You know Siri.
Siri is the thing that knows your intent and helps you do it for you, helps you get things done.
But what you might not know is that we designed Siri as humanistic AI, to augment people with a conversational interface that made it possible for them to use mobile computing, regardless of who they were and their abilities.
Now for most of us, the impact of this technology is to make things a little bit easier to use.
But for my friend Daniel, the impact of the AI in these systems is a life changer.
You see, Daniel is a really social guy, and he's blind and quadriplegic, which makes it hard to use those devices that we all take for granted.
The last time I was at his house, his brother said, "Hang on a second, Daniel's not ready.
He's on the phone with a woman he met online."
I'm like, "That's cool, how'd he do it?"
Well, Daniel uses Siri to manage his own social life -- his email, text and phone -- without depending on his caregivers.
This is kind of interesting, right?
The irony here is great.
Here's the man whose relationship with AI helps him have relationships with genuine human beings.
And this is humanistic AI.
Another example with life-changing consequences is diagnosing cancer.
When a doctor suspects cancer, they take a sample and send it to a pathologist, who looks at it under a microscope.
Now, pathologists look at hundreds of slides and millions of cells every day.
So to support this task, some researchers made an AI classifier.
Now, the classifier says, "Is this cancer or is this not cancer?"
The classifier was pretty good, but not as good as the person, who got it right most of the time.
But when they combine the ability of the machine and the human together, accuracy went to 99.5 percent.
Adding that AI to a partnership eliminated 85 percent of the errors that the human pathologist would have made working alone.
That's a lot of cancer that would have otherwise gone untreated.
Now, for the curious, it turns out that the human was better at rejecting false positives, and the machine was better at recognizing those hard-to-spot cases.
But the lesson here isn't about which agent is better at this image-classification task.
Those things are changing every day.
The lesson here is that by combining the abilities of the human and machine, it created a partnership that had superhuman performance.
And that is humanistic AI.
Now let's look at another example with turbocharging performance.
This is design.
Now, let's say you're an engineer.
You want to design a new frame for a drone.
You get out your favorite software tools, CAD tools, and you enter the form and the materials, and then you analyze performance.
That gives you one design.
If you give those same tools to an AI, it can generate thousands of designs.
This video by Autodesk is amazing.
This is real stuff.
So this transforms how we do design.
The human engineer now says what the design should achieve, and the machine says, "Here's the possibilities."
Now in her job, the engineer's job is to pick the one that best meets the goals of the design, which she knows as a human better than anyone else, using human judgment and expertise.
In this case, the winning form looks kind of like something nature would have designed, minus a few million years of evolution and all that unnecessary fur.
Now let's see where this idea of humanistic AI might lead us if we follow it into the speculative beyond.
What's a kind of augmentation that we would all like to have?
Well, how about cognitive enhancement?
Instead of asking, "How smart can we make our machines?"
let's ask "How smart can our machines make us?"
I mean, take memory for example.
Memory is the foundation of human intelligence.
But human memory is famously flawed.
We're great at telling stories, but not getting the details right.
And our memories -- they decay over time.
I mean, like, where did the '60s go, and can I go there, too?
(Laughter) But what if you could have a memory that was as good as computer memory, and was about your life?
What if you could remember every person you ever met, how to pronounce their name, their family details, their favorite sports, the last conversation you had with them?
If you had this memory all your life, you could have the AI look at all the interactions you had with people over time and help you reflect on the long arc of your relationships.
What if you could have the AI read everything you've ever read and listen to every song you've ever heard?
From the tiniest clue, it could help you retrieve anything you've ever seen or heard before.
Imagine what that would do for the ability to make new connections and form new ideas.
And what about our bodies?
What if we could remember the consequences of every food we eat, every pill we take, every all-nighter we pull?
We could do our own science on our own data about what makes us feel good and stay healthy.
And imagine how this could revolutionize the way we manage allergies and chronic disease.
I believe that AI will make personal memory enhancement a reality.
I can't say when or what form factors are involved, but I think it's inevitable, because the very things that make AI successful today -- the availability of comprehensive data and the ability for machines to make sense of that data -- can be applied to the data of our lives.
And those data are here today, available for all of us, because we lead digitally mediated lives, in mobile and online.
In my view, a personal memory is a private memory.
We get to choose what is and is not recalled and retained.
It's absolutely essential that this be kept very secure.
Now for most of us, the impact of augmented personal memory will be a more improved mental gain, maybe, hopefully, a bit more social grace.
But for the millions who suffer from Alzheimer's and dementia, the difference that augmented memory could make is a difference between a life of isolation and a life of dignity and connection.
We are in the middle of a renaissance in artificial intelligence right now.
I mean, in just the past few years, we're beginning to see solutions to AI problems that we have struggled with literally for decades: speech understanding, text understanding, image understanding.
We have a choice in how we use this powerful technology.
We can choose to use AI to automate and compete with us, or we can use AI to augment and collaborate with us, to overcome our cognitive limitations and to help us do what we want to do, only better.
And as we discover new ways to give machines intelligence, we can distribute that intelligence to all of the AI assistants in the world, and therefore to every person, regardless of circumstance.
And that is why, every time a machine gets smarter, we get smarter.
That is an AI worth spreading.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine you and a friend are strolling through an art exhibit and a striking painting catches your eye.
The vibrant red appears to you as a symbol of love, but your friend is convinced it's a symbol of war.
And where you see stars in a romantic sky, your friend interprets global warming-inducing pollutants.
To settle the debate, you turn to the internet, where you read that the painting is a replica of the artist's first-grade art project: Red was her favorite color and the silver dots are fairies.
You now know the exact intentions that led to the creation of this work.
Are you wrong to have enjoyed it as something the artist didn’t intend?
Do you enjoy it less now that you know the truth?
Just how much should the artist's intention affect your interpretation of the painting?
It's a question that's been tossed around by philosophers and art critics for decades, with no consensus in sight.
In the mid-20th century, literary critic W.K. Wimsatt and philosopher Monroe Beardsley argued that artistic intention was irrelevant.
They called this the Intentional Fallacy: the belief that valuing an artist's intentions was misguided.
Their argument was twofold: First, the artists we study are no longer living, never recorded their intentions, or are simply unavailable to answer questions about their work.
Second, even if there were a bounty of relevant information, Wimsatt and Beardsley believed it would distract us from the qualities of the work itself.
They compared art to a dessert: When you taste a pudding, the chef's intentions don't affect whether you enjoy its flavor or texture.
All that matters, they said, is that the pudding "works."
Of course, what "works" for one person might not "work" for another.
And since different interpretations appeal to different people, the silver dots in our painting could be reasonably interpreted as fairies, stars, or pollutants.
By Wimsatt and Beardsley's logic, the artist's interpretation of her own work would just be one among many equally acceptable possibilities.
If you find this problematic, you might be more in line with Steven Knapp and Walter Benn Michaels, two literary theorists who rejected the Intentional Fallacy.
They argued that an artist's intended meaning was not just one possible interpretation, but the only possible interpretation.
For example, suppose you're walking along a beach and come across a series of marks in the sand that spell out a verse of poetry.
Knapp and Michaels believed the poem would lose all meaning if you discovered these marks were not the work of a human being, but an odd coincidence produced by the waves.
They believed an intentional creator is what makes the poem subject to understanding at all.
Other thinkers advocate for a middle ground, suggesting that intention is just one piece in a larger puzzle.
Contemporary philosopher Noel Carroll took this stance, arguing that an artist's intentions are relevant to their audience the same way a speaker's intentions are relevant to the person they’re engaging in conversation.
To understand how intentions function in conversation, Carroll said to imagine someone holding a cigarette and asking for a match.
You respond by handing them a lighter, gathering that their motivation is to light their cigarette.
The words they used to ask the question are important, but the intentions behind the question dictate your understanding and ultimately, your response.
So which end of this spectrum do you lean towards?
Do you, like Wimsatt and Beardsley, believe that when it comes to art, the proof should be in the pudding?
Or do you think that an artist's plans and motivations for their work affect its meaning?
Artistic interpretation is a complex web that will probably never offer a definitive answer.
Here's an intriguing fact.
In the developed world, everywhere, women live an average of six to eight years longer than men do.
Six to eight years longer.
That's, like, a huge gap.
In 2015, the "Lancet" published an article showing that men in rich countries are twice as likely to die as women are at any age.
But there is one place in the world where men live as long as women.
It's a remote, mountainous zone, a blue zone, where super longevity is common to both sexes.
This is the blue zone in Sardinia, an Italian island in the Mediterranean, between Corsica and Tunisia, where there are six times as many centenarians as on the Italian mainland, less than 200 miles away.
There are 10 times as many centenarians as there are in North America.
It's the only place where men live as long as women.
But why?
My curiosity was piqued.
I decided to research the science and the habits of the place, and I started with the genetic profile.
I discovered soon enough that genes account for just 25 percent of their longevity.
The other 75 percent is lifestyle.
So what does it take to live to 100 or beyond?
What are they doing right?
What you're looking at is an aerial view of Villagrande.
It's a village at the epicenter of the blue zone where I went to investigate this, and as you can see, architectural beauty is not its main virtue, density is: tightly spaced houses, interwoven alleys and streets.
It means that the villagers' lives constantly intersect.
And as I walked through the village, I could feel hundreds of pairs of eyes watching me from behind doorways and curtains, from behind shutters.
Because like all ancient villages, Villagrande couldn't have survived without this structure, without its walls, without its cathedral, without its village square, because defense and social cohesion defined its design.
Urban priorities changed as we moved towards the industrial revolution because infectious disease became the risk of the day.
But what about now?
Now, social isolation is the public health risk of our time.
Now, a third of the population says they have two or fewer people to lean on.
But let's go to Villagrande now as a contrast to meet some centenarians.
Meet Giuseppe Murinu. He's 102, a supercentenarian and a lifelong resident of the village of Villagrande.
He was a gregarious man.
He loved to recount stories such as how he lived like a bird from what he could find on the forest floor during not one but two world wars, how he and his wife, who also lived past 100, raised six children in a small, homey kitchen where I interviewed him.
Here he is with his sons Angelo and Domenico, both in their 70s and looking after their father, and who were quite frankly very suspicious of me and my daughter who came along with me on this research trip, because the flip side of social cohesion is a wariness of strangers and outsiders.
But Giuseppe, he wasn't suspicious at all.
He was a happy-go-lucky guy, very outgoing with a positive outlook.
And I wondered: so is that what it takes to live to be 100 or beyond, thinking positively?
Actually, no.
(Laughter) Meet Giovanni Corrias. He's 101, the grumpiest person I have ever met.
(Laughter) And he put a lie to the notion that you have to be positive to live a long life.
And there is evidence for this.
When I asked him why he lived so long, he kind of looked at me under hooded eyelids and he growled, "Nobody has to know my secrets."
(Laughter) But despite being a sourpuss, the niece who lived with him and looked after him called him "Il Tesoro," "my treasure."
And she respected him and loved him, and she told me, when I questioned this obvious loss of her freedom, "You just don't understand, do you?
Looking after this man is a pleasure.
It's a huge privilege for me.
This is my heritage."
And indeed, wherever I went to interview these centenarians, I found a kitchen party.
Here's Giovanni with his two nieces, Maria above him and beside him his great-niece Sara, who came when I was there to bring fresh fruits and vegetables.
And I quickly discovered by being there that in the blue zone, as people age, and indeed across their lifespans, they're always surrounded by extended family, by friends, by neighbors, the priest, the barkeeper, the grocer.
People are always there or dropping by.
They are never left to live solitary lives.
This is unlike the rest of the developed world, where as George Burns quipped, "Happiness is having a large, loving, caring family in another city."
(Laughter) Now, so far we've only met men, long-living men, but I met women too, and here you see Zia Teresa.
She, at over 100, taught me how to make the local specialty, which is called culurgiones, which are these large pasta pockets like ravioli about this size, this size, and they're filled with high-fat ricotta and mint and drenched in tomato sauce.
And she showed me how to make just the right crimp so they wouldn't open, and she makes them with her daughters every Sunday and distributes them by the dozens to neighbors and friends.
And that's when I discovered a low-fat, gluten-free diet is not what it takes to live to 100 in the blue zone.
(Applause) Now, these centenarians' stories along with the science that underpins them prompted me to ask myself some questions too, such as, when am I going to die and how can I put that day off?
And as you will see, the answer is not what we expect.
Julianne Holt-Lunstad is a researcher at Brigham Young University and she addressed this very question in a series of studies of tens of thousands of middle aged people much like this audience here.
And she looked at every aspect of their lifestyle: their diet, their exercise, their marital status, how often they went to the doctor, whether they smoked or drank, etc.
She recorded all of this and then she and her colleagues sat tight and waited for seven years to see who would still be breathing.
And of the people left standing, what reduced their chances of dying the most?
That was her question.
So let's now look at her data in summary, going from the least powerful predictor to the strongest.
OK?
So clean air, which is great, it doesn't predict how long you will live.
Whether you have your hypertension treated is good.
Still not a strong predictor.
Whether you're lean or overweight, you can stop feeling guilty about this, because it's only in third place.
How much exercise you get is next, still only a moderate predictor.
Whether you've had a cardiac event and you're in rehab and exercising, getting higher now.
Whether you've had a flu vaccine.
Did anybody here know that having a flu vaccine protects you more than doing exercise?
Whether you were drinking and quit, or whether you're a moderate drinker, whether you don't smoke, or if you did, whether you quit, and getting towards the top predictors are two features of your social life.
First, your close relationships.
These are the people that you can call on for a loan if you need money suddenly, who will call the doctor if you're not feeling well or who will take you to the hospital, or who will sit with you if you're having an existential crisis, if you're in despair.
Those people, that little clutch of people are a strong predictor, if you have them, of how long you'll live.
And then something that surprised me, something that's called social integration.
This means how much you interact with people as you move through your day.
How many people do you talk to?
And these mean both your weak and your strong bonds, so not just the people you're really close to, who mean a lot to you, but, like, do you talk to the guy who every day makes you your coffee?
Do you talk to the postman?
Do you talk to the woman who walks by your house every day with her dog?
Do you play bridge or poker, have a book club?
Those interactions are one of the strongest predictors of how long you'll live.
Now, this leads me to the next question: if we now spend more time online than on any other activity, including sleeping, we're now up to 11 hours a day, one hour more than last year, by the way, does it make a difference?
Why distinguish between interacting in person and interacting via social media?
Is it the same thing as being there if you're in contact constantly with your kids through text, for example?
Well, the short answer to the question is no, it's not the same thing.
Face-to-face contact releases a whole cascade of neurotransmitters, and like a vaccine, they protect you now in the present and well into the future.
So simply making eye contact with somebody, shaking hands, giving somebody a high-five is enough to release oxytocin, which increases your level of trust and it lowers your cortisol levels.
So it lowers your stress.
And dopamine is generated, which gives us a little high and it kills pain.
It's like a naturally produced morphine.
Now, all of this passes under our conscious radar, which is why we conflate online activity with the real thing.
But we do have evidence now, fresh evidence, that there is a difference.
So let's look at some of the neuroscience.
Elizabeth Redcay, a neuroscientist at the University of Maryland, tried to map the difference between what goes on in our brains when we interact in person versus when we're watching something that's static.
And what she did was she compared the brain function of two groups of people, those interacting live with her or with one of her research associates in a dynamic conversation, and she compared that to the brain activity of people who were watching her talk about the same subject but in a canned video, like on YouTube.
And by the way, if you want to know how she fit two people in an MRI scanner at the same time, talk to me later.
So what's the difference?
This is your brain on real social interaction.
What you're seeing is the difference in brain activity between interacting in person and taking in static content.
In orange, you see the brain areas that are associated with attention, social intelligence -- that means anticipating what somebody else is thinking and feeling and planning -- and emotional reward.
And these areas become much more engaged when we're interacting with a live partner.
Now, these richer brain signatures might be why recruiters from Fortune 500 companies evaluating candidates thought that the candidates were smarter when they heard their voices compared to when they just read their pitches in a text, for example, or an email or a letter.
Now, our voices and body language convey a rich signal.
It shows that we're thinking, feeling, sentient human beings who are much more than an algorithm.
Now, this research by Nicholas Epley at the University of Chicago Business School is quite amazing because it tells us a simple thing.
If somebody hears your voice, they think you're smarter.
I mean, that's quite a simple thing.
Now, to return to the beginning, why do women live longer than men?
And one major reason is that women are more likely to prioritize and groom their face-to-face relationships over their lifespans.
Fresh evidence shows that these in-person friendships create a biological force field against disease and decline.
And it's not just true of humans but their primate relations, our primate relations as well.
Anthropologist Joan Silk's work shows that female baboons who have a core of female friends show lower levels of stress via their cortisol levels, they live longer and they have more surviving offspring.
At least three stable relationships.
That was the magic number.
Think about it.
I hope you guys have three.
The power of such face-to-face contact is really why there are the lowest rates of dementia among people who are socially engaged.
It's why women who have breast cancer are four times more likely to survive their disease than loners are.
Why men who've had a stroke who meet regularly to play poker or to have coffee or to play old-timer's hockey -- I'm Canadian, after all -- (Laughter) are better protected by that social contact than they are by medication.
Why men who've had a stroke who meet regularly -- this is something very powerful they can do.
This face-to-face contact provides stunning benefits, yet now almost a quarter of the population says they have no one to talk to.
We can do something about this.
Like Sardinian villagers, it's a biological imperative to know we belong, and not just the women among us.
Building in-person interaction into our cities, into our workplaces, into our agendas bolsters the immune system, sends feel-good hormones surging through the bloodstream and brain and helps us live longer.
I call this building your village, and building it and sustaining it is a matter of life and death.
Thank you.
(Applause) Helen Walters: Susan, come back. I have a question for you.
I'm wondering if there's a middle path.
So you talk about the neurotransmitters connecting when in face-to-face, but what about digital technology?
We've seen enormous improvements in digital technology like FaceTime, things like that.
Does that work too?
I mean, I see my nephew.
He plays Minecraft and he's yelling at his friends.
It seems like he's connecting pretty well.
Is that useful? Is that helpful?
Susan Pinker: Some of the data are just emerging.
The data are so fresh that the digital revolution happened and the health data trailed behind.
So we're just learning, but I would say there are some improvements that we could make in the technology.
For example, the camera on your laptop is at the top of the screen, so for example, when you're looking into the screen, you're not actually making eye contact.
So something as simple as even just looking into the camera can increase those neurotransmitters, or maybe changing the position of the camera.
So it's not identical, but I think we are getting closer with the technology.
HW: Great. Thank you so much.
SP: Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a meteorologist by degree, I have a bachelor's, master's and PhD in physical meteorology, so I'm a meteorologist, card carrying.
And so with that comes four questions, always.
This is one prediction I will always get right.
(Laughter) And those questions are, "Marshall, what channel are you on?"
(Laughter) "Dr. Shepherd, what's the weather going to be tomorrow?"
(Laughter) And oh, I love this one: "My daughter is getting married next September, it's an outdoor wedding.
Is it going to rain?"
(Laughter) Not kidding, I get those, and I don't know the answer to that, the science isn't there.
But the one I get a lot these days is, "Dr. Shepherd, do you believe in climate change?"
"Do you believe in global warming?"
Now, I have to gather myself every time I get that question.
Because it's an ill-posed question -- science isn't a belief system.
My son, he's 10 -- he believes in the tooth fairy.
And he needs to get over that, because I'm losing dollars, fast.
(Laughter) But he believes in the tooth fairy.
But consider this.
Bank of America building, there, in Atlanta.
You never hear anyone say, "Do you believe, if you go to the top of that building and throw a ball off, it's going to fall?"
You never hear that, because gravity is a thing.
So why don't we hear the question, "Do you believe in gravity?"
But of course, we hear the question, "Do you believe in global warming?"
Well, consider these facts.
The American Association for the Advancement of Science, AAAS, one of the leading organizations in science, queried scientists and the public on different science topics.
Here are some of them: genetically modified food, animal research, human evolution.
And look at what the scientists say about those, the people that actually study those topics, in red, versus the gray, what the public thinks.
How did we get there?
How did we get there?
That scientists and the public are so far apart on these science issues.
Well, I'll come a little bit closer to home for me, climate change.
Eighty-seven percent of scientists believe that humans are contributing to climate change.
But only 50 percent of the public?
How did we get there?
So it begs the question, what shapes perceptions about science?
It's an interesting question and one that I've been thinking about quite a bit.
I think that one thing that shapes perceptions in the public, about science, is belief systems and biases.
Belief systems and biases.
Go with me for a moment.
Because I want to talk about three elements of that: confirmation bias, Dunning-Kruger effect and cognitive dissonance.
Now, these sound like big, fancy, academic terms, and they are.
But when I describe them, you're going to be like, "Oh!
I recognize that; I even know somebody that does that."
Confirmation bias.
Finding evidence that supports what we already believe.
Now, we're probably all a little bit guilty of that at times.
Take a look at this.
I'm on Twitter.
And often, when it snows, I'll get this tweet back to me.
(Laughter) "Hey, Dr. Shepherd, I have 20 inches of global warming in my yard, what are you guys talking about, climate change?"
I get that tweet a lot, actually.
It's a cute tweet, it makes me chuckle as well.
But it's oh, so fundamentally scientifically flawed.
Because it illustrates that the person tweeting doesn't understand the difference between weather and climate.
I often say, weather is your mood and climate is your personality.
Think about that.
Weather is your mood, climate is your personality.
Your mood today doesn't necessarily tell me anything about your personality, nor does a cold day tell me anything about climate change, or a hot day, for that matter.
Dunning-Kruger.
Two scholars from Cornell came up with the Dunning-Kruger effect.
If you go look up the peer-reviewed paper for this, you will see all kinds of fancy terminology: it's an illusory superiority complex, thinking we know things.
In other words, people think they know more than they do.
Or they underestimate what they don't know.
And then, there's cognitive dissonance.
Cognitive dissonance is interesting.
We just recently had Groundhog Day, right?
Now, there's no better definition of cognitive dissonance than intelligent people asking me if a rodent's forecast is accurate.
(Laughter) But I get that, all of the time.
(Laughter) But I also hear about the Farmer's Almanac.
We grew up on the Farmer's Almanac, people are familiar with it.
The problem is, it's only about 37 percent accurate, according to studies at Penn State University.
But we're in an era of science where we actually can forecast the weather.
And believe it or not, and I know some of you are like, "Yeah, right," we're about 90 percent accurate, or more, with weather forecast.
You just tend to remember the occasional miss, you do.
(Laughter) So confirmation bias, Dunning-Kruger and cognitive dissonance.
I think those shape biases and perceptions that people have about science.
But then, there's literacy and misinformation that keep us boxed in, as well.
During the hurricane season of 2017, media outlets had to actually assign reporters to dismiss fake information about the weather forecast.
That's the era that we're in.
I deal with this all the time in social media.
Someone will tweet a forecast -- that's a forecast for Hurricane Irma, but here's the problem: it didn't come from the Hurricane Center.
But people were tweeting and sharing this; it went viral.
It didn't come from the National Hurricane Center at all.
So I spent 12 years of my career at NASA before coming to the University of Georgia, and I chair their Earth Science Advisory Committee, I was just up there last week in DC.
And I saw some really interesting things.
Here's a NASA model and science data from satellite showing the 2017 hurricane season.
You see Hurricane Harvey there?
Look at all the dust coming off of Africa.
Look at the wildfires up in northwest US and in western Canada.
There comes Hurricane Irma.
This is fascinating to me.
But admittedly, I'm a weather geek.
But more importantly, it illustrates that we have the technology to not only observe the weather and climate system, but predict it.
There's scientific understanding, so there's no need for some of those perceptions and biases that we've been talking about.
We have knowledge.
But think about this ...
This is Houston, Texas, after Hurricane Harvey.
Now, I write a contribution for "Forbes" magazine periodically, and I wrote an article a week before Hurricane Harvey made landfall, saying, "There's probably going to be 40 to 50 inches of rainfall."
I wrote that a week before it happened.
But yet, when you talk to people in Houston, people are saying, "We had no idea it was going to be this bad."
I'm just...
(Sigh) (Laughter) A week before.
But -- I know, it's amusing, but the reality is, we all struggle with perceiving something outside of our experience level.
People in Houston get rain all of the time, they flood all of the time.
But they've never experienced that.
Houston gets about 34 inches of rainfall for the entire year.
They got 50 inches in three days.
That's an anomaly event, that's outside of the normal.
So belief systems and biases, literacy and misinformation.
How do we step out of the boxes that are cornering our perceptions?
Well we don't even have to go to Houston, we can come very close to home.
(Laughter) Remember "Snowpocalypse?"
(Laughter) Snowmageddon?
Snowzilla?
Whatever you want to call it.
All two inches of it.
(Laughter) Two inches of snow shut the city of Atlanta down.
(Laughter) But the reality is, we were in a winter storm watch, we went to a winter weather advisory, and a lot of people perceived that as being a downgrade, "Oh, it's not going to be as bad."
When in fact, the perception was that it was not going to be as bad, but it was actually an upgrade.
Things were getting worse as the models were coming in.
So that's an example of how we get boxed in by our perceptions.
So, the question becomes, how do we expand our radius?
The area of a circle is "pi r squared".
We increase the radius, we increase the area.
How do we expand our radius of understanding about science?
Here are my thoughts.
You take inventory of your own biases.
And I'm challenging you all to do that.
Take an inventory of your own biases.
Where do they come from?
Your upbringing, your political perspective, your faith -- what shapes your own biases?
Then, evaluate your sources -- where do you get your information on science?
What do you read, what do you listen to, to consume your information on science?
And then, it's important to speak out.
Talk about how you evaluated your biases and evaluated your sources.
I want you to listen to this little 40-second clip from one of the top TV meteorologists in the US, Greg Fishel, in the Raleigh, Durham area.
He's revered in that region.
But he was a climate skeptic.
But listen to what he says about speaking out.
Greg Fishel: The mistake I was making and didn't realize until very recently, was that I was only looking for information to support what I already thought, and was not interested in listening to anything contrary.
And so I woke up one morning, and there was this question in my mind, "Greg, are you engaging in confirmation bias?
Are you only looking for information to support what you already think?"
And if I was honest with myself, and I tried to be, I admitted that was going on.
And so the more I talked to scientists and read peer-reviewed literature and tried to conduct myself the way I'd been taught to conduct myself at Penn State when I was a student, it became very difficult for me to make the argument that we weren't at least having some effect.
Maybe there was still a doubt as to how much, but to say "nothing" was not a responsible thing for me to do as a scientist or a person.
JMS: Greg Fishel just talked about expanding his radius of understanding of science.
And when we expand our radius, it's not about making a better future, but it's about preserving life as we know it.
So as we think about expanding our own radius in understanding science, it's critical for Athens, Georgia, for Atlanta, Georgia, for the state of Georgia, and for the world.
So expand your radius.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What's one thing that every person in this room is going to become?
Older.
And most of us are scared stiff at the prospect.
How does that word make you feel?
I used to feel the same way.
What was I most worried about?
Ending up drooling in some grim institutional hallway.
And then I learned that only four percent of older Americans are living in nursing homes, and the percentage is dropping.
What else was I worried about?
Dementia.
Turns out that most of us can think just fine to the end.
Dementia rates are dropping, too.
The real epidemic is anxiety over memory loss.
(Laughter) I also figured that old people were depressed because they were old and they were going to die soon.
(Laughter) It turns out that the longer people live, the less they fear dying, and that people are happiest at the beginnings and the end of their lives.
It's called the U-curve of happiness, and it's been borne out by dozens of studies around the world.
You don't have to be a Buddhist or a billionaire.
The curve is a function of the way aging itself affects the brain.
So I started feeling a lot better about getting older, and I started obsessing about why so few people know these things.
The reason is ageism: discrimination and stereotyping on the basis of age.
We experience it anytime someone assumes we're too old for something, instead of finding out who we are and what we're capable of, or too young.
Ageism cuts both ways.
All -isms are socially constructed ideas -- racism, sexism, homophobia -- and that means we make them up, and they can change over time.
All these prejudices pit us against each other to maintain the status quo, like auto workers in the US competing against auto workers in Mexico instead of organizing for better wages.
(Applause) We know it's not OK to allocate resources by race or by sex.
Why should it be OK to weigh the needs of the young against the old?
All prejudice relies on "othering" -- seeing a group of people as other than ourselves: other race, other religion, other nationality.
The strange thing about ageism: that other is us.
Ageism feeds on denial -- our reluctance to acknowledge that we are going to become that older person.
It's denial when we try to pass for younger or when we believe in anti-aging products, or when we feel like our bodies are betraying us, simply because they are changing.
Why on earth do we stop celebrating the ability to adapt and grow as we move through life?
Why should aging well mean struggling to look and move like younger versions of ourselves?
It's embarrassing to be called out as older until we quit being embarrassed about it, and it's not healthy to go through life dreading our futures.
The sooner we get off this hamster wheel of age denial, the better off we are.
Stereotypes are always a mistake, of course, but especially when it comes to age, because the longer we live, the more different from one another we become.
Right? Think about it.
And yet, we tend to think of everyone in a retirement home as the same age: old -- (Laughter) when they can span four decades.
Can you imagine thinking that way about a group of people between the ages of 20 and 60?
When you get to a party, do you head for people your own age?
Have you ever grumbled about entitled millennials?
Have you ever rejected a haircut or a relationship or an outing because it's not age-appropriate?
For adults, there's no such thing.
All these behaviors are ageist.
We all do them, and we can't challenge bias unless we're aware of it.
Nobody's born ageist, but it starts at early childhood, around the same time attitudes towards race and gender start to form, because negative messages about late life bombard us from the media and popular culture at every turn.
Right? Wrinkles are ugly.
Old people are pathetic.
It's sad to be old.
Look at Hollywood.
A survey of recent Best Picture nominations found that only 12 percent of speaking or named characters were age 60 and up, and many of them were portrayed as impaired.
Older people can be the most ageist of all, because we've had a lifetime to internalize these messages and we've never thought to challenge them.
I had to acknowledge it and stop colluding.
"Senior moment" quips, for example: I stopped making them when it dawned on me that when I lost the car keys in high school, I didn't call it a "junior moment."
(Laughter) I stopped blaming my sore knee on being 64.
My other knee doesn't hurt, and it's just as old.
(Laughter) (Applause) We are all worried about some aspect of getting older, whether running out of money, getting sick, ending up alone, and those fears are legitimate and real.
But what never dawns on most of us is that the experience of reaching old age can be better or worse depending on the culture in which it takes place.
It is not having a vagina that makes life harder for women.
It's sexism.
(Applause) It's not loving a man that makes life harder for gay guys.
It's homophobia.
And it is not the passage of time that makes getting older so much harder than it has to be.
It is ageism.
When labels are hard to read or there's no handrail or we can't open the damn jar, we blame ourselves, our failure to age successfully, instead of the ageism that makes those natural transitions shameful and the discrimination that makes those barriers acceptable.
You can't make money off satisfaction, but shame and fear create markets, and capitalism always needs new markets.
Who says wrinkles are ugly?
The multi-billion-dollar skin care industry.
Who says perimenopause and low T and mild cognitive impairment are medical conditions?
The trillion-dollar pharmaceutical industry.
(Cheers) The more clearly we see these forces at work, the easier it is to come up with alternative, more positive and more accurate narratives.
Aging is not a problem to be fixed or a disease to be cured.
It is a natural, powerful, lifelong process that unites us all.
Changing the culture is a tall order, I know that, but culture is fluid.
Look at how much the position of women has changed in my lifetime or the incredible strides that the gay rights movement has made in just a few decades, right?
(Applause) Look at gender.
We used to think of it as a binary, male or female, and now we understand it's a spectrum.
It is high time to ditch the old-young binary, too.
There is no line in the sand between old and young, after which it's all downhill.
And the longer we wait to challenge that idea, the more damage it does to ourselves and our place in the world, like in the workforce, where age discrimination is rampant.
In Silicon Valley, engineers are getting Botoxed and hair-plugged before key interviews -- and these are skilled white men in their 30s, so imagine the effects further down the food chain.
(Laughter) The personal and economic consequences are devastating.
Not one stereotype about older workers holds up under scrutiny.
Companies aren't adaptable and creative because their employees are young; they're adaptable and creative despite it.
Companies -- (Laughter) (Applause) We know that diverse companies aren't just better places to work; they work better.
And just like race and sex, age is a criterion for diversity.
A growing body of fascinating research shows that attitudes towards aging affect how our minds and bodies function at the cellular level.
When we talk to older people like this (Speaks more loudly) or call them "sweetie" or "young lady" -- it's called elderspeak -- they appear to instantly age, walking and talking less competently.
People with more positive feelings towards aging walk faster, they do better on memory tests, they heal quicker, and they live longer.
Even with brains full of plaques and tangles, some people stayed sharp to the end.
What did they have in common?
A sense of purpose.
And what's the biggest obstacle to having a sense of purpose in late life?
A culture that tells us that getting older means shuffling offstage.
That's why the World Health Organization is developing a global anti-ageism initiative to extend not just life span but health span.
Women experience the double whammy of ageism and sexism, so we experience aging differently.
There's a double standard at work here -- shocker -- (Laughter) the notion that aging enhances men and devalues women.
Women reinforce this double standard when we compete to stay young, another punishing and losing proposition.
Does any woman in this room really believe that she is a lesser version -- less interesting, less fun in bed, less valuable -- than the woman she once was?
This discrimination affects our health, our well-being and our income, and the effects add up over time.
They are further compounded by race and by class, which is why, everywhere in the world, the poorest of the poor are old women of color.
What's the takeaway from that map?
By 2050, one out of five of us, almost two billion people, will be age 60 and up.
Longevity is a fundamental hallmark of human progress.
All these older people represent a vast unprecedented and untapped market.
And yet, capitalism and urbanization have propelled age bias into every corner of the globe, from Switzerland, where elders fare the best, to Afghanistan, which sits at the bottom of the Global AgeWatch Index.
Half of the world's countries aren't mentioned on that list because we don't bother to collect data on millions of people because they're no longer young.
Almost two-thirds of people over 60 around the world say they have trouble accessing healthcare.
Almost three-quarters say their income doesn't cover basic services like food, water, electricity, and decent housing.
Is this the world we want our children, who may well live to be a hundred, to inherit?
Everyone -- all ages, all genders, all nationalities -- is old or future-old, and unless we put an end to it, ageism will oppress us all.
And that makes it a perfect target for collective advocacy.
Why add another -ism to the list when so many, racism in particular, call out for action?
Here's the thing: we don't have to choose.
When we make the world a better place to grow old in, we make it a better place in which to be from somewhere else, to have a disability, to be queer, to be non-rich, to be non-white.
And when we show up at all ages for whatever cause matters most to us -- save the whales, save the democracy -- we not only make that effort more effective, we dismantle ageism in the process.
Longevity is here to stay.
A movement to end ageism is underway.
I'm in it, and I hope you will join me.
(Applause and cheers) Thank you. Let's do it! Let's do it!
(Applause)
I am guilty of stacking my dishes in the sink and leaving them there for hours.
I fact-checked this with my boyfriend.
He says it's less like hours and more like days, but that's not the point.
The point is sometimes I don't finish the job until the stack has gotten high enough that it's peaking over the lip of the sink and my inner clean freak loses it.
This charming habit developed when I was in college, and I had tons of excuses.
"I'm running to class!"
"What's one more dirty dish in the sink?"
Or my favorite, "I think I can save time and water if I do them all together later."
(Laughter) But it's not like I needed those excuses, because nobody was calling me on it.
I wish they had.
I look back now and realize that every time I didn't put a dish in the dishwasher and finish what I started, it became more second nature to me, and I grew less likely to question why I was doing it.
Today, I'm a 30-something, certified dirty-dish leaver, and breaking this habit is hard.
So when I'm not at home avoiding the sink, I work with large, complex organizations on leadership transformation in times of change.
My job is to work with the most senior leaders to examine how they lead today and establish habits better suited for the future.
But what interests me more than senior leaders these days is what's going on with the junior ones.
We call them "middle managers," but it's a term I wish we could change because what they are is our pipeline of future talent for the C-suite, and they are starting to leave their dishes in the sink.
While organizations are hiring people like me to redevelop their senior leaders for the future, outdated leadership habits are forming right before our eyes among the middle managers who will one day take their place.
We need middle managers and senior leaders to work together, because this is a big problem.
Organizations are evolving rapidly, and they're counting on their future leaders to lead with more speed, flexibility, trust and cooperation than they do today.
I believe there is a window of time in the formative middle-manager years when we can lay the groundwork for that kind of leadership, but we're missing it.
Why?
Because our future leaders are learning from senior role models who just aren't ready to role model yet, much less change the systems that made them so successful.
We need middle managers and senior leaders to work together to define a new way of leading and develop each other to rise to the occasion.
One of my favorite senior clients -- we'll call her Jane -- is a poster child for what's old-fashioned in leadership today.
She rose to her C-level position based on exceptional individual performance.
Come hell or high water, Jane got the job done, and today, she leads like it.
She is tough to please, she doesn't have a lot of time for things that's aren't mission-critical, and she really doesn't trust anyone's judgment more than her own.
Needless to say, Jane's in behavior boot camp.
Those deeply ingrained habits are deeply inconsistent with where her organization is heading.
The command-and-control behavior that she was once rewarded for just isn't going to work in a faster-moving, flatter, more digitally interconnected organization.
What got her here won't get her there.
But I want to talk about John, a supertalented, up-and-coming manager who works for Jane, because her habits are rubbing off on him.
Recently, he and I were strategizing about a decision we needed to put in front of the CEO, Jane's boss, and the rest of Jane's peers.
He said to me, "Liz, you're not going to like this, but the way decisions get made around here is with a bunch of meetings before the meeting."
I counted.
That was going to mean eight one-on-ones, exec by exec, to make sure each one of them was individually on board enough that things would go smoothly in the actual meeting.
He promised, "It's not how we'll do things in the future, but it's how we have to do them today."
John wasn't wrong on either count.
Meetings before the meeting are a necessary evil in his company today, and I didn't like it at all.
Sure, it was going to be inefficient and annoying, but what bothered me most was his confidence that it's not how they'll do things in the future.
How could he be sure?
Who was going to change it and when, if it wasn't him and now?
What would the trigger be?
And when it happened, would he even know how to have effective meetings without pre-meetings?
He was confidently implying that when he's the boss, he'll change the rules and do things differently, but all I could see were dishes stacking in the sink and a guy with a lot of good excuses.
Worse, a guy who might be out of a job one day because he learned too late how to lead in the organizations of tomorrow.
These stories really get to me when it's the fast-track, high-potential managers like John because they're probably the most capable of making waves and redefining how leaders lead from the inside.
But what we find is that they're often doing the best job at not rocking the boat and challenging the system because they're trying to impress and make life easier on the senior leaders who will promote them.
As someone who also likes to get promoted, I can hardly blame him.
It's a catch-22.
But they're also so self-assured that they'll be able to change their behavior once they've earned the authority to do things differently, and that is a trap.
Because if I've learned anything from working with Jane, it's that when that day comes, John will wonder how he could possibly do anything differently in his high-stakes, high-pressure executive job without risking his own success and the organization's, and he'll wish it didn't feel so safe and so easy to keep doing things the way they've always been done.
So the leadership development expert in me asks: How can we better intervene in the formative years of our soon-to-be senior leaders?
How can we use the fact that John and his peers want to take charge of their professional destinies and get them ready to lead the organizations of the future, rather than let them succumb to the catch-22 that will perfectly prepare them to lead the organizations of the past?
We'll have to start by coming to terms with a very real paradox, which is this: the best form of learning happens on the job -- not in a classroom, not via e-modules.
And the two things we rely on to shape on-the-job learning are role models and work environments.
And as we just talked about, our role models are in behavior boot camp right now, and our work environments are undergoing unprecedented disruption.
We are systematically changing just about everything about how organizations work, but by and large, still measuring and rewarding behavior based on old metrics, because changing those systems takes time.
So, if we can't fully count on role models or the system right now, it's on John to not miss this critical development window.
Yes, he'll need Jane's help to do it, but the responsibility is his because the risks are actually his.
Either he inherits an organization that is failing because of stubbornly old-fashioned leadership, or he himself fails to build the capabilities to lead one that transformed while he was playing it safe.
So now the question is, where does John start?
If I were John, I'd ask to start flying the plane.
For my 13th birthday, my grandpa, a former Navy pilot, gave me the gift of being able to fly a very small plane.
Once we were safely airborne, the pilot turned over the controls, folded his hands, and he let me fly.
It was totally terrifying.
It was exhilarating, but it was also on-the-job learning with a safety net.
And because it was real, I really learned how to do it myself.
Likewise, in the workplace, every meeting to be led, every decision to be made can be a practice flight for someone who could really use the learning experience and the chance to figure out how to do it their own way.
So instead of caving, John needs to knock on Jane's door, propose a creative strategy for having the meeting without the eight pre-meetings, show her he's thought through the trade-offs and ask for her support to do it differently.
This isn't going to be easy for Jane.
Not only does she need to trust John, she needs to accept that with a little bit of room to try his hand at leading, John will inevitably start leading in some ways that are far more John than Jane.
And this won't be an indictment of her.
Rather, it will be individualism.
It will be progress.
And it might even be a chance for Jane to learn a thing or two to take her own leadership game to the next level.
I work with another senior client who summed up this dilemma beautifully when we were talking about why he and his peers haven't empowered the folks below them with more decision rights.
He said, "We haven't done it because we just don't trust that they're going to make the right decisions.
But then again, how could they?
We've just never given them decisions to practice with."
So I'm not advocating that Jane hands over the controls and folds her hands indefinitely, but what I am saying is that if she doesn't engineer learning and practice right into John's day today, he'll never be able to do what she does, much less do it any differently than she does it.
Finally, since we're going to be pushing both of them outside their comfort zones, we need some outside coaches to make sure this isn't a case of the blind leading the blind.
But what if instead of using coaches to coach each one of them to individually be more effective, we started coaching the interactions between them?
If I could wave my magic wand, I would have coaches sitting in the occasional team meeting of Jane and her direct reports, debriefing solely on how well they cooperated that day.
I would put a coach in the periodic feedback session between Jane and John, and just like a couples' therapist coaches on communication, they would offer advice and observations on how that conversation can go better in the future.
Was Jane simply reinforcing what Jane would have done?
Or was Jane really helping John think through what to do for the organization?
That is seriously hard mentorship to provide, and even the best leaders need help doing it, which is why we need more coaches coaching more leaders, more in real time versus any one leader behind closed doors.
Around 20 years ago, Warren Buffet gave a school lecture in which he said, "The chains of habit are too light to be felt until they're too heavy to be broken."
I couldn't agree more, and I see it happening with our future leaders in training.
Can we and they be doing more to build their leadership capabilities while they're still open, eager and not too far gone down a path of bad habits we totally saw coming?
I wish my college roommates and I called each other out back then for the dishes.
It would have been so much easier to nip that habit in the bud than it is to change it today.
But I still believe in a future for myself full of gleaming sinks and busy dishwashers, and so we're working on it, every day, together, moment to moment, one dirty dish at a time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The philosopher Plato once said, "Music gives a soul to the universe, wings to the mind, flight to the imagination and life to everything."
Music has always been a big part of my life.
To create and to perform music connects you to people countries and lifetimes away.
It connects you to the people you're playing with, to your audience and to yourself.
When I'm happy, when I'm sad, when I'm bored, when I'm stressed, I listen to and I create music.
When I was younger, I played piano; later, I took up guitar.
And as I started high school, music became a part of my identity.
I was in every band, I was involved with every musical fine arts event.
Music surrounded me.
It made me who I was, and it gave me a place to belong.
Now, I've always had this thing with rhythms.
I remember being young, I would walk down the hallways of my school and I would tap rhythms to myself on my leg with my hands, or tapping my teeth.
It was a nervous habit, and I was always nervous.
I think I liked the repetition of the rhythm -- it was calming.
Then in high school, I started music theory, and it was the best class I've ever taken.
We were learning about music -- things I didn't know, like theory and history.
It was a class where we basically just listened to a song, talked about what it meant to us and analyzed it, and figured out what made it tick.
Every Wednesday, we did something called "rhythmic dictation," and I was pretty good at it.
Our teacher would give us an amount of measures and a time signature, and then he would speak a rhythm to us and we would have to write it down with the proper rests and notes.
Like this: ta ta tuck-a tuck-a ta, ta tuck-a-tuck-a-tuck-a, tuck-a.
And I loved it.
The simplicity of the rhythm -- a basic two- to four- measure line -- and yet each of them almost told a story, like they had so much potential, and all you had to do was add a melody.
(Guitar) Rhythms set a foundation for melodies and harmonies to play on top of.
It gives structure and stability.
Now, music has these parts -- rhythm, melody and harmony -- just like our lives.
Where music has rhythm, we have routines and habits -- things that help us to remember what to do and to stay on track, and to just keep going.
And you may not notice it, but it's always there.
(Guitar) And it may seem simple, it may seem dull by itself, but it gives tempo and heartbeat.
And then things in your life add on to it, giving texture -- that's your friends and your family, and anything that creates a harmonic structure in your life and in your song, like harmonies, cadences and anything that makes it polyphonic.
And they create beautiful chords and patterns.
(Guitar) And then there's you.
You play on top of everything else, on top of the rhythms and the beat because you're the melody.
And things may change and develop, but no matter what we do, we're still the same people.
Throughout a song melodies develop, but it's still the same song.
No matter what you do, the rhythms are still there: the tempo and the heartbeat ...
until I left, and I went to college and everything disappeared.
When I first arrived at university, I felt lost.
And don't get me wrong -- sometimes I loved it and it was great, but other times, I felt like I had been left alone to fend for myself.
It's like I had been taken out of my natural environment, and put somewhere new, where the rhythms and the harmonies and the form had gone away, and it was just me -- (Guitar) silence and my melody.
And even that began to waver, because I didn't know what I was doing.
I didn't have any chords to structure myself, or a rhythm or a beat to know the tempo.
(Guitar) And then I began to hear all these other sounds.
(Guitar) And they were off-time and off-key.
And the more I was around them, the more my melody started to sound like theirs.
And slowly I began to lose myself, like I was being washed away.
But then the next moment -- (Guitar) I could hear it.
And I could feel it.
And it was me.
And I was here.
And it was different, but not worse off.
Just changed a little.
Music is my way of coping with the changes in my life.
There's a beautiful connection between music and life.
It can bind us to reality at the same time it allows us to escape it.
Music is something that lives inside of you.
You create it and you're created by it.
Our lives are not only conducted by music, they're also composed of it.
So this may seem like a bit of a stretch, but hear me out: music is a fundamental part of what we are and of everything around us.
Now, music is my passion, but physics also used to be an interest of mine.
And the more I learned, the more I saw connections between the two -- especially regarding string theory.
I know this is only one of many theories, but it spoke to me.
So, one aspect of string theory, at its simplest form, is this: matter is made up of atoms, which are made up of protons and neutrons and electrons, which are made up of quark.
And here's where the string part comes in.
This quark is supposedly made up of little coiled strings, and it's the vibrations of these strings that make everything what it is.
Michio Kaku once explained this in a lecture called, "The Universe in a Nutshell," where he says, "String theory is the simple idea that the four forces of the universe -- gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the two strong forces -- can be viewed as music.
The music of tiny little rubber bands."
In this lecture, he goes on to explain physics as the laws of harmony between these strings; chemistry, as the melodies you can play on these strings; and he states that the universe is a "symphony of strings."
These strings dictate the universe; they make up everything we see and everything we know.
They're musical notes, but they make us what we are and they hold us together.
So you see, everything is music.
(Guitar) When I look at the world, I see music all around us.
When I look at myself, I see music.
And my life has been defined by music.
I found myself through music.
Music is everywhere, and it is in everything.
And it changes and it builds and it diminishes.
But it's always there, supporting us, connecting us to each other and showing us the beauty of the universe.
So if you ever feel lost, stop and listen for your song.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Algorithms are everywhere.
They sort and separate the winners from the losers.
The winners get the job or a good credit card offer.
The losers don't even get an interview or they pay more for insurance.
We're being scored with secret formulas that we don't understand that often don't have systems of appeal.
That begs the question: What if the algorithms are wrong?
To build an algorithm you need two things: you need data, what happened in the past, and a definition of success, the thing you're looking for and often hoping for.
You train an algorithm by looking, figuring out.
The algorithm figures out what is associated with success.
What situation leads to success?
Actually, everyone uses algorithms.
They just don't formalize them in written code.
Let me give you an example.
I use an algorithm every day to make a meal for my family.
The data I use is the ingredients in my kitchen, the time I have, the ambition I have, and I curate that data.
I don't count those little packages of ramen noodles as food.
(Laughter) My definition of success is: a meal is successful if my kids eat vegetables.
It's very different from if my youngest son were in charge.
He'd say success is if he gets to eat lots of Nutella.
But I get to choose success.
I am in charge. My opinion matters.
That's the first rule of algorithms.
Algorithms are opinions embedded in code.
It's really different from what you think most people think of algorithms.
They think algorithms are objective and true and scientific.
That's a marketing trick.
It's also a marketing trick to intimidate you with algorithms, to make you trust and fear algorithms because you trust and fear mathematics.
A lot can go wrong when we put blind faith in big data.
This is Kiri Soares. She's a high school principal in Brooklyn.
In 2011, she told me her teachers were being scored with a complex, secret algorithm called the "value-added model."
I told her, "Well, figure out what the formula is, show it to me.
I'm going to explain it to you."
She said, "Well, I tried to get the formula, but my Department of Education contact told me it was math and I wouldn't understand it."
It gets worse.
The New York Post filed a Freedom of Information Act request, got all the teachers' names and all their scores and they published them as an act of teacher-shaming.
When I tried to get the formulas, the source code, through the same means, I was told I couldn't.
I was denied.
I later found out that nobody in New York City had access to that formula.
No one understood it.
Then someone really smart got involved, Gary Rubinstein.
He found 665 teachers from that New York Post data that actually had two scores.
That could happen if they were teaching seventh grade math and eighth grade math.
He decided to plot them.
Each dot represents a teacher.
(Laughter) What is that?
(Laughter) That should never have been used for individual assessment.
It's almost a random number generator.
(Applause) But it was.
This is Sarah Wysocki.
She got fired, along with 205 other teachers, from the Washington, DC school district, even though she had great recommendations from her principal and the parents of her kids.
I know what a lot of you guys are thinking, especially the data scientists, the AI experts here.
You're thinking, "Well, I would never make an algorithm that inconsistent."
But algorithms can go wrong, even have deeply destructive effects with good intentions.
And whereas an airplane that's designed badly crashes to the earth and everyone sees it, an algorithm designed badly can go on for a long time, silently wreaking havoc.
This is Roger Ailes.
(Laughter) He founded Fox News in 1996.
More than 20 women complained about sexual harassment.
They said they weren't allowed to succeed at Fox News.
He was ousted last year, but we've seen recently that the problems have persisted.
That begs the question: What should Fox News do to turn over another leaf?
Well, what if they replaced their hiring process with a machine-learning algorithm?
That sounds good, right?
Think about it.
The data, what would the data be?
A reasonable choice would be the last 21 years of applications to Fox News.
Reasonable.
What about the definition of success?
Reasonable choice would be, well, who is successful at Fox News?
I guess someone who, say, stayed there for four years and was promoted at least once.
Sounds reasonable.
And then the algorithm would be trained.
It would be trained to look for people to learn what led to success, what kind of applications historically led to success by that definition.
Now think about what would happen if we applied that to a current pool of applicants.
It would filter out women because they do not look like people who were successful in the past.
Algorithms don't make things fair if you just blithely, blindly apply algorithms.
They don't make things fair.
They repeat our past practices, our patterns.
They automate the status quo.
That would be great if we had a perfect world, but we don't.
And I'll add that most companies don't have embarrassing lawsuits, but the data scientists in those companies are told to follow the data, to focus on accuracy.
Think about what that means.
Because we all have bias, it means they could be codifying sexism or any other kind of bigotry.
Thought experiment, because I like them: an entirely segregated society -- racially segregated, all towns, all neighborhoods and where we send the police only to the minority neighborhoods to look for crime.
The arrest data would be very biased.
What if, on top of that, we found the data scientists and paid the data scientists to predict where the next crime would occur?
Minority neighborhood.
Or to predict who the next criminal would be?
A minority.
The data scientists would brag about how great and how accurate their model would be, and they'd be right.
Now, reality isn't that drastic, but we do have severe segregations in many cities and towns, and we have plenty of evidence of biased policing and justice system data.
And we actually do predict hotspots, places where crimes will occur.
And we do predict, in fact, the individual criminality, the criminality of individuals.
The news organization ProPublica recently looked into one of those "recidivism risk" algorithms, as they're called, being used in Florida during sentencing by judges.
Bernard, on the left, the black man, was scored a 10 out of 10.
Dylan, on the right, 3 out of 10.
10 out of 10, high risk. 3 out of 10, low risk.
They were both brought in for drug possession.
They both had records, but Dylan had a felony but Bernard didn't.
This matters, because the higher score you are, the more likely you're being given a longer sentence.
What's going on?
Data laundering.
It's a process by which technologists hide ugly truths inside black box algorithms and call them objective; call them meritocratic.
When they're secret, important and destructive, I've coined a term for these algorithms: "weapons of math destruction."
(Laughter) (Applause) They're everywhere, and it's not a mistake.
These are private companies building private algorithms for private ends.
Even the ones I talked about for teachers and the public police, those were built by private companies and sold to the government institutions.
They call it their "secret sauce" -- that's why they can't tell us about it.
It's also private power.
They are profiting for wielding the authority of the inscrutable.
Now you might think, since all this stuff is private and there's competition, maybe the free market will solve this problem.
It won't.
There's a lot of money to be made in unfairness.
Also, we're not economic rational agents.
We all are biased.
We're all racist and bigoted in ways that we wish we weren't, in ways that we don't even know.
We know this, though, in aggregate, because sociologists have consistently demonstrated this with these experiments they build, where they send a bunch of applications to jobs out, equally qualified but some have white-sounding names and some have black-sounding names, and it's always disappointing, the results -- always.
So we are the ones that are biased, and we are injecting those biases into the algorithms by choosing what data to collect, like I chose not to think about ramen noodles -- I decided it was irrelevant.
But by trusting the data that's actually picking up on past practices and by choosing the definition of success, how can we expect the algorithms to emerge unscathed?
We can't. We have to check them.
We have to check them for fairness.
The good news is, we can check them for fairness.
Algorithms can be interrogated, and they will tell us the truth every time.
And we can fix them. We can make them better.
I call this an algorithmic audit, and I'll walk you through it.
First, data integrity check.
For the recidivism risk algorithm I talked about, a data integrity check would mean we'd have to come to terms with the fact that in the US, whites and blacks smoke pot at the same rate but blacks are far more likely to be arrested -- four or five times more likely, depending on the area.
What is that bias looking like in other crime categories, and how do we account for it?
Second, we should think about the definition of success, audit that.
Remember -- with the hiring algorithm? We talked about it.
Someone who stays for four years and is promoted once?
Well, that is a successful employee, but it's also an employee that is supported by their culture.
That said, also it can be quite biased.
We need to separate those two things.
We should look to the blind orchestra audition as an example.
That's where the people auditioning are behind a sheet.
What I want to think about there is the people who are listening have decided what's important and they've decided what's not important, and they're not getting distracted by that.
When the blind orchestra auditions started, the number of women in orchestras went up by a factor of five.
Next, we have to consider accuracy.
This is where the value-added model for teachers would fail immediately.
No algorithm is perfect, of course, so we have to consider the errors of every algorithm.
How often are there errors, and for whom does this model fail?
What is the cost of that failure?
And finally, we have to consider the long-term effects of algorithms, the feedback loops that are engendering.
That sounds abstract, but imagine if Facebook engineers had considered that before they decided to show us only things that our friends had posted.
I have two more messages, one for the data scientists out there.
Data scientists: we should not be the arbiters of truth.
We should be translators of ethical discussions that happen in larger society.
(Applause) And the rest of you, the non-data scientists: this is not a math test.
This is a political fight.
We need to demand accountability for our algorithmic overlords.
(Applause) The era of blind faith in big data must end.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The youthful perspective on the future, the present perspective on the future and the future, mature perspective on the future -- I'd like to try and bring all those three tenses together in one identity tonight.
And you could say that the poet, in many ways, looks at what I call "the conversational nature of reality."
And you ask yourself: What is the conversational nature of reality?
The conversational nature of reality is the fact that whatever you desire of the world -- whatever you desire of your partner in a marriage or a love relationship, whatever you desire of your children, whatever you desire of the people who work for you or with you, or your world -- will not happen exactly as you would like it to happen.
But equally, whatever the world desires of us -- whatever our partner, our child, our colleague, our industry, our future demands of us, will also not happen.
And what actually happens is this frontier between what you think is you and what you think is not you.
And this frontier of actual meeting between what we call a self and what we call the world is the only place, actually, where things are real.
But it's quite astonishing, how little time we spend at this conversational frontier, and not abstracted away from it in one strategy or another.
I was coming through immigration, which is quite a dramatic border at the moment, into the US last year, and, you know, you get off an international flight across the Atlantic, and you're not in the best place; you're not at your most spiritually mature.
You're quite impatient with the rest of humanity, in fact.
So when you get up to immigration with your shirt collar out and a day's growth of beard, and you have very little patience, and the immigration officer looked at my passport and said, "What do you do, Mr. Whyte?"
I said, "I work with the conversational nature of reality."
(Laughter) And he leaned forward over his podium and he said, "I needed you last night."
(Laughter) (Applause) And I said, "I'm sorry, my powers as a poet and philosopher only go so far.
I'm not sure I can --" But before we knew it, we were into a conversation about his marriage.
Here he was in his uniform, and the interesting thing was, he was looking up and down the row of officers to make sure his supervisor didn't see that we was having a real conversation.
But all of us live at this conversational frontier with the future.
I'd like to put you in the shoes of my Irish niece, Marlene McCormack, standing on a cliff edge on the western coast of Spain, overlooking the broad Atlantic.
Twenty-three years old, she's just walked 500 miles from Saint Jean Pied de Port on the French side of the Pyrenees, all the way across Northern Spain, on this very famous, old and contemporary pilgrimage called the Camino de Santiago de Compostela -- the Path to Santiago of Compostela.
And when you get to Santiago, actually, it can be something of an anticlimax, because there are 100,000 people living there who are not necessarily applauding you as you're coming into town.
(Laughter) And 10,000 of them are trying to sell you a memento of your journey.
But you do have the possibility of going on for three more days to this place where Marlene stood, called, in Spanish, Finisterre, in English, Finisterre, from the Latin, meaning "the ends of the earth," the place where ground turns to ocean; the place where your present turns into the future.
And Marlene had walked this way -- she just graduated as a 23-year-old from the University of Sligo with a degree in Irish drama.
And she said to me, "I don't think the major corporations of the world will be knocking on my door."
I said, "Listen, I've worked in corporations all over the world for decades; a degree in drama is what would most prepare you for the adult -- (Laughter) corporate world."
(Applause) But she said, "I'm not interested in that, anyway.
I don't want to teach drama, I want to become a dramatist.
I want to write plays.
So I walked the Camino in order to give myself some courage, in order to walk into my future."
And I said, "What was the most powerful moment you had on the whole Camino, the very most powerful moment?"
She said, "I had many powerful moments, but you know, the most powerful moment was post-Camino, was the three days you go on from Santiago and come to this cliff edge.
And you go through three rituals.
The first ritual is to eat a tapas plate of scallops" -- or if you're vegetarian, to contemplate the scallop shell.
(Laughter) Because the scallop shell has been the icon and badge of your walk, and every arrow that you have seen along that way has been pointing underneath a scallop shell.
So really, this first ritual is saying: How did you get to this place?
How did you follow the path to get here?
How do you hold the conversation of life when you feel unbesieged, when you're unbullied, when you're left to yourself?
How do you hold the conversation of life that brings you to this place?
And the second ritual is that you burn something that you've brought.
I said, "What did you burn, Marlene?"
She said, "I burned a letter and two postcards."
I said, "Astonishing.
Twenty-three years old and you have paper.
I can't believe it."
(Laughter) I'm sure there's a Camino app where you can just delete a traumatic text, you know?
(Laughter) It will engage the flashlight, imbue it with color and disappear in a firework of flames.
But you either bring a letter or you write one there, and you burn it.
And of course we know intuitively what is on those letters and postcards.
It's a form of affection and love that is now no longer extant, yeah?
And then the third ritual: between all these fires are large piles of clothes.
And you leave an item of clothing that has helped you to get to this place.
And I said to Marlene, "What did you leave at the cliff edge?"
She said, "I left my boots -- the very things that I walked in, actually.
They were beautiful boots, I loved those boots, but they were finished after seven weeks of walking.
So I walked away in my trainers, but I left my boots there."
She said, "It was really incredible.
The most powerful moment was, the sun was going down, but the full moon was coming up behind me.
And the full moon was illuminated by the dying sun in such a powerful way that even after the sun had dropped below the horizon, the moon could still see that sun.
And I had a moon shadow, and I was looking at my moon shadow walking across the Atlantic, across this ocean.
And I thought, 'Oh! That's my new self going into the future.' But suddenly I realized the sun was falling further.
The moon was losing its reflection, and my shadow was disappearing.
The most powerful moment I had on the whole Camino was when I realized I myself had to walk across that unknown sea into my future."
Well, I was so taken by this story, I wrote this piece for her.
We were driving at the time; we got home, I sat on the couch, I wrote until two in the morning -- everyone had gone to bed -- and I gave it to Marlene at breakfast time.
It's called, "Finisterre," for Marlene McCormack.
"The road in the end the road in the end taking the path the sun had taken the road in the end taking the path the sun had taken into the western sea the road in the end taking the path the sun had taken into the western sea and the moon the moon rising behind you as you stood where ground turned to ocean: no way to your future now no way to your future now except the way your shadow could take, walking before you across water, going where shadows go, no way to make sense of a world that wouldn't let you pass except to call an end to the way you had come, to take out each letter you had brought and light their illumined corners; and to read them as they drifted on the late western light; to empty your bags to empty your bags; to sort this and to leave that to sort this and to leave that; to promise what you needed to promise all along to promise what you needed to promise all along, and to abandon the shoes that brought you here right at the water's edge, not because you had given up not because you had given up but because now, you would find a different way to tread, and because, through it all, part of you would still walk on, no matter how, over the waves."
"Finisterre."
For Marlene McCormack -- (Applause) who has already had her third play performed in off-off-off-off-Broadway -- in Dublin.
(Laughter) But she's on her way.
This is the last piece.
This is about the supposed arrival at the sum of all of our endeavors.
In Santiago itself -- it could be Santiago, it could be Mecca, it could be Varanasi, it could be Kyoto, it could be that threshold you've set for yourself, the disturbing approach to the consummation of all your goals.
And one of the difficulties about walking into your life, about coming into this body, into this world fully, is you start to realize that you have manufactured three abiding illusions that the rest of humanity has shared with you since the beginning of time.
And the first illusion is that you can somehow construct a life in which you are not vulnerable.
You can somehow be immune to all of the difficulties and ill health and losses that humanity has been subject to since the beginning of time.
If we look out at the natural world, there's no part of that world that doesn't go through cycles of, first, incipience, or hiddenness, but then growth, fullness, but then a beautiful, to begin with, disappearance, and then a very austere, full disappearance.
We look at that, we say, "That's beautiful, but can I just have the first half of the equation, please?
And when the disappearance is happening, I'll close my eyes and wait for the new cycle to come around."
Which means most human beings are at war with reality 50 percent of the time.
The mature identity is able to live in the full cycle.
The second illusion is, I can construct a life in which I will not have my heart broken.
Romance is the first place we start to do it.
When you're at the beginning of a new romance or a new marriage, you say, "I have found the person who will not break my heart."
I'm sorry; you have chosen them out unconsciously for that exact core competency.
(Laughter) They will break your heart.
Why?
Because you care about them.
You look at parenting, yeah?
Parenting: "I will be the perfect mother and father."
Your children will break your heart.
And they don't even have to do anything spectacular or dramatic.
But usually, they do do something spectacular or dramatic -- (Laughter) to break your heart.
And then they live with you as spies and saboteurs for years, watching your every psychological move, and spotting your every weakness.
And one day, when they're about 14 years old, with your back turned to them, in the kitchen, while you're making something for them -- (Laughter) the psychological stiletto goes in.
(Laughter) (Applause) And you say, "How did you know exactly where to place it?"
(Laughter) And they say, "I've been watching you for -- (Laughter) a good few years."
And then we hope that our armored, professional personalities will prevent us from having our heart broken in work.
But if you're sincere about your work, it should break your heart.
You should get to thresholds where you do not know how to proceed.
You do not know how to get from here to there.
What does that do?
It puts you into a proper relationship with reality.
Why?
Because you have to ask for help.
Heartbreak.
We don't have a choice about heartbreak, we only have a choice of having our hearts broken over people and things and projects that we deeply care about.
And the last illusion is, I can somehow plan enough and arrange things that I will be able to see the path to the end right from where I'm standing, right to the horizon.
But when you think about it, the only environment in which that would be true would be a flat desert, empty of any other life.
But even in a flat desert, the curvature of the earth would take the path away from you.
So, no; you see the path, and then you don't and then you see it again.
So this is "Santiago," the supposed arrival, which is a kind of return to the beginning all at the same time.
We have this experience of the journey, which is in all of our great spiritual traditions, of pilgrimage.
But just by actually standing in the ground of your life fully, not trying to abstract yourself into a strategic future that's actually just an escape from present heartbreak; the ability to stand in the ground of your life and to look at the horizon that is pulling you -- in that moment, you are the whole journey.
You are the whole conversation.
"Santiago."
"The road seen, then not seen the road seen, then not seen the hillside hiding then revealing the way you should take the road seen, then not seen the hillside hiding then revealing the way you should take, the road dropping away from you as if leaving you to walk on thin air, then catching you, catching you, holding you up, when you thought you would fall, catching you, holding you up, when you thought you would fall, and the way forward the way forward always in the end the way that you came, the way forward always in the end the way that you came, the way that you followed, the way that carried you into your future, that brought you to this place, that brought you to this place, no matter that it sometimes had to take your promise from you, no matter that it always had to break your heart along the way: the sense the sense of having walked from deep inside yourself out into the revelation, to have risked yourself for something that seemed to stand both inside you and far beyond you, and that called you back in the end to the only road you could follow, walking as you did, in your rags of love walking as you did, in your rags of love and speaking in the voice that by night became a prayer for safe arrival, so that one day one day you realized that what you wanted had actually already happened one day you realized that what you wanted had actually already happened and long ago and in the dwelling place in which you lived before you began, and that and that every step along the way, every step along the way, you had carried the heart and the mind and the promise that first set you off and then drew you on, and that and that you were more marvelous in your simple wish to find a way you were more marvelous in your simple wish to find a way than the gilded roofs of any destination you could reach you were more marvelous in that simple wish to find a way than the gilded roofs of any destination you could reach: as if, all along, you had thought the end point might be a city with golden domes, and cheering crowds, and turning the corner at what you thought was the end of the road, you found just a simple reflection, and a clear revelation beneath the face looking back and beneath it another invitation, all in one glimpse all in one glimpse: like a person like a person or a place you had sought forever like a person or a place you had sought forever, like a bold field of freedom that beckoned you beyond; like another life like another life, and the road the road still stretching on."
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much. Thank you.
You're very kind. Thank you.
(Applause)
Are you tired of your boss?
(Laughter) Are you tired of going to work and making money for other people?
And who are those people anyways?
Those people that make money from your work.
Well, they're capitalists.
They have capital, and they use your labor to make more capital.
So if you're tired of going to work and making money for other people, then you're probably like me -- just tired of capitalism.
Which is ironic, because I'm a capitalist.
(Laughter) I own a small business -- Rco Tires in Compton.
A few years ago, when I read Van Jones, and he wrote, "Let's make green collar jobs in the hood," I took him really seriously.
So I cofounded, own and operate a tire recycling company, and I'm really proud of what we've done.
So far, we've recycled a hundred million pounds of rubber.
That's 21 million gallons of oil diverted from landfills into new products.
(Cheers) We also employ about 15 guys -- mostly people of color, most of whom are felons, and we pay above the minimum wage, and we are now proud members of the United Steelworkers Union.
(Applause) Now, Rco is not a cooperative now.
It's a privately held company with community-minded ownership, but I would like it to become one.
I would like for them to fire the boss -- that's me.
(Laughter) And I'm going to tell you why, but first, let me tell you how we got started.
So a lot of people ask, "How did Rco come to be?"
And I have to be really honest.
I leveraged my white privilege.
So, here's how white privilege worked for me and Rco.
My white grandmother was born on her family's plantation in Arkansas in 1918.
She traveled with her white father west, following the oil boom.
And he held various union oil jobs -- jobs which would have never been given to my black great-grandfather, had he lived here at the time.
Granny became a hairdresser and then got a loan with her husband who built their home in West Los Angeles -- a loan which would never have been given to a black family at the time.
And after my grandfather passed away, my granny was able to keep that house because she had his pension and his health care from a state job which he held, which again, would have never been given to a black man before the anti-discrimination act of the 1960s.
So, you fast-forward 30 years, and I graduate, and I want to start my own business with a pile of debt and a credit card, and no experience in the tire industry.
But I had what most people didn't have.
I had a clean, safe, free place to live.
I moved in with my grandmother, and I was able to rent our first warehouse, buy our first truck, pay our first employees, because I didn't have to worry about paying myself, because I didn't need to feed myself, because I am the direct beneficiary of generations of white privilege.
Now, telling the story of white privilege is important because very often people say, "Oh, we want more companies like yours.
We want more Rco's, we want more black-owned businesses, female-led, triple bottom line, Ban the Box, green manufacturing companies," right?
But the question we have to ask is, where is the wealth?
Where is the money?
Where's the capital in our communities to build the types of businesses that we want?
And in telling a story of the white side of my family, I needed a dozen ways where blacks were excluded from the economy, whereas the white side of my family was able to gain access and traction, and build wealth ...
Primarily because racism and capitalism are best homies, but -- (Laughter) but what that means is that when we ask ourselves, "Why are our communities broke?" -- Like, we're not just broke because we're broke; we're broke for a reason.
Historical context really does matter.
But our history tells another story as well.
There's this incredible book called "Collective Courage," which is the story of how thousands of African Americans have been able to build businesses and schools, hospitals, farming cooperatives, banks, financial institutions -- entire communities and sovereign economies, without a lot of capital.
And they did it by working together and leveraging their community assets and trusting each other and putting solidarity first -- not just profits by any means necessary.
And they didn't have to wait around for celebrities and athletes to bring their money back to the hood.
However, if you are a celebrity or an athlete, and you're listening to this, please feel free to bring your money.
(Laughter) But they did it through cooperative economics, because they knew that capitalism was never going to finance black liberation.
So, there are so many great examples in this book, and I suggest that everybody just read it because it answers the question I asked earlier, which was where are we going to get the wealth to build the types of business that we want.
And the answer is going to have to be cooperative economics.
There's a lot of different versions of cooperativism.
What I'm talking about today is worker ownership.
You may not have heard of worker ownership, but it's been an incredible tool for black economic liberation for a century, and it's also working all over the world right now.
You may have heard of Black Wall Street or maybe the Zapatistas, but I'll give you an example that's a little bit closer to home.
Right now, today, in South Bronx, is the country's largest worker-owned company.
It's called Cooperative Home Care Associates, and it was founded by black and Latinx home care workers who are now able to pay themselves living wages, they have full-time hours, they have benefits and a pension, through their membership as a unit of SEIU.
And these women owners now receive a dividend back on their ownership every year that the company has been profitable, which has been most years.
So they're able to really enjoy the fruits of their labor because they fired the boss.
They don't have any big investors.
They don't have fat-cat CEOs or absentee owners taking the profit out of the company.
They each pay in about 1,000 dollars over time in order to gain ownership, and now they own their job.
Now, there's hundreds of more examples of companies like this springing up all across the country.
And I'm so inspired by what they're doing, because it really represents an alternative to the type of economy we have now, which exploits all of us.
It also represents an alternative to waiting around for big investors to bring chain stores, or big-box stores to our communities, because honestly, those types of developments, they steal resources from our communities.
They put our mom-and-pop shops out of business, they make our entrepreneurs into wage workers, and they take money out of our pocket and send it to their shareholders.
So, I was so inspired by all these stories of resistance and resilience that I got together with a few people here in Los Angeles, and we created LUCI.
LUCI stands for the Los Angeles Union Cooperative Initiative, and our objective is to create more worker-owned businesses here in Los Angeles.
So far, in the last year, we've created two: Pacific Electric, an electrical company, and Vermont Gage Carwash, which is right here in South-Central, some of you guys might be familiar with it.
This long-time carwash is now owned and operated by its 20 workers, all of whom are union members as well.
(Applause) So you might be wondering why the focus on union-worker ownership, but there's a lot of good reasons why the labor movement is a natural ally to the worker-ownership movement.
To build these companies that we want in our community, we need a few things.
We're going to need money, people and training.
Unions have all of those things.
America's working class has been paying union dues for decades, and with it, our unions have been building dignified, decent, and democratic workplaces for us.
However, union jobs are on the steep decline, and it's time for us to start calling on our unions to really bring all of their financial and political capital to bear in the creation of new, union, living-wage jobs in our communities.
Also, union halls are full of union members who understand the importance of solidarity and the power of collective action.
These are the types of folks that want more union businesses to exist, so let's build them with them.
Learning from our unions, learning from our past, learning from our peers, are all going to be very important to our success, which is why I'd like to leave you with one last example and a vision for the future ...
and that vision is Mondragon, Spain.
Mondragon, Spain is a community built entirely around worker cooperatives.
There's 260-plus businesses here, manufacturing everything from bicycles to washing machines to transformers.
And this group of businesses now employs 80,000 people and earns more than 12 billion euros in revenue every year.
And all of the companies there are owned by the people that work in them.
They've also built universities and hospitals and financial institutions.
I mean, imagine if we could build something like this in South-Central.
The late mayor of Jackson had a similar idea.
He wanted to turn his entire city into a Mondragon-like cooperative economy, calling his ambitious plan "Jackson Rising."
And when I look at Mondragon, I see really what working-class people can do for ourselves when we work together and make decisions for ourselves and each other and our communities.
And what's really incredible about Mondragon is that while we are dreaming about them, they are dreaming about us.
This community in Spain has decided to launch an international initiative to create more communities like it all over the world, by linking up with unions, by supporting organizations like LUCI, and by educating folks about the worker-ownership model.
Now, here's what you can do to be a part of it.
If you're a union member, go to your union meetings, and make sure that your union has a worker-ownership initiative, and become a part of it.
If you're an entrepreneur, if you have a small business, or you're interested in starting one, then link up with LUCI or another organization like us to help you get started on the cooperative model.
If you're a politician, or you work for one, or you just like talking to them, please get the city, state, federal and county legislation passed that we need in order to fund and support worker-owned businesses.
And for everybody else, learn about our history, learn about our models, and seek us out so can support us, you can buy from us, invest in us, lend to us and join us, because it's really going to take all of us in order to build the more just and sustainable and resilient economy that we want for ourselves and our children.
And with that, I would like to leave you with a quote from Arundhati Roy, and she writes ...
"Our strategy should not be only to confront Empire, but to lay siege to it.
To deprive it of oxygen.
To mock it.
To shame it.
With our art, our literature, our music, our brilliance, our joy, our sheer relentlessness -- and our ability to tell our own stories.
Not the stories that we're being brainwashed to believe.
The corporate revolution will collapse if we refuse to buy what they're selling -- their ideas, their version of history, their wars, their weapons, their sense of inevitability.
Because know this: They be few and we be many.
They need us more than we need them.
Another world is not only possible, she's on her way.
And on a quiet day, I can hear her breathing."
Thank you.
(Applause)
These are some photos of me volunteering in a Cambodian orphanage in 2006.
When these photos were taken, I thought I was doing a really good thing and that I was really helping those kids.
I had a lot to learn.
It all started for me when I was 19 years old and went backpacking through Southeast Asia.
When I reached Cambodia, I felt uncomfortable being on holiday surrounded by so much poverty and wanted to do something to give back.
So I visited some orphanages and donated some clothes and books and some money to help the kids that I met.
But one of the orphanages I visited was desperately poor.
I had never encountered poverty like that before in my life.
They didn't have funds for enough food, clean water or medical treatment, and the sad little faces on those kids were heartbreaking.
So I was compelled to do something more to help.
I fund-raised in Australia and returned to Cambodia the following year to volunteer at the orphanage for a few months.
I taught English and bought water filters and food and took all of the kids to the dentist for the first time in their lives.
But over the course of the next year, I came to discover that this orphanage that I had been supporting was terribly corrupt.
The director had been embezzling every cent donated to the orphanage, and in my absence, the children were suffering such gross neglect that they were forced to catch mice to feed themselves.
I also found out later that the director had been physically and sexually abusing the kids.
I couldn't bring myself to turn my back on children who I had come to know and care about and return to my life in Australia.
So I worked with a local team and the local authorities to set up a new orphanage and rescue the kids to give them a safe new home.
But this is where my story takes another unexpected turn.
As I adjusted to my new life running an orphanage in Cambodia, (Khmer) I learned to speak Khmer fluently, which means that I learned to speak the Khmer language fluently.
And when I could communicate properly with the kids, I began to uncover some strange things.
Most of the children we had removed from the orphanage were not, in fact, orphans at all.
They had parents, and the few that were orphaned had other living relatives, like grandparents and aunties and uncles and other siblings.
So why were these children living in an orphanage when they weren't orphans?
Since 2005, the number of orphanages in Cambodia has risen by 75 percent, and the number of children living in Cambodian orphanages has nearly doubled, despite the fact that the vast majority of children living in these orphanages are not orphans in the traditional sense.
They're children from poor families.
So if the vast majority of children living in orphanages are not orphans, then the term "orphanage" is really just a euphemistic name for a residential care institution.
These institutions go by other names as well, like "shelters," "safe houses," "children's homes," "children's villages," even "boarding schools."
And this problem is not just confined to Cambodia.
This map shows some of the countries that have seen a dramatic increase in the numbers of residential care institutions and the numbers of children being institutionalized.
In Uganda, for example, the number of children living in institutions has increased by more than 1,600 percent since 1992.
And the problems posed by putting kids into institutions don't just pertain to the corrupt and abusive institutions like the one that I rescued the kids from.
The problems are with all forms of residential care.
Over 60 years of international research has shown us that children who grow up in institutions, even the very best institutions, are at serious risk of developing mental illnesses, attachment disorders, growth and speech delays, and many will struggle with an inability to reintegrate back into society later in life and form healthy relationships as adults.
These kids grow up without any model of family or of what good parenting looks like, so they then can struggle to parent their own children.
So if you institutionalize large numbers of children, it will affect not only this generation, but also the generations to come.
We've learned these lessons before in Australia.
It's what happened to our "Stolen Generations," the indigenous children who were removed from their families with the belief that we could do a better job of raising their children.
Just imagine for a moment what residential care would be like for a child.
Firstly, you have a constant rotation of caregivers, with somebody new coming on to the shift every eight hours.
And then on top of that you have a steady stream of visitors and volunteers coming in, showering you in the love and affection you're craving and then leaving again, evoking all of those feelings of abandonment, and proving again and again that you are not worthy of being loved.
We don't have orphanages in Australia, the USA, the UK anymore, and for a very good reason: one study has shown that young adults raised in institutions are 10 times more likely to fall into sex work than their peers, 40 times more likely to have a criminal record, and 500 times more likely to take their own lives.
There are an estimated eight million children around the world living in institutions like orphanages, despite the fact that around 80 percent of them are not orphans.
Most have families who could be caring for them if they had the right support.
But for me, the most shocking thing of all to realize is what's contributing to this boom in the unnecessary institutionalization of so many children: it's us -- the tourists, the volunteers and the donors.
It's the well-meaning support from people like me back in 2006, who visit these children and volunteer and donate, who are unwittingly fueling an industry that exploits children and tears families apart.
It's really no coincidence that these institutions are largely set up in areas where tourists can most easily be lured in to visit and volunteer in exchange for donations.
Of the 600 so-called orphanages in Nepal, over 90 percent of them are located in the most popular tourist hotspots.
The cold, hard truth is, the more money that floods in in support of these institutions, the more institutions open and the more children are removed from their families to fill their beds.
It's just the laws of supply and demand.
I had to learn all of these lessons the hard way, after I had already set up an orphanage in Cambodia.
I had to eat a big piece of humble pie to admit that I had made a mistake and inadvertently become a part of the problem.
I had been an orphanage tourist, a voluntourist.
I then set up my own orphanage and facilitated orphanage tourism in order to generate funds for my orphanage, before I knew better.
What I came to learn is that no matter how good my orphanage was, it was never going to give those kids what they really needed: their families.
I know that it can feel incredibly depressing to learn that helping vulnerable children and overcoming poverty is not as simple as we've all been led to believe it should be.
But thankfully, there is a solution.
These problems are reversible and preventable, and when we know better, we can do better.
The organization that I run today, the Cambodian Children's Trust, is no longer an orphanage.
In 2012, we changed the model in favor of family-based care.
I now lead an amazing team of Cambodian social workers, nurses and teachers.
Together, we work within communities to untangle a complex web of social issues and help Cambodian families escape poverty.
Our primary focus is on preventing some of the most vulnerable families in our community from being separated in the first place.
But in cases where it's not possible for a child to live with its biological family, we support them in foster care.
Family-based care is always better than placing a child in an institution.
Do you remember that first photo that I showed you before?
See that girl who is just about to catch the ball?
Her name is Torn She's a strong, brave and fiercely intelligent girl.
But in 2006, when I first met her living in that corrupt and abusive orphanage, she had never been to school.
She was suffering terrible neglect, and she yearned desperately for the warmth and love of her mother.
But this is a photo of Torn today with her family.
Her mother now has a secure job, her siblings are doing well in high school and she is just about to finish her nursing degree at university.
For Torn's family -- (Applause) for Torn's family, the cycle of poverty has been broken.
The family-based care model that we have developed at CCT has been so successful, that it's now being put forward by UNICEF Cambodia and the Cambodian government as a national solution to keep children in families.
And one of the best -- (Applause) And one of the best ways that you can help to solve this problem is by giving these eight million children a voice and become an advocate for family-based care.
If we work together to raise awareness, we can make sure the world knows that we need to put an end to the unnecessary institutionalization of vulnerable children.
How do we achieve that?
By redirecting our support and our donations away from orphanages and residential care institutions towards organizations that are committed to keeping children in families.
I believe we can make this happen in our lifetime, and as a result, we will see developing communities thrive and ensure that vulnerable children everywhere have what all children need and deserve: a family.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Before I get to bulk of what I have to say, I feel compelled just to mention a couple of things about myself.
I am not some mystical, spiritual sort of person.
I'm a science writer.
I studied physics in college.
I used to be a science correspondent for NPR.
OK, that said: in the course of working on a story for NPR, I got some advice from an astronomer that challenged my outlook, and frankly, changed my life.
You see, the story was about an eclipse, a partial solar eclipse that was set to cross the country in May of 1994.
And the astronomer -- I interviewed him, and he explained what was going to happen and how to view it, but he emphasized that, as interesting as a partial solar eclipse is, a much rarer total solar eclipse is completely different.
In a total eclipse, for all of two or three minutes, the moon completely blocks the face of the sun, creating what he described as the most awe-inspiring spectacle in all of nature.
And so the advice he gave me was this: "Before you die," he said, "you owe it to yourself to experience a total solar eclipse."
Well honestly, I felt a little uncomfortable hearing that from someone I didn't know very well; it felt sort of intimate.
But it got my attention, and so I did some research.
Now the thing about total eclipses is, if you wait for one to come to you, you're going to be waiting a long time.
Any given point on earth experiences a total eclipse about once every 400 years.
But if you're willing to travel, you don't have to wait that long.
And so I learned that a few years later, in 1998, a total eclipse was going to cross the Caribbean.
Now, a total eclipse is visible only along a narrow path, about a hundred miles wide, and that's where the moon's shadow falls.
It's called the "path of totality."
And in February 1998, the path of totality was going to cross Aruba.
So I talked to my husband, and we thought: February? Aruba?
Sounded like a good idea anyway.
(Laughter) So we headed south, to enjoy the sun and to see what would happen when the sun briefly went away.
Well, the day of the eclipse found us and many other people out behind the Hyatt Regency, on the beach, waiting for the show to begin.
And we wore eclipse glasses with cardboard frames and really dark lenses that enabled us to look at the sun safely.
A total eclipse begins as a partial eclipse, as the moon very slowly makes its way in front of the sun.
So first it looked the sun had a little notch in its edge, and then that notch grew larger and larger, turning the sun into a crescent.
And it was all very interesting, but I wouldn't say it was spectacular.
I mean, the day remained bright.
If I hadn't known what was going on overhead, I wouldn't have noticed anything unusual.
Well, about 10 minutes before the total solar eclipse was set to begin, weird things started to happen.
A cool wind kicked up.
Daylight looked odd, and shadows became very strange; they looked bizarrely sharp, as if someone had turned up the contrast knob on the TV.
Then I looked offshore, and I noticed running lights on boats, so clearly it was getting dark, although I hadn't realized it.
Well soon, it was obvious it was getting dark.
It felt like my eyesight was failing.
And then all of a sudden, the lights went out.
Well, at that, a cheer erupted from the beach, and I took off my eclipse glasses, because at this point during the total eclipse, it was safe to look at the sun with the naked eye.
And I glanced upward, and I was just dumbstruck.
Now, consider that, at this point, I was in my mid-30s.
I had lived on earth long enough to know what the sky looks like.
I mean -- (Laughter) I'd seen blue skies and grey skies and starry skies and angry skies and pink skies at sunrise.
But here was a sky I had never seen.
First, there were the colors.
Up above, it was a deep purple-grey, like twilight.
But on the horizon it was orange, like sunset, 360 degrees.
And up above, in the twilight, bright stars and planets had come out.
So there was Jupiter and there was Mercury and there was Venus.
They were all in a line.
And there, along this line, was this thing, this glorious, bewildering thing.
It looked like a wreath woven from silvery thread, and it just hung out there in space, shimmering.
That was the sun's outer atmosphere, the solar corona.
And pictures just don't do it justice.
It's not just a ring or halo around the sun; it's finely textured, like it's made out of strands of silk.
And although it looked nothing like our sun, of course, I knew that's what it was.
So there was the sun, and there were the planets, and I could see how the planets revolve around the sun.
It's like I had left our solar system and was standing on some alien world, looking back at creation.
And for the first time in my life, I just felt viscerally connected to the universe in all of its immensity.
Time stopped, or it just kind of felt nonexistent, and what I beheld with my eyes -- I didn't just see it, it felt like a vision.
And I stood there in this nirvana for all of 174 seconds -- less than three minutes -- when all of a sudden, it was over.
The sun burst out, the blue sky returned, the stars and the planets and the corona were gone.
The world returned to normal.
But I had changed.
And that's how I became an umbraphile -- an eclipse chaser.
(Laughter) So, this is how I spend my time and hard-earned money.
Every couple of years, I head off to wherever the moon's shadow will fall to experience another couple minutes of cosmic bliss, and to share the experience with others: with friends in Australia, with an entire city in Germany.
In 1999, in Munich, I joined hundreds of thousands who filled the streets and the rooftops and cheered in unison as the solar corona emerged.
And over time, I've become something else: an eclipse evangelist.
I see it as my job to pay forward the advice that I received all those years ago.
And so let me tell you: before you die, you owe it to yourself to experience a total solar eclipse.
It is the ultimate experience of awe.
Now, that word, "awesome," has grown so overused that it's lost its original meaning.
True awe, a sense of wonder and insignificance in the face of something enormous and grand, is rare in our lives.
But when you experience it, it's powerful.
Awe dissolves the ego.
It makes us feel connected.
Indeed, it promotes empathy and generosity.
Well, there is nothing truly more awesome than a total solar eclipse.
Unfortunately, few Americans have seen one, because it's been 38 years since one last touched the continental United States and 99 years since one last crossed the breadth of the nation.
But that is about to change.
Over the next 35 years, five total solar eclipses will visit the continental United States, and three of them will be especially grand.
Six weeks from now, on August 21, 2017 -- (Applause) the moon's shadow will race from Oregon to South Carolina.
April 8, 2024, the moon's shadow heads north from Texas to Maine.
In 2045, on August 12, the path cuts from California to Florida.
I say: What if we made these holidays?
What if we -- (Laughter) (Applause) What if we all stood together, as many people as possible, in the shadow of the moon?
Just maybe, this shared experience of awe would help heal our divisions, get us to treat each other just a bit more humanely.
Now, admittedly, some folks consider my evangelizing a little out there; my obsession, eccentric.
I mean, why focus so much attention on something so brief?
Why cross the globe -- or state lines, for that matter -- for something that lasts three minutes?
As I said: I am not a spiritual person.
I don't believe in God.
I wish I did.
But when I think of my own mortality -- and I do, a lot -- when I think of everyone I have lost, my mother in particular, what soothes me is that moment of awe I had in Aruba.
I picture myself on that beach, looking at that sky, and I remember how I felt.
My existence may be temporary, but that's OK because, my gosh, look at what I'm a part of.
And so this is a lesson I've learned, and it's one that applies to life in general: duration of experience does not equal impact.
One weekend, one conversation -- hell, one glance -- can change everything.
Cherish those moments of deep connection with other people, with the natural world, and make them a priority.
Yes, I chase eclipses.
You might chase something else.
But it's not about the 174 seconds.
It's about how they change the years that come after.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a work in process, based on some comments that were made at TED two years ago about the need for the storage of vaccine.
(Video): [On this planet 1.6 billion people don't have access to electricity refrigeration or stored fuels this is a problem it impacts: the spread of disease the storage of food and medicine and the quality of life.
So here's the plan ... inexpensive refrigeration that doesn't use electricity, propane, gas, kerosene or consumables time for some thermodynamics And the story of the Intermittent Absorption Refrigerator] Adam Grosser: So 29 years ago, I had this thermo teacher who talked about absorption and refrigeration, one of those things that stuck in my head, a lot like the Stirling engine: it was cool, but you didn't know what to do with it.
It was invented in 1858, by this guy Ferdinand Carré, but he couldn't actually build anything with it because of the tools at the time.
This crazy Canadian named Powel Crosley commercialized this thing called the IcyBall, in 1928.
It was a really neat idea, and I'll get to why it didn't work, but here's how it works.
There's two spheres and they're separated in distance.
One has a working fluid, water and ammonia, and the other is a condenser.
The ammonia evaporates and it recondenses in the other side.
You let it cool to room temperature, and then, as the ammonia reevaporates and combines with the water back on the erstwhile hot side, it creates a powerful cooling effect.
So it was a great idea that didn't work at all.
They blew up.
(Laughter) Because you're using ammonia, you get hugely high pressures if you heated them wrong; it topped 400 psi.
But it was kind of an interesting thought.
So the great thing about 2006, there's a lot of really great computational work you can do.
So we got the whole thermodynamics department at Stanford involved -- a lot of computational fluid dynamics.
We proved that most of the ammonia refrigeration tables are wrong.
We found some nontoxic refrigerants that worked at very low vapor pressures.
We brought in a team from the UK -- a lot of great refrigeration people, it turns out, in the UK -- and built a test rig, and proved that, in fact, we could make a low-pressure, nontoxic refrigerator.
So this is the way it works.
You put it on a cooking fire.
Most people have cooking fires in the world, whether it's camel dung or wood.
It heats up for about 30 minutes, cools for an hour.
This is a talk about sugar and cancer.
I became interested in sugar when I was in college.
Not this kind of sugar.
It was the sugar that our biology professors taught us about in the context of the coating of your cells.
Maybe you didn't know that your cells are coated with sugar.
And I didn't know that, either, until I took these courses in college, but back then -- and this was in, let's just call it the 1980s -- people didn't know much about why our cells are coated with sugar.
And when I dug through my notes, what I noticed I had written down is that the sugar coating on our cells is like the sugar coating on a peanut M and M.
And people thought the sugar coating on our cells was like a protective coating that somehow made our cells stronger or tougher.
But we now know, many decades later, that it's much more complicated than that, and that the sugars on our cells are actually very complex.
And if you could shrink yourself down to a little miniature airplane and fly right along the surface of your cells, it might look something like this -- with geographical features.
And now, the complex sugars are these trees and bushes -- weeping willows that are swaying in the wind and moving with the waves.
And when I started thinking about all these complex sugars that are like this foliage on our cells, it became one of the most interesting problems that I encountered as a biologist and also as a chemist.
And so now we tend to think about the sugars that are populating the surface of our cells as a language.
They have a lot of information stored in their complex structures.
But what are they trying to tell us?
I can tell you that we do know some information that comes from these sugars, and it's turned out already to be incredibly important in the world of medicine.
For example, one thing your sugars are telling us is your blood type.
So your blood cells, your red blood cells, are coated with sugars, and the chemical structures of those sugars determine your blood type.
So for example, I know that I am blood type O.
How many people are also blood type O?
Put your hands up.
It's a pretty common one, so when so few hands go up, either you're not paying attention or you don't know your blood type, and both of those are bad.
(Laughter) But for those of you who share the blood type O with me, what this means is that we have this chemical structure on the surface of our blood cells: three simple sugars linked together to make a more complex sugar.
And that, by definition, is blood type O.
Now, how many people are blood type A?
Right here.
That means you have an enzyme in your cells that adds one more building block, that red sugar, to build a more complex structure.
And how many people are blood type B?
Quite a few.
You have a slightly different enzyme than the A people, so you build a slightly different structure, and those of you that are AB have the enzyme from your mother, the other enzyme from your father, and now you make both of these structures in roughly equal proportions.
And when this was figured out, which is now back in the previous century, this enabled one of the most important medical procedures in the world, which, of course, is the blood transfusion.
And by knowing what your blood type is, we can make sure, if you ever need a transfusion, that your donor has the same blood type, so that your body doesn't see foreign sugars, which it wouldn't like and would certainly reject.
What else are the sugars on the surface of your cells trying to tell us?
Well, those sugars might be telling us that you have cancer.
So a few decades ago, correlations began to emerge from the analysis of tumor tissue.
And the typical scenario is a patient would have a tumor detected, and the tissue would be removed in a biopsy procedure and then sent down to a pathology lab where that tissue would be analyzed to look for chemical changes that might inform the oncologist about the best course of treatment.
And what was discovered from studies like that is that the sugars have changed when the cell transforms from being healthy to being sick.
And those correlations have come up again and again and again.
But a big question in the field has been: Why?
Why do cancers have different sugars? What's the importance of that?
Why does it happen, and what can we do about it if it does turn out to be related to the disease process?
So, one of the changes that we study is an increase in the density of a particular sugar that's called sialic acid.
And I think this is going to be one of the most important sugars of our times, so I would encourage everybody to get familiar with this word.
Sialic acid is not the kind of sugar that we eat.
Those are different sugars.
This is a kind of sugar that is actually found at certain levels on all of the cells in your body.
It's actually quite common on your cells.
But for some reason, cancer cells, at least in a successful, progressive disease, tend to have more sialic acid than a normal, healthy cell would have.
And why?
What does that mean?
Well, what we've learned is that it has to do with your immune system.
So let me tell you a little bit about the importance of your immune system in cancer.
And this is something that's, I think, in the news a lot these days.
You know, people are starting to become familiar with the term "cancer immune therapy."
And some of you might even know people who are benefiting from these very new ways of treating cancer.
What we now know is that your immune cells, which are the white blood cells coursing through your bloodstream, protect you on a daily basis from things gone bad -- including cancer.
And so in this picture, those little green balls are your immune cells, and that big pink cell is a cancer cell.
And these immune cells go around and taste all the cells in your body.
That's their job.
And most of the time, the cells taste OK.
But once in a while, a cell might taste bad.
Hopefully, that's the cancer cell, and when those immune cells get the bad taste, they launch an all-out strike and kill those cells.
So we know that.
We also know that if you can potentiate that tasting, if you can encourage those immune cells to actually take a big old bite out of a cancer cell, you get a better job protecting yourself from cancer every day and maybe even curing a cancer.
And there are now a couple of drugs out there in the market that are used to treat cancer patients that act exactly by this process.
They activate the immune system so that the immune system can be more vigorous in protecting us from cancer.
In fact, one of those drugs may well have spared President Jimmy Carter's life.
Do you remember, President Carter had malignant melanoma that had metastasized to his brain, and that diagnosis is one that is usually accompanied by numbers like "months to live."
But he was treated with one of these new immune-stimulating drugs, and now his melanoma appears to be in remission, which is remarkable, considering the situation only a few years ago.
In fact, it's so remarkable that provocative statements like this one: "Cancer is having a penicillin moment," people are saying, with these new immune therapy drugs.
I mean, that's an incredibly bold thing to say about a disease which we've been fighting for a long time and mostly losing the battle with.
So this is very exciting.
Now what does this have to do with sugars?
Well, I'll tell you what we've learned.
When an immune cell snuggles up against a cancer cell to take a taste, it's looking for signs of disease, and if it finds those signs, the cell gets activated and it launches a missile strike and kills the cell.
But if that cancer cell has a dense forest of that sugar, sialic acid, well, it starts to taste pretty good.
And there's a protein on immune cells that grabs the sialic acid, and if that protein gets held at that synapse between the immune cell and the cancer cell, it puts that immune cell to sleep.
The sialic acids are telling the immune cell, "Hey, this cell's all right. Nothing to see here, move along.
Look somewhere else."
So in other words, as long as our cells are wearing a thick coat of sialic acid, they look fabulous, right?
It's amazing.
And what if you could strip off that coat and take that sugar away?
Well, your immune system might be able to see that cancer cell for what it really is: something that needs to be destroyed.
And so this is what we're doing in my lab.
We're developing new medicines that are basically cell-surface lawnmowers -- molecules that go down to the surface of these cancer cells and just cut off those sialic acids, so that the immune system can reach its full potential in eliminating those cancer cells from our body.
So in closing, let me just remind you again: your cells are coated with sugars.
The sugars are telling cells around that cell whether the cell is good or bad.
And that's important, because our immune system needs to leave the good cells alone.
Otherwise, we'd have autoimmune diseases.
But once in a while, cancers get the ability to express these new sugars.
And now that we understand how those sugars mesmerize the immune system, we can come up with new medicines to wake up those immune cells, tell them, "Ignore the sugars, eat the cell and have a delicious snack, on cancer."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Mother Earth: Our end was imminent yet finality relented.
Wind, water and fire gently revived; you and I reconciled, rhythms realigned, the blues gone green.
Your care in conserving in exchange for my fruit and replenishing this picturous restoring of painted skies, mountains rolling, forest covering -- no more warming.
The purity and simplicity of how we used to be.
You remember me?
All I give to humanity?
Housing, land, seas, birds, beast and all of mankind, exclusively the interface where you and the elements meet and vibrate harmoniously.
(Piano plays) (Violin plays) (Music) (Music tempo quickens) (Violin plays) (Music) (Violin plays) (Music) (Music ends) (Applause) My beauty altered, muddied waters, fields stripped bare, interior scarred beyond repair, our memories eroding.
You once obsessed over my frame and how I came to be; my nature, its polarity -- how my sweet winds whisper softly, yet assault seas.
You remember me?
All I give to humanity?
Housing, land, seas, birds, beast and all of mankind -- exclusively the interface where you and the elements meet and vibrate harmoniously.
The unseen traveler forever passing, carrying life, moving, awning of earth felt and heard, strong and stirring, blowing.
Breathe you in, cleansing wind, gentle and still, quieter.
The source eternally here, ascent and descending: air.
Rhythmic flow, fluid and graceful, waves of serenity, smooth strings of purity, rains replenishing rapidly, rivers of dreams, raging springs covering earth in abundance, universal solvent dissolving, drink, liquid, life and power: water.
Born when the universe was formed, warmed mankind, gave him light, colored rays illuminate ember flickers incandescent, powerful and brilliant.
Sacred son of air, father of fury, heat dancing vigorously between perfection and beauty.
Unconfined agility, fast and fancy, sparks of ingenuity rise: fire.
(Canku One Star dances) (Choir chants) (Drums) (Drumming and chanting) (Drumming and chanting) (Drumming and chanting) (Music ends) (Applause) (Violin plays) (Music) (Music ends) (Applause)
Have you ever watched a flock of birds work together?
Thousands of animals, flying in perfect synchrony: Isn't it fascinating?
What I find remarkable is that these birds would not be able to do that if they all would have to follow one leader.
Their reaction speed would simply be too low.
Instead, scientists believe that these birds are aligned on a few simple rules, allowing every single bird to make autonomous decisions while still flying in perfect synchrony.
Their alignment enables their autonomy, and their autonomy makes them fast and flexible.
Now, what does this have to do with any one of us?
Well, it's one way of illustrating what I believe to be the most important change that is needed in ways of working today.
The world is getting faster and more complex, so we need a new way of working, a way that creates alignment around purpose, that takes out bureaucracy and that truly empowers people to make decisions faster.
But the question is: In order to get there, what are we willing to give up?
A few years ago, I was working with a bank that wanted to embark on a digital transformation.
They wanted their offering to be simpler, more intuitive, more relevant.
Now, I'm not sure how many of you have seen a bank from the inside, so let me try to illustrate what many traditional banks look like.
You see lots of people in suits taking elevators to go to their department, marketers sitting with marketers, engineers with engineers, etc.
You see meetings with 20 people where nothing gets decided.
Great ideas? They end up in PowerPoint parking lots.
And there are endless handovers between departments.
Getting anything done can take forever.
So this bank knew that in order to transform, they would have to improve their time to market by drastically changing their ways of working as well.
But how?
To get some inspiration, we decided to go and have a look at companies that seem to be more innovative, like Google, Netflix, Spotify, Zappos.
And I remember how we were walking the halls at one of these companies in December 2014, a management consultant and a team of bankers.
We felt like strangers in a strange land, surrounded by beanbags and hoodies and lots of smart, creative employees.
So then we asked, "How is your company organized?"
And we expected to get an org chart.
But instead, they used strange drawings with funny names like "squads" and "chapters" and "tribes" to explain how they were organized.
So then we tried to translate that to our own world.
We asked, "How many people are working for you?"
"It depends."
"Who do you report to?"
"It depends."
"Who decides on your priorities?"
"It depends."
You can imagine our surprise.
We were asking for what we thought were some of the basic principles of organizations, and their answer was, "It depends."
Now, over the course of that day, we gained a better understanding of their model.
They believed in the power of small, autonomous teams.
Their teams were like mini-start-ups.
They had product people and IT engineers in the same team so they could design, build and test ideas with customers independently of others in the company.
They did not need handovers between departments.
They had all the skills needed right there in the team.
Now, at the end of that day, we had a session to reflect on what we had learned.
And we had started to like their model, so we were already thinking of how to apply some of these ideas to a bank.
But then, one of the hosts, a guy who had not said a word all day, he suddenly said, "So I see you like our model.
But I have one question for you: What are you willing to give up?"
What were we willing to give up?
We did not have an answer immediately, but we knew he was right.
Change is not only about embracing the new; it's about giving up on some of the old as well.
Now, over the past five years, I have worked with companies all over the world to change their ways of working.
And clearly, every company has their own skeptics about why this is not going to work for them.
"Our product is more complex," or "They don't have the legacy IT like we do," or "Regulators just won't allow this in our industry."
But for this bank and also for the other companies that I have worked with afterwards, change was possible.
Within a year, we completely blew up the old silos between marketing, product, channels and IT.
Three thousand employees were reorganized into 350 multidisciplinary teams.
So instead of product people sitting just with product people and engineers with engineers, a product person and an engineer were now members of the same team.
You could be a member of a team responsible for account opening or for the mobile banking app, etc.
At the go-live date of that new organization, some people were shaking hands for the very first time, only to find out that they had been sitting two minutes away from each other but they were sending each other emails and status reports for the last 10 years.
You would hear someone saying, "Ah, so you're the guy that I was always chasing for answers."
(Laughter) But now, they're having coffee together every day.
If the product guy has an idea, he can just raise it to get input from the engineer who is sitting right next to him.
They can decide to test with customers immediately -- no handovers, no PowerPoints, no red tape, just getting stuff done.
Now, getting there is not easy.
And as it turns out, "What are you willing to give up?"
is exactly the right question to ask.
Autonomous decision-making requires multidisciplinary teams.
Instead of decisions going up and down the organization, we want the team to decide.
But to do so, we need all the skills and expertise for that decision in the team.
And this brings difficult trade-offs.
Can we physically co-locate our people who are working in different buildings, different cities or even different countries today?
Or should we invest in better videoconferencing?
And how do we ensure consistency in the way we do things across these teams?
We still need some kind of management matrix.
Now, all these changes to structure and process and procedure -- they are not easy.
But in the end, I found that the most difficult thing to change is our own behavior.
Let me try to illustrate.
If we want these teams to be fast, flexible, creative, like a mini-start-up, they have to be empowered and autonomous.
But this means we cannot have leaders commanding their people what to do, when to do, how to do.
No micromanagers.
But it also means that each employee needs to become a leader, regardless of their formal title.
It's about all of us stepping up to take initiative.
Now obviously, we also cannot afford to have all these teams running in different directions, because that would certainly lead to chaos.
So we need alignment and autonomy at the same time, just like a flock of birds.
In an organizational setting, this requires new behaviors, and with each new behavior, there is giving up on something old as well.
Leaders have to make sure that everyone in the organization is aligned around the overall purpose -- the why -- and the overall priorities -- the what.
But then they have to let go and trust their teams to make the right decisions on how to get there.
Now, creating alignment requires open and transparent communication.
But you know how they say that information is a source of power?
Well, for some managers, sharing information may feel as if they're giving up that source of power.
And it's not just managers.
The teams need to communicate openly and transparently as well.
In these companies, the teams typically work in short sprints, and at the end of every sprint, they organize a demo session to share the output of what they've done, transparently.
And every day, each member of the team gives an update of what they are working on individually.
Now, all this transparency can be uncomfortable for people, because suddenly, there is no place to hide anymore.
Everything we do is transparent for everyone.
So, alignment is not easy, and providing autonomy is not so obvious, either.
One executive at another company likes to explain how he used to be a master of milestone-tracking.
Now, today, to know how things are going, instead of looking at status reports, he needs to walk down to the team floors to attend one of their sessions.
And instead of telling people what to do, he looks for ways to help them.
That is radical change for someone who used to be a master of milestone-tracking.
But in the old world, this executive said, "I only had the illusion of control.
In reality, many projects would run over time and over budget, anyway.
Now I have much more transparency, and I can course-correct much earlier if needed."
And middle managers need to change as well.
First of all, without the handovers and the PowerPoint, there's less of a need for middle managers.
And in the old world, there was this idea of thinkers and doers.
Employees would just follow orders.
But now, instead of only managing other people, middle managers were expected to become player-coaches.
So imagine, for the last 10 years, you have just been telling other people what to do, but now you're expected to do things yourself again.
Clearly, this model is not for everyone, and some great people leave the company.
But the result is a new culture with less hierarchy.
And all of this is hard work.
But it's worth it.
The companies that I worked with, they were used to deploying new product features a few times per year.
Now they have releases every few weeks, and without the handovers and the red tape, the whole organization becomes more efficient.
And finally, if you walk the halls of these companies today, you just feel a new energy.
It feels as if you're walking the halls of a very large start-up.
Now, to be fair, these companies, they cannot claim victory yet.
But at least with this new model, they are much better prepared to respond to change.
The world is getting faster and more complex, so we need to reboot our way of working.
And the hardest part of that change is not in structure or process or procedure, and it's also not just senior executives taking charge.
Leaders will be all of those in the organization who embrace the change.
We all have to lead the change.
So the question is: What are you willing to give up?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today, I'm going to talk about AI and us.
AI researchers have always said that we humans do not need to worry, because only menial jobs will be taken over by machines.
Is that really true?
They have also said that AI will create new jobs, so those who lose their jobs will find a new one.
Of course.
But the real question is: How many of those who may lose their jobs to AI will be able to land a new one, especially when AI is smart enough to learn better than most of us?
Let me ask you a question: How many of you think that AI will pass the entrance examination of a top university by 2020?
Oh, so many. OK.
So some of you may say, "Of course, yes!"
Now singularity is the issue.
And some others may say, "Maybe, because AI already won against a top Go player."
And others may say, "No, never. Uh-uh."
That means we do not know the answer yet, right?
So that was the reason why I started Todai Robot Project, making an AI which passes the entrance examination of the University of Tokyo, the top university in Japan.
This is our Todai Robot.
And, of course, the brain of the robot is working in the remote server.
It is now writing a 600-word essay on maritime trade in the 17th century.
How does that sound?
Why did I take the entrance exam as its benchmark?
Because I thought we had to study the performance of AI in comparison to humans, especially on the skills and expertise which are believed to be acquired only by humans and only through education.
To enter Todai, the University of Tokyo, you have to pass two different types of exams.
The first one is a national standardized test in multiple-choice style.
You have to take seven subjects and achieve a high score -- I would say like an 85 percent or more accuracy rate -- to be allowed to take the second stage written test prepared by Todai.
So let me first explain how modern AI works, taking the "Jeopardy!" challenge as an example.
Here is a typical "Jeopardy!" question: "Mozart's last symphony shares its name with this planet."
Interestingly, a "Jeopardy!" question always asks, always ends with "this" something: "this" planet, "this" country, "this" rock musician, and so on.
In other words, "Jeopardy!" doesn't ask many different types of questions, but a single type, which we call "factoid questions."
By the way, do you know the answer?
If you do not know the answer and if you want to know the answer, what would you do?
You Google, right? Of course.
Why not?
But you have to pick appropriate keywords like "Mozart," "last" and "symphony" to search.
The machine basically does the same.
Then this Wikipedia page will be ranked top.
Then the machine reads the page.
No, uh-uh.
Unfortunately, none of the modern AIs, including Watson, Siri and Todai Robot, is able to read.
But they are very good at searching and optimizing.
It will recognize that the keywords "Mozart," "last" and "symphony" are appearing heavily around here.
So if it can find a word which is a planet and which is co-occurring with these keywords, that must be the answer.
This is how Watson finds the answer "Jupiter," in this case.
Our Todai Robot works similarly, but a bit smarter in answering history yes-no questions, like, "'Charlemagne repelled the Magyars.' Is this sentence true or false?"
Our robot starts producing a factoid question, like: "Charlemagne repelled [this person type]" by itself.
Then, "Avars" but not "Magyars" is ranked top.
This sentence is likely to be false.
Our robot does not read, does not understand, but it is statistically correct in many cases.
For the second stage written test, it is required to write a 600-word essay like this one: [Discuss the rise and fall of the maritime trade in East and Southeast Asia in the 17th century ...] and as I have shown earlier, our robot took the sentences from the textbooks and Wikipedia, combined them together, and optimized it to produce an essay without understanding a thing.
(Laughter) But surprisingly, it wrote a better essay than most of the students.
(Laughter) How about mathematics?
A fully automatic math-solving machine has been a dream since the birth of the word "artificial intelligence," but it has stayed at the level of arithmetic for a long, long time.
Last year, we finally succeeded in developing a system which solved pre-university-level problems from end to end, like this one.
This is the original problem written in Japanese, and we had to teach it 2,000 mathematical axioms and 8,000 Japanese words to make it accept the problems written in natural language.
And it is now translating the original problems into machine-readable formulas.
Weird, but it is now ready to solve it, I think.
Go and solve it.
Yes! It is now executing symbolic computation.
Even more weird, but probably this is the most fun part for the machine.
(Laughter) Now it outputs a perfect answer, though its proof is impossible to read, even for mathematicians.
Anyway, last year our robot was among the top one percent in the second stage written exam in mathematics.
(Applause) Thank you.
So, did it enter Todai?
No, not as I expected.
Why?
Because it doesn't understand any meaning.
Let me show you a typical error it made in the English test.
[Nate: We're almost at the bookstore. Just a few more minutes.
Sunil: Wait. ______ . Nate: Thank you! That always happens ...] Two people are talking.
For us, who can understand the situation -- [1. "We walked for a long time." 2. "We're almost there."
3. "Your shoes look expensive." 4. "Your shoelace is untied."] it is obvious number four is the correct answer, right?
But Todai Robot chose number two, even after learning 15 billion English sentences using deep learning technologies.
OK, so now you might understand what I said: modern AIs do not read, do not understand.
They only disguise as if they do.
This is the distribution graph of half a million students who took the same exam as Todai Robot.
Now our Todai Robot is among the top 20 percent, and it was capable to pass more than 60 percent of the universities in Japan -- but not Todai.
But see how it is beyond the volume zone of to-be white-collar workers.
You might think I was delighted.
After all, my robot was surpassing students everywhere.
Instead, I was alarmed.
How on earth could this unintelligent machine outperform students -- our children?
I decided to investigate what was going on in the human world.
I took hundreds of sentences from high school textbooks and made easy multiple-choice quizzes, and asked thousands of high school students to answer.
Here is an example: [Buddhism spread to ... , Christianity to ... and Oceania, and Islam to ...] Of course, the original problems are written in Japanese, their mother tongue.
[ ______ has spread to Oceania.
1. Hinduism 2. Christianity 3. Islam 4. Buddhism ] Obviously, Christianity is the answer, isn't it?
It's written!
And Todai Robot chose the correct answer, too.
But one-third of junior high school students failed to answer this question.
Do you think it is only the case in Japan?
I do not think so, because Japan is always ranked among the top in OECD PISA tests, measuring 15-year-old students' performance in mathematics, science and reading every three years.
We have been believing that everybody can learn and learn well, as long as we provide good learning materials free on the web so that they can access through the internet.
But such wonderful materials may benefit only those who can read well, and the percentage of those who can read well may be much less than we expected.
How we humans will coexist with AI is something we have to think about carefully, based on solid evidence.
At the same time, we have to think in a hurry because time is running out.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Noriko, thank you.
Noriko Arai: Thank you.
CA: In your talk, you so beautifully give us a sense of how AIs think, what they can do amazingly and what they can't do.
But -- do I read you right, that you think we really need quite an urgent revolution in education to help kids do the things that humans can do better than AIs?
NA: Yes, yes, yes.
Because we humans can understand the meaning.
That is something which is very, very lacking in AI.
But most of the students just pack the knowledge without understanding the meaning of the knowledge, so that is not knowledge, that is just memorizing, and AI can do the same thing.
So we have to think about a new type of education.
CA: A shift from knowledge, rote knowledge, to meaning.
NA: Mm-hmm.
CA: Well, there's a challenge for the educators. Thank you so much.
NA: Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause)
It's Christmas Eve, 1968.
The Apollo 8 spacecraft has successfully completed its first three orbits around the moon.
Launched from Cape Canaveral three days before, this is the first time that humans have ever traveled beyond low Earth orbit.
On the vessel's fourth pass, the Earth slowly comes into view and reveals itself above the Moon's horizon.
Astronaut Bill Anders frantically asks his crewmates where their camera is, grabs the Hasselblad, points it towards the window, presses the shutter, and takes one of the most important photographs of all time: "Earthrise."
When the crew was safely home a few days later, they were asked about the mission.
Anders famously replied, "We went to the moon, but we actually discovered Earth."
What did he and his fellow crewmates feel in this incredible moment?
In a study released just this past year, a team of researchers at the University of Pennsylvania examined the testimonies of hundreds of astronauts who had the opportunity to view the Earth from space.
Their analysis uncovered three common feelings: first, a greater appreciation for Earth's beauty; second, an increased sense of connection to all other living beings; and third, an unexpected, often overwhelming sense of emotion.
The researchers believe that seeing the Earth from a great distance provokes someone to develop new cognitive frameworks to understand what they are seeing.
They believe these astronauts were forever changed by this new view, this new perspective, this new visual truth.
This feeling is commonly referred to as the "overview effect."
Only 558 people have ever been to outer space.
558 people had the opportunity to gaze down in awe, to wonder at our planet floating in an infinite sea of darkness.
But what if that number were bigger?
Three years ago, I set off on my own mission: to see if I could bring this feeling of overwhelming scale and beauty to many more people just by using one small computer in my small New York City apartment.
It was then, in 2013, that I launched "Daily Overview."
Every day, I have used satellite imagery to create one expansive overhead view of our planet.
More than 1,000 of these images have been created thus far, and more than 600,000 people tune in for this daily dose of perspectives.
I create the imagery by curating photos from the massive archive of a satellite company called Digital Globe.
They operate a constellation of five satellites, each roughly the size of an ambulance, that is constantly taking pictures of the Earth as they orbit at 28,000 kilometers per hour.
Now, what does this mean?
Each of these satellites is equipped with a camera that has a focal length of 16 meters, so that's roughly 290 times greater than a DSLR camera equipped with a standard 55 millimeter lens.
So if were able to attach one of their satellites to the roof of this theater in Oxford, we could take a picture of a football, clearly, on the pitch at the stadium in Amsterdam.
That's 450 kilometers away.
That's incredibly powerful technology.
And I decided at the beginning of this project that I would use that incredible technology to focus on the places where humans have impacted the planet.
As a species, we dig and scrape the Earth for resources, we produce energy, we raise animals and cultivate crops for food, we build cities, we move around, we create waste.
And in the process of doing all of these things, we shape landscapes and seascapes and cityscapes with increasing control and impunity.
So with that in mind, I would like to share a few of my overviews with you now.
Here we see cargo ships and oil tankers waiting outside the entry to the port of Singapore.
This facility is the second-busiest in the world by terms of total tonnage, accounting for one-fifth of the world's shipping containers and one half of the annual supply of crude oil.
If you look closely at this overview, you'll see a lot of little specks.
Those are actually cows at a feedlot in Summerfield, Texas, in the United States.
So once cows reach a particular weight, roughly 300 kilograms, they are moved here and placed on a specialized diet.
Over the next three to four months, the cows gain an additional 180 kilograms before they are shipped off to slaughter.
You're also probably wondering about this glowing pool at the top there.
That gets its color from a unique combination of manure, chemicals and a particular type of algae that grows in the stagnant water.
This is the Mount Whaleback iron ore mine in the Pilbara region of Western Australia, a beautiful yet scary scar on the face of the Earth.
Of the world's mined iron ore, 98 percent is used to make steel and is therefore a major component in the construction of buildings, automobiles or appliances such as your dishwasher or refrigerator.
This is a solar concentrator in Seville, Spain.
So this facility contains 2,650 mirrors which are arrayed in concentric circles around an 140-meter-tall tower at its center.
At the top of the tower, there is a capsule of molten salt that gets heated by the beams of light reflected upwards from the mirrors below.
From there, the salt circulates to a storage tank underground, where it produces steam, which spins turbines and generates enough electricity to power 70,000 homes and offsets 30,000 tons of carbon dioxide emissions every year.
This overview shows deforestation in Santa Cruz, Bolivia immediately adjacent to untouched tracts of rainforest.
Deforestation in the country has primarily been driven by the expansion of mechanized agriculture and cattle ranching, so as the country tries to meet the demand of its growing population and feed them, the sacrificial destruction of its rainforest has taken place to do so.
It is estimated that the country lost 4.5 million acres of rainforest in one decade alone from 2000 until 2010.
This is the Eixample district in Barcelona, Spain.
So the overview perspective can be incredibly helpful to help us understand how cities function and how we can devise smarter solutions for urban planning, and this will become only more relevant as it is expected that 4.9 billion people will live in cities around the world by the year 2030.
This area of Barcelona is characterized by its strict grid pattern, apartments with communal courtyards and these octagonal intersections which allow for more sunlight, better ventilation and additional parking at street level.
And here we see that grid pattern but under much different circumstances.
This is the Dadaab Refugee Camp in northern Kenya, the largest such facility of its kind in the world.
To cope with the influx of refugees who are fleeing Somalia, where there is famine and conflict, the UN has built this area gridded out at left called the LFO extension to house more and more refugees who are arriving and occupying these white dots, which are actually tents which will slowly fill up the area over time.
So if you have one of these overviews, you have a moment in time.
If we have two overviews, however, we are able to tell stories about changes in time.
I call that feature of the project "Juxtapose," and we'll share a few examples of it with you now.
So the tulip fields in Netherlands bloom every year in April.
So we take an image captured in March a few weeks before and contrast it to one taken a few weeks later.
We're able to watch the flowers bloom in this magnificent cascade of color.
It is estimated that the Dutch produce 4.3 billion tulip bulbs every year.
In 2015, two dams collapsed at an iron ore mine in southeastern Brazil, causing one of the worst environmental disasters in the history of the country.
It is estimated that 62 million cubic meters of waste were released when the dams broke, destroying numerous villages in the process, including Bento Rodrigues, seen here before ...
and after the flood.
Ultimately, 19 people were killed in this disaster.
Half a million people did not have access to clean drinking water for an extended period of time, and the waste soon entered into the Doce River, extended for 650 kilometers all the way into the sea, killing unknowable amounts of plant and animal life along the way.
And lastly, here is a story related to the crisis in Syria, a conflict which has claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of people and displaced millions.
So this patch of desert is seen in Mafraq, Jordan in 2011, the year the conflict started, and when we compare it to an image captured just this year in 2017, we see the construction of the Zaatari refugee camp.
So just as the astronauts of Apollo 8 watched the Earth rising above the lunar landscape for the first time, there is no way that you could have imagined what the places I just showed you look like from outer space.
And while you may enjoy the aesthetics of an image, once you learn exactly what it is you're seeing, you may struggle with the fact that you still like it.
And that's the tension I want to create with my work, because I believe it is that contemplation, that internal dialogue that will lead to greater interest in our planet and more awareness of what we're doing to it.
I believe that viewing the Earth from the overview perspective is more important now than ever before.
Through the incredible technology of these high-flying cameras, we can see, monitor and expose the unprecedented impact that we are having.
And whether we are scientists or engineers or policymakers or investors or artists, if we can adopt a more expansive perspective, embrace the truth of what is going on and contemplate the long-term health of our planet, we will create a better and safer and smarter future for our one and only home.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why do people deliberately destroy cultural heritage?
By doing so, do they believe they're erasing our history?
Our cultural memory?
It's true that we are losing cultural heritage to erosion and natural disasters, but this is something that is simply difficult to avoid.
I'm here to show you today how we can use pictures -- your pictures -- to reclaim the history that is being lost using innovative technology and the effort of volunteers.
In the early 20th century, archaeologists discovered hundreds of statues and artifacts at the ancient city of Hatra, in northern Iraq.
Statues like this one were found in fragments, some of them missing their heads or arms, yet the clothing that they are wearing and their pose can still tell us their story.
For example, we believe that by wearing a knee-length tunic and open bare feet, this was representative of a priest.
However, with a closer look at this particular piece, we can see that this tunic being worn was elaborately decorated, which has led many researchers to believe this was actually a statue of a king performing his religious functions.
When the Mosul Cultural Museum opened in 1952 in northern Iraq, this statue, as well as others, were placed there to preserve them for future generations.
Following the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, a few statues and artifacts were relocated to Baghdad, but this statue remained.
Then in February of last year, a video was released, and it instantly went viral.
Maybe some of you remember seeing it.
Here's a short clip.
(Video) (Singing in Arabic) (Singing ends) Not a very pleasant sight, right?
Did you notice anything familiar in the video?
There it is.
There is that very statue, as it was toppled over, breaking into pieces.
When Matthew Vincent and I saw this video, we were shocked.
Since we are archaeologists using innovative technology for digital preservation, an idea sprung to mind.
Maybe we can crowdsource the images that were taken of these artifacts before they were destroyed, to create digital reconstructions.
If we can do that, maybe we can put them into a virtual museum to tell that story.
And so two weeks after we saw this video, we started the project called Project Mosul.
Remember the pictures of the statue I showed you before?
This is actually the crowdsourced reconstruction of it before it was destroyed.
Now, many of you may be wondering, how exactly does this work?
Well, the key to this technology is called photogrammetry, and it was invented here, in Germany.
It is the technology that allows us to use two-dimensional images taken of the same object from different angles to create a 3D model.
I know you may be thinking this sounds like magic -- but it's not.
Let me show you how it works.
Here are two crowdsourced images of the same statue.
What the computer can do is it can detect similar features between the photographs -- similar features of the object.
Then, by using multiple photos, in this case, it can begin to reconstruct the object in 3D.
In this case, you have the position of the cameras when each image was taken, shown in blue.
Now, this is a partial reconstruction, I admit, but why would I say partial?
Well, simply because the statue was positioned against a wall.
We don't have photographs taken of it from the back.
If I wanted to complete a full digital reconstruction of this statue, I would need a proper camera, tripods, proper lighting, but we simply can't do that with crowdsourced images.
Think about it: How many of you, when you visit a museum, take photographs of all parts of the statue, even the back side of it?
Well, maybe if some of you find Michelangelo's David interesting, I guess -- (Laughter) But the thing is, if we can find more images of this object, we can improve the 3D model.
When we started the project, we started it with the Mosul Museum in mind.
We figured we may get a few images, some people interested, make one or two virtual reconstructions, but we had no idea that we had sparked something that would grow so quickly.
Before we knew it, we realized it was obvious: we could apply this same idea to lost heritage anywhere.
And so, we decided to change the name of the project to Rekrei.
Then, in the summer of last year, "The Economist" magazine's media lab reached out to us.
They asked us, "Hey, would you like us to build a virtual museum to put the reconstructions back inside, to tell the story?"
Can you imagine us saying no?
Of course not.
We said yes!
We were so excited.
This was exactly the initial dream of that project.
And so now, any of you can experience RecoVR Mosul on your phone, using Google Cardboard or a tablet or even YouTube 360.
Here is a screenshot from the virtual museum.
And there it is ...
the partial reconstruction of the statue, as well as the Lion of Mosul, the first reconstruction completed by our project.
Although the video doesn't explicitly show the Lion of Mosul being destroyed, we have many other examples of large artifacts being destroyed that were simply too large to have been stolen.
For example, the Gate of Nimrud in northern Iraq.
This is a digital reconstruction from before, and this is actually during the destruction.
Or the Lion of Al-Lāt, in Palmyra, Syria: before ...
and after.
Although virtual reconstructions are primarily the main focus of our project, some people have been asking the question: Can we print them in 3D?
We believe 3D printing doesn't offer a straightforward solution to lost heritage.
Once an object is destroyed, it's gone.
But 3D printing does offer an addition to tell that story.
For example, I can show you here ...
There is the statue from Hatra and the Lion of Mosul.
(Applause) Thank you.
Now, if you look closely, you'll notice that there are some parts that have been printed in color, and some parts that are in white or gray.
This part was added simply to hold the statues up.
This works the same way if you visit a museum, and a statue is found in fragments; it's put together for the people to see it.
This makes sense, right?
However, we're much more interested in what virtual reality has to offer for lost heritage.
Here is an example of one of the tower tombs that was destroyed in Palmyra.
Using Sketchfab's online viewer, we can show that we have reconstructed three parts of the exterior of the tomb, but we also have photos of the inside, so we're beginning to create a reconstruction of the wall and the ceiling.
Archaeologists worked there for many, many years, so we also have architectural drawing plans of this lost heritage.
Unfortunately, we are not only losing cultural heritage to areas of conflict and at war -- we're also losing it to natural disasters.
This is a 3D model of Durbar Square in Kathmandu, before the earthquake that occurred last April ...
and this is after.
You may be thinking, you didn't create these 3D models with only tourist photographs, and that's true.
But what this represents is the ability for large, public organizations and private industry to come together for initiatives like ours.
And so one of the major challenges of our project, really, is to find photographs that were taken before something happens, right?
Well, the internet is basically a database with millions of images, right?
Exactly.
So we have begun to develop a tool that allows us to extract images from websites like Flickr, based on their geotags, to complete reconstructions.
Because we're not only losing cultural heritage to natural disasters and in war, but we're also losing it to something else.
Any idea, just looking at these two pictures?
Maybe it's a little difficult to remember, but only a few weeks ago, this was the example of human destruction by human stupidity.
Because a tourist in Lisbon wanted to climb onto this statue and take a selfie with it -- (Laughter) and pulled it down with him.
So we're already finding photographs to complete a digital reconstruction of this.
We need to remember that the destruction of cultural heritage isn't a recent phenomenon.
In the 16th century, European priests and explorers burned thousands of Maya books in the Americas, of which we only have a handful left.
Fast-forward to 2001, when the Taliban blew up the Bamiyan Buddhas in Afghanistan.
You see, cultural heritage is about our shared global history.
It helps us connect with our ancestors and their stories, but we're losing pieces of it every day to natural disasters and in areas of conflict.
Of course, the loss of human life is the most heartbreaking loss ...
but cultural heritage offers us a way to preserve the memory of the people for future generations.
We need your help to reclaim the history that is being lost.
Will you join us?
(Applause)
Your internship in Professor Ramsey’s physics lab has been amazing.
Until, that is, the professor accidentally stepped through a time portal.
You’ve got just a minute to jump through the portal to save him before it closes and leaves him stranded in history.
Once you’re through it, the portal will close, and your only way back will be to create a new one using the chrono-nodules from your lab.
Activated nodules connect to each other via red or blue tachyon entanglement.
Activate more nodules and they’ll connect to all other nodules in the area.
As soon as a red or blue triangle is created with a nodule at each point, it opens a doorway through time that will take you back to the present.
But the color of each individual connection manifests at random, and there’s no way to choose or change its color.
And there’s one more problem: each individual nodule creates a temporal instability that raises the chances the portal might collapse as you go through it.
So the fewer you bring, the better.
The portal’s about to close.
What’s the minimum number of nodules you need to bring to be certain you’ll create a red or blue triangle and get back to the present?
Pause here if you want to figure it out for yourself!
Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 This question is so rich that an entire branch of mathematics known as Ramsey Theory developed from it.
Ramsey Theory is home to some famously difficult problems.
This one isn’t easy, but it can be handled if you approach it systematically.
Imagine you brought just three nodules.
Would that be enough? No - for example, you might have two blue and one red connection, and be stuck in the past forever.
Would four nodules be enough? No - there are many arrangements here that don’t give a blue or red triangle.
What about five?
It turns out there is an arrangement of connections that avoids creating a blue or red triangle.
These smaller triangles don’t count because they don’t have a nodule at each corner.
However, six nodules will always create a blue triangle or a red triangle.
Here’s how we can prove that without sorting through every possible case.
Imagine activating the sixth nodule, and consider how it might connect to the other five.
It could do so in one of six ways: with five red connections, five blue connections, or some mix of red and blue.
Notice that every possibility has at least three connections of the same color coming from this nodule.
Let’s look at just the nodules on the other end of those same three color connections.
If the connections were blue, then any additional blue connection between those three would give us a blue triangle.
So the only way we could get in trouble is if all the connections between them were red.
But those three red connections would give us a red triangle.
No matter what happens, we’ll get a red or a blue triangle, and open our doorway.
On the other hand, if the original three connections were all red instead of blue, the same argument still works, with all the colors flipped.
In other words, no matter how the connections are colored, six nodules will always create a red or blue triangle and a doorway leading home.
So you grab six nodules and jump through the portal.
You were hoping your internship would give you valuable life experience.
Turns out, that didn’t take much time.
By the light of the moon, a group of youths sneak into the woods, where they take mind-altering substances, switch it up romantically, and brush up against creatures from another dimension.
"A Midsummer’s Night’s Dream" sees Shakespeare get psychedelic – and the result is a treat in the theatre and on the page.
First performed in the 1590's, this play is one of Shakespeare’s friskiest works, filled with trickery, madness and magic.
Set over the course of one night, Midsummer progresses at a rollicking pace.
The plot is structured around patterns of collision and dissolution, where characters from different worlds are thrown together and torn apart.
Shakespeare uses these patterns to mock the characters’ self-obsession and question authority with a comic twist.
The action is set in Ancient Greece, but like many of Shakespeare’s plays it reflects his contemporary concerns.
The magical setting of the woods at night disrupts the boundaries between separate groups, with bizarre results.
Here, the bard plays with the rigid class system of his own time, taking three distinct groups and turning their society upside-down in a world where no mortal is in control.
The play opens with young Hermia raging at her father Egeus and Theseus, the King of Athens, who have forbidden her to marry her lover Lysander.
Hermia has no interest in her father's choice for her of Demetrius – but her best friend Helena definitely does.
Furious at their elders, Hermia and Lysander elope under cover of darkness, with Demetrius in hot pursuit.
This is further complicated by Helena’s decision to follow them all into the woods, in the hope of winning Demetrius’ heart.
At this point, the woods are getting crowded, as the lovers are sharing the space with a group of “rude mechanicals”— a troupe of workers drunkenly rehearsing a play, led by the jovial Nick Bottom.
Unbeknownst to them, the humans have entered into the world of the fairies.
Despite their magical splendor, Oberon and Titania, the king and queen of the fairies, have their own romantic problems.
Furious at his inability to control Titania, the jealous Oberon commands the trickster Puck to squeeze the juice of a magical flower over her eyes.
When she wakes up, she’ll fall in love with the first thing she sees.
On his mission, Puck gleefully sprinkles the juice over the eyes of the napping Demetrius and Lysander, and transforms Bottom’s head into that of a donkey for good measure.
As eyes flicker open, a night of chaos commences that includes broken hearts, mistaken identity, and transformations.
Out of all the characters, Bottom probably fares the best – when the bewitched Titania lays eyes on him, she calls on her fairies to lavish him with wine and treasures and sweeps the transfigured donkeyman off his feet: “pluck the wings from painted butterflies/ To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.” While magic is the catalyst to the action, the play reflects the real drama of the things we do for love – and the nonsensical behavior of the people under its spell.
The moon overlooks the action “like a silver bow,” signifying erratic behavior, the dark side of love, and the bewitching allure of a world where the usual rules don’t apply.
Although the characters eventually come to their senses, "A Midsummer Night's Dream" raises the question of how much agency we have over our own daily lives.
But it’s not the more realistically rendered lovers, rulers or workers who have the last word, but the impish Puck who queries whether we can ever truly trust what we see: If we shadows have offended, Think but this and all is mended: That you have but slumbered here While these visions did appear.
And in so doing, he evokes the effect of entering into the magical world of great theatre that plays with the boundary between illusion and reality – and dramatizes the possibility that life is but a dream.
Do you remember these glow-in-the-dark little stars which you had on the ceiling when you were a boy or a girl?
It is light.
It is pure light.
I think I stared at them way too long when I was a five-year-old, you know?
It's so beautiful: no energy bill, no maintenance.
It is there.
So two years ago, we went back to the lab, making it more durable, more light-emitting, with the experts.
And at the same time, we got a request from this guy -- Van Gogh, the famous Van Gogh Foundation -- who wanted to celebrate his 125th anniversary in the Netherlands.
And they came to me and asked, "Can you make a place where he feels more alive again in the Netherlands?"
And I liked that question a lot, so in way, we sort of started to connect these two different worlds.
This is how my brain works, by the way.
(Laughter) I would love to keep on doing this for an hour, but OK -- (Laughter) And this is the result that we made: a bicycle path which charges at daytime via the sun and glows at night, up to eight hours.
(Applause) Thank you.
... hinting towards a future which should be energy friendly and linking up the local grounds as Van Gogh literally walked and lived there in 1883.
And you can go there every night for free, no ticket needed.
People experience the beauty of cycling through the starry night, thinking about green energy and safety.
I want to create places where people feel connected again.
And it was somehow great to make these projects happen with the industry, with the infrastructure companies.
So when these sheikhs of Qatar started to call: "How much for 10 kilometers?"
(Laughter) Yeah, really, that's a weird call you're going to get.
But it's fascinating that this is not just a sort of one-off, nice-to-have special.
I think this kind of creative thinking, these kinds of connections -- it's the new economy.
The World Economic Forum, the think tank in Geneva, did an interview with a lot of smart people all around the world, asking, "What are the top 10 skills you and I need to become successful?"
And what is interesting, what you see here: it's not about money or being really good in C++, although these are great skills to have, I have to admit.
But look at number three, creativity; number two, critical thinking; number one, complex problem-solving -- all the things a robot or a computer is really bad at.
And this makes me very optimistic, very hopeful for the new world, that as we will live in this hyper-technological world, our human skills -- our desire for empathy, our desire for curiosity, our desire for beauty -- will be more appreciated again, and we will live in a world where creativity is our true capital.
And a creative process like that -- I don't know how it works for you, but in my brain, it always starts with a question: Why?
Why does a jellyfish emit light?
Or a firefly?
Or why do be accept pollution?
This is from my room in Beijing three years ago.
Left image is a good day -- Saturday.
I can see the cars and the people, the birds; life is OK in a dense urban city.
And on the right image -- holy moly.
Pollution -- complete layers.
I couldn't even see the other side of the city.
And this image made me really sad.
This is not the bright future we envision here at TED -- this is the horror.
We live five to six years shorter; children have lung cancer when they're six years old.
And so in a weird, beautiful way, I, at that moment, became inspired by Beijing smog.
And the governments all around the world are fighting their war on smog, but I wanted to make something within the now.
So we decided to build the largest smog vacuum cleaner in the world.
It sucks up polluted air, cleans it and then releases it.
And we built the first one.
So it sucks up 30,000 cubic meters per hour, cleans it on the nano level -- the PM2.5, PM10 particles -- using very little electricity, and then releases the clean air, so we have parks, playgrounds, which are 55 to 75 percent more clean than the rest of the city.
(Applause) Yes!
(Applause) And every month or so, it opens like a spaceship -- like a Marilyn Monroe with the -- well, you know what.
Anyway.
(Laughter) So this ...
this is the stuff we are capturing.
This is Beijing smog.
This is in our lungs right now.
If you live next to a highway, it's the same as 17 cigarettes per day.
Are we insane?
When did we say yes to that?
And we had buckets of this disgusting material in our studio, and on a Monday morning, we were discussing, we were like, "Shit, what should we do with it? Should we throw it away?"
Like, "Help!"
And then we realized: no, no, no, no, no -- waste should not exist.
Waste for the one should be food for the other.
So, here, maybe show it around.
Do not put this in your coffee.
(Laughter) And we realized that 42 percent is made out of carbon, and carbon, of course, under high pressure, you get ...
diamonds.
So, inspired by that, we compress it for 30 minutes -- (Cracking sound) and make smog-free rings.
(Laughter) And so by sharing -- yeah, really!
And so by sharing a ring, you donate 1,000 cubic meters of clean air to the city the tower is in.
(Applause) I have one here -- (Applause) A little floating cube.
I will give one to you.
I'm not going to propose, don't worry.
(Laughter) Are we good?
You can show it around.
And we put this online -- Kickstarter campaign, crowdfunding.
And people started to preorder it, but more importantly, they started to prepay it.
So the finance we made with the jewelry helped us to realize, to build the first tower.
And that's powerful.
So the waste the activator, it was the enabler.
Also, the feedback from the community -- this is a wedding couple from India, where he proposed to her with the smog-free ring as a sign of true beauty, as a sign of hope.
And she said yes.
(Laughter) I love this image so much for a lot of different reasons.
(Laughter) And right now, the project is touring through China, actually with the support of China's central government.
So the first goal is to create local clean-air parks, and that works already quite well -- 55, 75 percent more clean.
And at the same time, we team up with the NGOs, with the governors, with the students, with the tech people, to say, "Hey, what do we need to do to make a whole city smog-free?"
It's about the dream of clean air.
We do workshops. New ideas pop up.
These are smog-free bicycles which -- I'm Dutch, yes? -- I have this "bicycle DNA" inside of me somewhere.
And so it sucks up polluted air, it cleans it and releases it, in the fight against the car, in the celebration of the bicycle.
And so right now, we're working on a sort of "package deal," so to speak, where we say, "Smog-free towers, smog-free rings."
We go to the mayors or the governors of this world, and say, "We can guarantee a short-term reduction of pollution between 20 and 40 percent.
Please sign here right now."
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) So it's all about connecting new technology with creative thinking.
And if you start thinking about that, there is so much you can imagine, so much more you can do.
We worked on dance floors which produce electricity when you dance on them.
We did the design for that -- 2008.
So it moves eight or nine millimeters, produces 25 watts.
The electricity that we generate is used for the lighting or the DJ booth.
So some of the sustainability is about doing more, not about doing less.
But also on a larger scale, the Netherlands, where I'm from, we live below sea level.
So because of these beauties -- the Afsluitdijk: 32 kilometers, built by hand in 1932 -- we live with the water, we fight with the water, we try to find harmony, but sometimes we forget.
And therefore, we made "Waterlicht," a combination of LEDs and lenses, which show how high the water level would be -- global change -- if we stop.
If, today, we all go home and we say, "Oh, whatever, somebody else will do it for us," or we'll wait for government or whomever.
You know, we're not going to do that.
It goes wrong.
Thousands of people showed up.
(Applause) Thank you.
You're too nice, you're too nice. That's not good for a designer.
So thousands of people showed up, and some, actually, were scared.
And they left; they experienced the floods in 1953.
And others were mesmerized.
Can we make floating cities?
Can we generate electricity from the change in tides?
So I think it's so important to make experiences -- collective experiences -- where people feel connected with a vision, with a future and trigger what is possible.
At the same time, you know, these kinds of things -- they're not easy, yes?
It's a struggle.
And what I experienced in my life is that a lot of people say they want innovation, and they want the next and the new, the future.
But the moment you present a new idea, there's this weird tendency to reply to every new idea starting with two words.
Which are?
(Audience guesses) No, not "How much?" It's more annoying.
(Laughter) What is it, guys?
Or you're really blessed people? That's really good.
"Yes, but." Very good.
"Yes, but: it's too expensive, it's too cheap, it's too fast, it's too slow, it's too beautiful, it's too ugly, it cannot be done, it already exists."
I heard everything about the same project in the same week.
And I got really, really annoyed.
I got a bit of gray hair, started to dress in black like a true architect.
(Laughter) And one morning I woke up and I said, "Daan, stop.
You have to do something with this.
You have to use it as an ingredient, as a component."
And so we decided to build, to realize the famous "Yes, but" chair.
(Laughter) And this is an existing chair by Friso Kramer, a Dutch design.
But we gave it a little "update," a little "hack," so to speak.
We placed a little voice-recognition element right here.
So the moment you sit on that chair, and you say those two horrible, creative-destructive, annoying little words -- (Laughter) you get a short -- (Laughter) but pretty intense little shock on the back side of your bottom.
(Laughter) (Applause) And -- (Applause) and that works; yeah, that works.
Some clients have left us, they got really mad.
Fortunately, the good ones have stayed.
And, of course, we also apply it to ourselves.
But ladies and gentlemen, let's not be afraid.
Let's be curious, yes?
And, you know, walking through TED in these days and hearing the other speakers and feeling the energy of the crowd, I was remembering this quote of the Canadian author, Marshall McLuhan, who once famously said, "On spacecraft earth, there are no passengers.
We are all crew."
And I think this so beautiful.
This is so beautiful!
We're not just consumers; we're makers: we make decisions, we make new inventions, we make new dreams.
And I think if we start implementing that kind of thinking even more within today, there's still a whole new world to be explored.
All right, thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
So in 2011, I altered my name so that I could participate in Far Right youth camp in Hungary.
I was doing a PhD looking at youth political socialization -- why young people were developing political ideologies in a post-communist setting, and I saw that a lot of young people I was talking to were joining the Far Right, and this was astounding to me.
So I wanted to enroll in this youth camp to get a better understanding of why people were joining.
So a colleague enrolled me, and my last name sounds a little bit too Jewish.
So Erin got turned into Iréna, and Saltman got turned into Sós, which means "salty" in Hungarian.
And in Hungarian, your last name goes first, so my James Bond name turned into "Salty Irena," which is not something I would have naturally chosen for myself.
But going to this camp, I was further shocked to realize that it was actually really fun.
They talked very little about politics.
It was mostly learning how to ride horses, shooting a bow and arrow, live music at night, free food and alcohol, also some air-gun target practice using mainstream politicians' faces as targets.
And this seemed like a very, actually, friendly, inclusive group until you started talking or mentioning anything to do with the Roma population, Jewish people or immigrants, and then the discourse would become very hate-based very quickly.
So it led me into my work now, where we pose the question, "Why do people join violent extremist movements, and how do we effectively counter these processes?"
In the aftermath of horrible atrocities and attacks in places like Belgium, France, but all over the world, sometimes it's easier for us to think, "Well, these must be sociopaths, these must be naturally violent individuals.
They must have something wrong with their upbringing."
And what's really tragic is that oftentimes there's no one profile.
Many people come from educated backgrounds, different socioeconomic backgrounds, men and women, different ages, some with families, some single.
So why? What is this allure?
And this is what I want to talk you through, as well as how do we challenge this in a modern era?
We do know, through research, that there are quite a number of different things that affect somebody's process of radicalization, and we categorize these into push and pull factors.
And these are pretty much similar for Far Right, neo-Nazi groups all the way to Islamist extremist and terrorist groups.
And push factors are basically what makes you vulnerable to a process of radicalization, to joining a violent extremist group.
And these can be a lot of different things, but roughly, a sense of alienation, a sense of isolation, questioning your own identity, but also feeling that your in-group is under attack, and your in group might be based on a nationality or an ethnicity or a religion, and feeling that larger powers around you are doing nothing to help.
Now, push factors alone do not make you a violent extremist, because if that were the fact, those same factors would go towards a group like the Roma population, and they're not a violently mobilized group.
So we have to look at the pull factors.
What are these violent extremist organizations offering that other groups are not offering?
And actually, this is usually very positive things, very seemingly empowering things, such as brotherhood and sisterhood and a sense of belonging, as well as giving somebody a spiritual purpose, a divine purpose to build a utopian society if their goals can be met, but also a sense of empowerment and adventure.
When we look at foreign terrorist fighters, we see young men with the wind in their hair out in the desert and women going to join them to have nuptials out in the sunset.
It's very romantic, and you become a hero.
For both men and women, that's the propaganda being given.
So what extremist groups are very good at is taking a very complicated, confusing, nuanced world and simplifying that world into black and white, good and evil.
And you become what is good, challenging what is evil.
So I want to talk a little bit about ISIS, Daesh, because they have been a game changer in how we look at these processes, and through a lot of the material and their tactics.
They're very much a modern movement.
One of the aspects is the internet and the usage of social media, as we've all seen in headlines tweeting and videos of beheadings.
But the internet alone does not radicalize you.
The internet is a tool.
You don't go online shopping for shoes and accidentally become a jihadist.
However, what the Internet does do is it is a catalyst.
It provides tools and scale and rapidity that doesn't exist elsewhere.
And with ISIS, all of a sudden, this idea of a cloaked, dark figure of a jihadist changed for us.
All of a sudden, we were in their kitchens.
We saw what they were eating for dinner.
They were tweeting.
We had foreign terrorist fighters tweeting in their own languages.
We had women going out there talking about their wedding day, about the births of their children.
We had gaming culture, all of a sudden, and references to Grand Theft Auto being made.
So all of a sudden, they were homey.
They became human.
And the problem is that trying to counter it, lots of governments and social media companies just tried to censor.
How do we get rid of terrorist content?
And it became a cat-and-mouse game where we would see accounts taken down and they'd just come back up, and an arrogance around somebody having a 25th account and material that was disseminated everywhere.
But we also saw a dangerous trend -- violent extremists know the rules and regulations of social media, too.
So we would see a banal conversation with a recruiter start on a mainstream platform, and at the point at which that conversation was going to become illegal, they would jump to a smaller, less regulated, more encrypted platform.
So all of a sudden, we couldn't track where that conversation went.
So this is a problem with censorship, which is why we need to develop alternatives to censorship.
ISIS is also a game-changer because it's state-building.
It's not just recruiting combatants; it's trying to build a state.
And what that means is all of a sudden, your recruitment model is much more broad.
You're not just trying to get fighters -- now you need architects, engineers, accountants, hackers and women.
We've actually seen a huge increase of women going in the last 24, but especially 12 months.
Some countries, one in four of the people going over to join are now women.
And so, this really changes who we're trying to counter this process with.
Now, not all doom and gloom.
So the rest I'd like to talk about some of the positive things and the new innovation in trying to prevent and counter violent extremism.
Preventing is very different than countering, and actually, you can think of it in medical terms.
So preventative medicine is, how do we make it so you are naturally resilient to this process of radicalization, whereas that is going to be different if somebody is already showing a symptom or a sign of belonging to a violent extremist ideology.
And so in preventative measures, we're talking more about really broad groups of people and exposure to ideas to make them resilient.
Whereas it's very different if somebody is starting to question and agree with certain things online, and it's also very different if somebody already has a swastika tattoo and is very much embedded within a group.
How do you reach them?
So I'd like to go through three examples of each one of those levels and talk you through what some of the new ways of engaging with people are becoming.
One is "Extreme Dialogue," and it's an educational program that we helped develop.
This one is from Canada, and it's meant to create dialogues within a classroom setting, using storytelling, because violent extremism can be very hard to try to explain, especially to younger individuals.
So we have a network of former extremists and survivors of extremism that tell their stories through video and create question-giving to classrooms, to start a conversation about the topic.
These two examples show Christianne, who lost her son, who radicalized and died fighting for ISIS, and Daniel is a former neo-Nazi who was an extremely violent neo-Nazi, and they pose questions about their lives and where they're at and regret, and force a classroom to have a dialogue around it.
Now, looking at that middle range of individuals, actually, we need a lot of civil society voices.
How do you interact with people that are looking for information online, that are starting to toy with an ideology, that are doing those searching identity questions?
How do we provide alternatives for that?
And that's when we combine large groups of civil society voices with creatives, techies, app developers, artists, comedians, and we can create really specified content and actually, online, disseminate it to very strategic audiences.
So one example would be creating a satirical video which makes fun of Islamophobia, and targeting it to 15- to 20-year-olds online that have an interest in white power music and live specifically in Manchester.
We can use these marketing tools to be very specific, so that we know when somebody's viewing, watching and engaging with that content, it's not just the average person, it's not me or you -- it's a very specific audience that we are looking to engage with.
Even more downstream, we developed a pilot program called "One to One," where we took former extremists and we had them reach out directly to a group of labeled neofascists as well as Islamist extremists, and put direct messages through Facebook Messenger into their inbox, saying, "Hey, I see where you're going. I've been there.
If you want to talk, I'm here."
Now, we kind of expected death threats from this sort of interaction.
It's a little alarming to have a former neo-Nazi say, "Hey, how are you?"
But actually, we found that around 60 percent of the people reached out to responded, and of that, around another 60 percent had sustained engagement, meaning that they were having conversations with the hardest people to reach about what they were going through, planting seeds of doubt and giving them alternatives for talking about these subjects, and that's really important.
So what we're trying to do is actually bring unlikely sectors to the table.
We have amazing activists all over the world, but oftentimes, their messages are not strategic or they don't actually reach the audiences they want to reach.
So we work with networks of former extremists.
We work with networks of young people in different parts of the world.
And we work with them to bring the tech sector to the table with artists and creatives and marketing expertise so that we can actually have a more robust and challenging of extremism that works together.
So I would say that if you are in the audience and you happen to be a graphic designer, a poet, a marketing expert, somebody that works in PR, a comedian -- you might not think that this is your sector, but actually, the skills that you have right now might be exactly what is needed to help challenge extremism effectively.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, my mother's a pediatrician, and when I was young, she'd tell the craziest stories that combined science with her overactive imagination.
One of the stories she told was that if you eat a lot of salt, all of the blood rushes up your legs, through your body, and shoots out the top of your head, killing you instantly.
(Laughter) She called it "high blood pressure."
(Laughter) This was my first experience with science fiction, and I loved it.
So when I started to write my own science fiction and fantasy, I was surprised that it was considered un-African.
So naturally, I asked, what is African?
And this is what I know so far: Africa is important.
Africa is the future.
It is, though.
And Africa is a serious place where only serious things happen.
So when I present my work somewhere, someone will always ask, "What's so important about it?
How does it deal with real African issues like war, poverty, devastation or AIDS?"
And it doesn't.
My work is about Nairobi pop bands that want to go to space or about seven-foot-tall robots that fall in love.
It's nothing incredibly important.
It's just fun, fierce and frivolous, as frivolous as bubble gum -- "AfroBubbleGum."
So I'm not saying that agenda art isn't important; I'm the chairperson of a charity that deals with films and theaters that write about HIV and radicalization and female genital mutilation.
It's vital and important art, but it cannot be the only art that comes out of the continent.
We have to tell more stories that are vibrant.
The danger of the single story is still being realized.
And maybe it's because of the funding.
A lot of art is still dependent on developmental aid.
So art becomes a tool for agenda.
Or maybe it's because we've only seen one image of ourselves for so long that that's all we know how to create.
Whatever the reason, we need a new way, and AfroBubbleGum is one approach.
It's the advocacy of art for art's sake.
It's the advocacy of art that is not policy-driven or agenda-driven or based on education, just for the sake of imagination: AfroBubbleGum art.
And we can't all be AfroBubbleGumists.
We have to judge our work for its potential poverty porn pitfalls.
We have to have tests that are similar to the Bechdel test, and ask questions like: Are two or more Africans in this piece of fiction healthy?
Are those same Africans financially stable and not in need of saving?
Are they having fun and enjoying life?
And if we can answer yes to two or more of these questions, then surely we're AfroBubbleGumists.
(Laughter) (Applause) And fun is political, because imagine if we have images of Africans who were vibrant and loving and thriving and living a beautiful, vibrant life.
What would we think of ourselves then?
Would we think that maybe we're worthy of more happiness?
Would we think of our shared humanity through our shared joy?
I think of these things when I create.
I think of the people and the places that give me immeasurable joy, and I work to represent them.
And that's why I write stories about futuristic girls that risk everything to save plants or to race camels or even just to dance, to honor fun, because my world is mostly happy.
And I know happiness is a privilege in this current splintered world where remaining hopeful requires diligence.
But maybe, if you join me in creating, curating and commissioning more AfroBubbleGum art, there might be hope for a different view of the world, a happy Africa view where children are strangely traumatized by their mother's dark sense of humor, (Laughter) but also they're claiming fun, fierce and frivolous art in the name of all things unseriously African.
Because we're AfroBubbleGumists and there's so many more of us than you can imagine.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Someday, we may have robots as smart as people, artificial intelligence, AI.
How could that happen?
One route is that we'll just keep accumulating better software, like we've been doing for 70 years.
At past rates of progress, that may take centuries.
Some say it'll happen a lot faster as we discover grand new powerful theories of intelligence.
I'm skeptical.
But a third scenario is what I'm going to talk about today.
The idea is to port the software from the human brain.
To do this, we're going to need three technologies to be good enough, and none of them are there yet.
First, we're going to need lots of cheap, fast, parallel computers.
Second, we're going to need to scan individual human brains in fine spatial and chemical detail, to see exactly what cells are where, connected to what, of what type.
And third, we're going to need computer models of how each kind of brain cell works -- taking input signals, changing interval state and sending output signals.
If we have good enough models of all the kinds of brain cells and a good enough model of the brain, we can put it together to make a good enough model of an entire brain, and that model would have the same input-output behavior as the original.
So if you talk to it, it might talk back.
If you ask it to do things, it might do them.
And if we could do that, everything would change.
People have been talking about this idea for decades, under the name of "uploads."
I'm going to call them "ems."
When they talk about it, they say, "Is this even possible?
If you made one, would it be conscious? Or is it just an empty machine?
If you made one of me, is that me or someone else?"
These are all fascinating questions that I'm going to ignore ...
(Laughter) because I see a neglected question: What would actually happen?
I became obsessed with this question.
I spent four years trying to analyze it, using standard academic tools, to guess what would happen, and I'm here to tell you what I found.
But be warned -- I'm not offering inspiration, I'm offering analysis.
I see my job as telling you what's most likely to happen if we did the least to avoid it.
If you aren't at least a bit disturbed by something I tell you here, you're just not paying attention.
(Laughter) OK, the first thing I can tell you is that ems spend most of their life in virtual reality.
This is what you might look like if you were using virtual reality.
And this is what you might see: sunlight glinting off of water, you might hear gulls flying above, you might even feel the wind on your cheeks or smell seawater, with advanced hardware.
Now, if you were to spend a lot of time here, you might want a dashboard where you could do things like make a phone call, move to a new virtual world, check your bank account.
Now, while this is what you would look like in virtual reality, this is what an em would look like in virtual reality.
It's computer hardware sitting in a server rack somewhere.
But still, it could see and experience the same thing.
But some things are different for ems.
First, while you'll probably always notice that virtual reality isn't entirely real, to an em, it can feel as real to them as this room feels to you now or as anything ever feels.
And ems also have some more action possibilities.
For example, your mind just always runs at the same speed, but an em can add more or less computer hardware to run faster or slower, and therefore, if the world around them seems to be going too fast, they can just speed up their mind, and the world around them would seem to slow down.
In addition, an em can make a copy of itself at that moment.
This copy would remember everything the same, and if it starts out with the same speed, looking at the same speed, it might even need to be told, "You are the copy."
And em could make archive copies, and with enough archives, an em can be immortal -- in principle, though not usually in practice.
And an em can move its brain, the computer that represents its brain, from one physical location to another.
Ems can actually move around the world at the speed of light, and by moving to a new location, they can interact more quickly with ems near that new location.
So far, I've been talking about what ems can do.
What do ems choose to do?
To understand that, we'll need to understand three key facts.
First, ems by definition do what the human they emulate would do in the same situation.
So their lives and behavior are very human.
They're mainly different because they're living in a different world.
Second, ems need real resources to survive.
You need food and shelter or you'll die.
Also, ems need computer hardware, energy, cooling, or they can't exist.
For every subjective minute that an em experiences, someone, usually that em, had to work to pay for it.
Third, ems are poor.
(Laughter) The em population can grow quicker than the em economy, so that means wages fall down to em subsistence levels.
That means ems have to be working most of the time.
So that means this is what ems usually see: beautiful and luxurious, but desks -- they're working most of the time.
Now, a subsistence wage scenario, you might think, is exotic and strange, but it's actually the usual case in human history, and it's how pretty much all wild animals have ever lived, so we know what humans do in this situation.
Humans basically do what it takes to survive, and this is what lets me say so much about the em world.
When creatures are rich, like you, you have to know a lot about what they want to figure out what they do.
When creatures are poor, you know that they mostly do what it takes to survive.
So we've been talking about the em world from the point of view of the ems -- now, let's step back and look at their whole world.
First, the em world grows much faster than ours, roughly a hundred times faster.
So the amount of change we would experience in a century or two, they would experience in a year or two.
And I'm not really willing to project this age much beyond that, because plausibly by then something else will happen, I don't know what.
Second, the typical emulation runs even faster, roughly a thousand times human speed.
So for them, they experience thousands of years in this year or two, and for them, the world around them is actually changing more slowly than your world seems to change for you.
Third, ems are crammed together in a small number of very dense cities.
This is not only how they see themselves in virtual reality, it's also how they actually are physically crammed together.
So at em speeds, physical travel feels really painfully slow, so most em cities are self-sufficient, most war is cyber war, and most of the rest of the earth away from the em cities is left to the humans, because the ems really aren't that interested in it.
Speaking of humans, you were wanting to hear about that.
Humans must retire, at once, for good.
They just can't compete.
Now, humans start out owning all of the capital in this world.
The economy grows very fast, their wealth grows very fast.
Humans get rich, collectively.
As you may know, most humans today don't actually own that much besides their ability to work, so between now and then, they need to acquire sufficient assets, insurance or sharing arrangements, or they may starve.
I highly recommend avoiding this outcome.
(Laughter) Now, you might wonder, why would ems let humans exist?
Why not kill them, take their stuff?
But notice we have many unproductive retirees around us today, and we don't kill them and take their stuff.
(Laughter) In part, that's because it would disrupt the institutions we share with them.
Other groups would wonder who's next, so plausibly, ems may well let humans retire in peace during the age of em.
You should worry more that the age of em only lasts a year or two and you don't know what happens next.
Ems are very much like humans, but they are not like the typical human.
The typical em is a copy of the few hundred most productive humans.
So in fact, they are as elite, compared to the typical human, as the typical billionaire, Nobel Prize winner, Olympic gold medalist, head of state.
Ems look on humans perhaps with nostalgia and gratitude, but not so much respect, which is, if you think about it, how you think about your ancestors.
We know many things about how humans differ in terms of productivity.
We can just use those to predict features of ems -- for example, they tend to be smart, conscientious, hard-working, married, religious, middle-aged.
These are features of ems.
Em world also contains enormous variety.
Not only does it continue on with most of the kinds of variety that humans do, including variety of industry and profession, they also have many new kinds of variety, and one of the most important is mind speed.
Ems can plausibly go from human speed up to a million times faster than human speed, and down to a billion times slower than human speed.
Faster ems tend to have markers of high status.
They embody more wealth. They win arguments.
They sit at premium locations.
Slower ems are mostly retirees, and they are like the ghosts of our literature.
If you recall, ghosts are all around us -- you can interact with them if you pay the price.
But they don't know much, they can't influence much, and they're obsessed with the past, so what's the point?
(Laughter) Ems also have more variety in the structure of their lives.
This is your life: you start and you end, really simple.
This is the life of an em, who every day splits off some short-term copies to do short-term tasks and then end.
We'll talk more about those short term versions in a moment, but they are much more efficient because they don't have to rest for the next day.
This em is more opportunistic.
They make more copies of themselves when there's more demand for that.
They don't know which way the future's going.
This is an em designer, who conceives of a large system and then breaks recursively into copies who elaborate that, so ems can implement larger, more coherent designs.
This an emulation plumber who remembers that every day, for the last 20 years, they only ever worked two hours a day, a life of leisure.
But what really happened is, every day they had a thousand copies, each of whom did a two-hour plumbing job, and only one of them went on to the next day.
Objectively, they're working well over 99 percent of the time.
Subjectively, they remember a life of leisure.
(Laughter) This, again, is you. You start and you end.
This could be you if at the start of party, you took a drug that meant you would not remember that party ever after that day.
Some people do this, I'm told.
Toward the end of the party, will you say to yourself, "I'm about to die, this is terrible.
That person tomorrow isn't me, because they won't remember what I do."
Or you could say, "I will go on tomorrow. I just won't remember what I did."
This is an em who splits off a short-term copy to do a short-term task and then end.
They have the same two attitude possibilities.
They can say, "I'm a new short-term creature with a short life. I hate this."
Or "I'm a part of a larger creature who won't remember this part."
I predict they'll have that second attitude, not because it's philosophically correct, but because it helps them get along.
Today, if the president says we must invade Iraq, and you say, "Why?"
and they say, "State secret," you're not sure if you can trust them, but for ems, a copy of the president and a copy of you can go inside a safe, explain all their secret reasons, and then one bit comes out from your copy to yourself, telling you if you were convinced.
So now you can know there is a good reason.
I know you guys are all eager to evaluate this world.
You're eager to decide if you love it or hate it.
But think: your ancestors from thousands of years ago would have loved or hated your world based on the first few things they heard about it, because your world is really just weird.
So before judging a strange future world, you should really learn a lot about it, maybe read a whole book about it, and then, if you don't like it, work to change it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Whether you like it or not, radical transparency and algorithmic decision-making is coming at you fast, and it's going to change your life.
That's because it's now easy to take algorithms and embed them into computers and gather all that data that you're leaving on yourself all over the place, and know what you're like, and then direct the computers to interact with you in ways that are better than most people can.
Well, that might sound scary.
I've been doing this for a long time and I have found it to be wonderful.
My objective has been to have meaningful work and meaningful relationships with the people I work with, and I've learned that I couldn't have that unless I had that radical transparency and that algorithmic decision-making.
I want to show you why that is, I want to show you how it works.
And I warn you that some of the things that I'm going to show you probably are a little bit shocking.
Since I was a kid, I've had a terrible rote memory.
And I didn't like following instructions, I was no good at following instructions.
But I loved to figure out how things worked for myself.
When I was 12, I hated school but I fell in love with trading the markets.
I caddied at the time, earned about five dollars a bag.
And I took my caddying money, and I put it in the stock market.
And that was just because the stock market was hot at the time.
And the first company I bought was a company by the name of Northeast Airlines.
Northeast Airlines was the only company I heard of that was selling for less than five dollars a share.
(Laughter) And I figured I could buy more shares, and if it went up, I'd make more money.
So, it was a dumb strategy, right?
But I tripled my money, and I tripled my money because I got lucky.
The company was about to go bankrupt, but some other company acquired it, and I tripled my money.
And I was hooked.
And I thought, "This game is easy."
With time, I learned this game is anything but easy.
In order to be an effective investor, one has to bet against the consensus and be right.
And it's not easy to bet against the consensus and be right.
One has to bet against the consensus and be right because the consensus is built into the price.
And in order to be an entrepreneur, a successful entrepreneur, one has to bet against the consensus and be right.
I had to be an entrepreneur and an investor -- and what goes along with that is making a lot of painful mistakes.
So I made a lot of painful mistakes, and with time, my attitude about those mistakes began to change.
I began to think of them as puzzles.
That if I could solve the puzzles, they would give me gems.
And the puzzles were: What would I do differently in the future so I wouldn't make that painful mistake?
And the gems were principles that I would then write down so I would remember them that would help me in the future.
And because I wrote them down so clearly, I could then -- eventually discovered -- I could then embed them into algorithms.
And those algorithms would be embedded in computers, and the computers would make decisions along with me; and so in parallel, we would make these decisions.
And I could see how those decisions then compared with my own decisions, and I could see that those decisions were a lot better.
And that was because the computer could make decisions much faster, it could process a lot more information and it can process decisions much more -- less emotionally.
So it radically improved my decision-making.
Eight years after I started Bridgewater, I had my greatest failure, my greatest mistake.
It was late 1970s, I was 34 years old, and I had calculated that American banks had lent much more money to emerging countries than those countries were going to be able to pay back and that we would have the greatest debt crisis since the Great Depression.
And with it, an economic crisis and a big bear market in stocks.
It was a controversial view at the time.
People thought it was kind of a crazy point of view.
But in August 1982, Mexico defaulted on its debt, and a number of other countries followed.
And we had the greatest debt crisis since the Great Depression.
And because I had anticipated that, I was asked to testify to Congress and appear on "Wall Street Week," which was the show of the time.
Just to give you a flavor of that, I've got a clip here, and you'll see me in there.
(Video) Mr. Chairman, Mr. Mitchell, it's a great pleasure and a great honor to be able to appear before you in examination with what is going wrong with our economy.
The economy is now flat -- teetering on the brink of failure.
Martin Zweig: You were recently quoted in an article.
You said, "I can say this with absolute certainty because I know how markets work."
Ray Dalio: I can say with absolute certainty that if you look at the liquidity base in the corporations and the world as a whole, that there's such reduced level of liquidity that you can't return to an era of stagflation."
I look at that now, I think, "What an arrogant jerk!"
(Laughter) I was so arrogant, and I was so wrong.
I mean, while the debt crisis happened, the stock market and the economy went up rather than going down, and I lost so much money for myself and for my clients that I had to shut down my operation pretty much, I had to let almost everybody go.
And these were like extended family, I was heartbroken.
And I had lost so much money that I had to borrow 4,000 dollars from my dad to help to pay my family bills.
It was one of the most painful experiences of my life ...
but it turned out to be one of the greatest experiences of my life because it changed my attitude about decision-making.
Rather than thinking, "I'm right," I started to ask myself, "How do I know I'm right?"
I gained a humility that I needed in order to balance my audacity.
I wanted to find the smartest people who would disagree with me to try to understand their perspective or to have them stress test my perspective.
I wanted to make an idea meritocracy.
In other words, not an autocracy in which I would lead and others would follow and not a democracy in which everybody's points of view were equally valued, but I wanted to have an idea meritocracy in which the best ideas would win out.
And in order to do that, I realized that we would need radical truthfulness and radical transparency.
What I mean by radical truthfulness and radical transparency is people needed to say what they really believed and to see everything.
And we literally tape almost all conversations and let everybody see everything, because if we didn't do that, we couldn't really have an idea meritocracy.
In order to have an idea meritocracy, we have let people speak and say what they want.
Just to give you an example, this is an email from Jim Haskel -- somebody who works for me -- and this was available to everybody in the company.
"Ray, you deserve a 'D-' for your performance today in the meeting ...
you did not prepare at all well because there is no way you could have been that disorganized."
Isn't that great?
(Laughter) That's great.
It's great because, first of all, I needed feedback like that.
I need feedback like that.
And it's great because if I don't let Jim, and people like Jim, to express their points of view, our relationship wouldn't be the same.
And if I didn't make that public for everybody to see, we wouldn't have an idea meritocracy.
So for that last 25 years that's how we've been operating.
We've been operating with this radical transparency and then collecting these principles, largely from making mistakes, and then embedding those principles into algorithms.
And then those algorithms provide -- we're following the algorithms in parallel with our thinking.
That has been how we've run the investment business, and it's how we also deal with the people management.
In order to give you a glimmer into what this looks like, I'd like to take you into a meeting and introduce you to a tool of ours called the "Dot Collector" that helps us do this.
A week after the US election, our research team held a meeting to discuss what a Trump presidency would mean for the US economy.
Naturally, people had different opinions on the matter and how we were approaching the discussion.
The "Dot Collector" collects these views.
It has a list of a few dozen attributes, so whenever somebody thinks something about another person's thinking, it's easy for them to convey their assessment; they simply note the attribute and provide a rating from one to 10.
For example, as the meeting began, a researcher named Jen rated me a three -- in other words, badly -- (Laughter) for not showing a good balance of open-mindedness and assertiveness.
As the meeting transpired, Jen's assessments of people added up like this.
Others in the room have different opinions.
That's normal.
Different people are always going to have different opinions.
And who knows who's right?
Let's look at just what people thought about how I was doing.
Some people thought I did well, others, poorly.
With each of these views, we can explore the thinking behind the numbers.
Here's what Jen and Larry said.
Note that everyone gets to express their thinking, including their critical thinking, regardless of their position in the company.
Jen, who's 24 years old and right out of college, can tell me, the CEO, that I'm approaching things terribly.
This tool helps people both express their opinions and then separate themselves from their opinions to see things from a higher level.
When Jen and others shift their attentions from inputting their own opinions to looking down on the whole screen, their perspective changes.
They see their own opinions as just one of many and naturally start asking themselves, "How do I know my opinion is right?"
That shift in perspective is like going from seeing in one dimension to seeing in multiple dimensions.
And it shifts the conversation from arguing over our opinions to figuring out objective criteria for determining which opinions are best.
Behind the "Dot Collector" is a computer that is watching.
It watches what all these people are thinking and it correlates that with how they think.
And it communicates advice back to each of them based on that.
Then it draws the data from all the meetings to create a pointilist painting of what people are like and how they think.
And it does that guided by algorithms.
Knowing what people are like helps to match them better with their jobs.
For example, a creative thinker who is unreliable might be matched up with someone who's reliable but not creative.
Knowing what people are like also allows us to decide what responsibilities to give them and to weigh our decisions based on people's merits.
We call it their believability.
Here's an example of a vote that we took where the majority of people felt one way ...
but when we weighed the views based on people's merits, the answer was completely different.
This process allows us to make decisions not based on democracy, not based on autocracy, but based on algorithms that take people's believability into consideration.
Yup, we really do this.
(Laughter) We do it because it eliminates what I believe to be one of the greatest tragedies of mankind, and that is people arrogantly, naïvely holding opinions in their minds that are wrong, and acting on them, and not putting them out there to stress test them.
And that's a tragedy.
And we do it because it elevates ourselves above our own opinions so that we start to see things through everybody's eyes, and we see things collectively.
Collective decision-making is so much better than individual decision-making if it's done well.
It's been the secret sauce behind our success.
It's why we've made more money for our clients than any other hedge fund in existence and made money 23 out of the last 26 years.
So what's the problem with being radically truthful and radically transparent with each other?
People say it's emotionally difficult.
Critics say it's a formula for a brutal work environment.
Neuroscientists tell me it has to do with how are brains are prewired.
There's a part of our brain that would like to know our mistakes and like to look at our weaknesses so we could do better.
I'm told that that's the prefrontal cortex.
And then there's a part of our brain which views all of this as attacks.
I'm told that that's the amygdala.
In other words, there are two you's inside you: there's an emotional you and there's an intellectual you, and often they're at odds, and often they work against you.
It's been our experience that we can win this battle.
We win it as a group.
It takes about 18 months typically to find that most people prefer operating this way, with this radical transparency than to be operating in a more opaque environment.
There's not politics, there's not the brutality of -- you know, all of that hidden, behind-the-scenes -- there's an idea meritocracy where people can speak up.
And that's been great.
It's given us more effective work, and it's given us more effective relationships.
But it's not for everybody.
We found something like 25 or 30 percent of the population it's just not for.
And by the way, when I say radical transparency, I'm not saying transparency about everything.
I mean, you don't have to tell somebody that their bald spot is growing or their baby's ugly.
So, I'm just talking about -- (Laughter) talking about the important things.
So -- (Laughter) So when you leave this room, I'd like you to observe yourself in conversations with others.
Imagine if you knew what they were really thinking, and imagine if you knew what they were really like ...
and imagine if they knew what you were really thinking and what were really like.
It would certainly clear things up a lot and make your operations together more effective.
I think it will improve your relationships.
Now imagine that you can have algorithms that will help you gather all of that information and even help you make decisions in an idea-meritocratic way.
This sort of radical transparency is coming at you and it is going to affect your life.
And in my opinion, it's going to be wonderful.
So I hope it is as wonderful for you as it is for me.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Probably a lot of you know the story of the two salesmen who went down to Africa in the 1900s.
They were sent down to find if there was any opportunity for selling shoes, and they wrote telegrams back to Manchester.
And one of them wrote, "Situation hopeless. Stop. They don't wear shoes."
And the other one wrote, "Glorious opportunity. They don't have any shoes yet."
(Laughter) Now, there's a similar situation in the classical music world, because there are some people who think that classical music is dying.
And there are some of us who think you ain't seen nothing yet.
And rather than go into statistics and trends, and tell you about all the orchestras that are closing, and the record companies that are folding, I thought we should do an experiment tonight.
Actually, it's not really an experiment, because I know the outcome.
(Laughter) But it's like an experiment.
Now, before we start -- (Laughter) Before we start, I need to do two things.
One is I want to remind you of what a seven-year-old child sounds like when he plays the piano.
Maybe you have this child at home.
He sounds something like this.
(Music) (Music ends) I see some of you recognize this child.
Now, if he practices for a year and takes lessons, he's now eight and he sounds like this.
(Music) (Music ends) He practices for another year and takes lessons -- he's nine.
(Music) (Music ends) Then he practices for another year and takes lessons -- now he's 10.
(Music) (Music ends) At that point, they usually give up.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, if you'd waited for one more year, you would have heard this.
(Music) (Music ends) Now, what happened was not maybe what you thought, which is, he suddenly became passionate, engaged, involved, got a new teacher, he hit puberty, or whatever it is.
What actually happened was the impulses were reduced.
You see, the first time, he was playing with an impulse on every note.
(Music) And the second, with an impulse every other note.
(Music) You can see it by looking at my head.
(Laughter) The nine-year-old put an impulse on every four notes.
(Music) The 10-year-old, on every eight notes.
(Music) And the 11-year-old, one impulse on the whole phrase.
(Music) I don't know how we got into this position.
(Laughter) I didn't say, "I'm going to move my shoulder over, move my body."
No, the music pushed me over, which is why I call it one-buttock playing.
(Music) It can be the other buttock.
(Music) You know, a gentleman was once watching a presentation I was doing, when I was working with a young pianist.
He was the president of a corporation in Ohio.
I was working with this young pianist, and said, "The trouble with you is you're a two-buttock player.
You should be a one-buttock player."
And suddenly, the music took off. It took flight.
The audience gasped when they heard the difference.
Then I got a letter from this gentleman.
He said, "I was so moved.
I went back and I transformed my entire company into a one-buttock company."
(Laughter) Now, the other thing I wanted to do is to tell you about you.
There are 1,600 people, I believe.
My estimation is that probably 45 of you are absolutely passionate about classical music.
You adore classical music. Your FM is always on that classical dial.
You have CDs in your car, and you go to the symphony, your children are playing instruments.
That's the first group, quite small.
Then there's another bigger group.
The people who don't mind classical music.
(Laughter) You know, you've come home from a long day, and you take a glass of wine, and you put your feet up.
A little Vivaldi in the background doesn't do any harm.
That's the second group.
Now comes the third group: people who never listen to classical music.
You might hear it like second-hand smoke at the airport ...
(Laughter) -- and maybe a little bit of a march from "Aida" when you come into the hall.
That's probably the largest group.
And then there's a very small group.
Amazing number of people think they're tone-deaf.
Actually, I hear a lot, "My husband is tone-deaf."
(Laughter) Actually, you cannot be tone-deaf.
Nobody is tone-deaf.
If you were tone-deaf, you couldn't change the gears on your car, in a stick shift car.
You couldn't tell the difference between somebody from Texas and somebody from Rome.
If your mother calls on the miserable telephone, she calls and says, "Hello," you not only know who it is, you know what mood she's in.
You have a fantastic ear. Everybody has a fantastic ear.
So nobody is tone-deaf.
But I tell you what.
It doesn't work for me to go on with this thing, with such a wide gulf between those who understand, love and are passionate about classical music, and those who have no relationship to it at all.
The tone-deaf people, they're no longer here.
So I'm not going to go on until every single person in this room, downstairs and in Aspen, and everybody else looking, will come to love and understand classical music.
So that's what we're going to do.
Now, you notice that there is not the slightest doubt in my mind that this is going to work, if you look at my face, right?
It's one of the characteristics of a leader that he not doubt for one moment the capacity of the people he's leading to realize whatever he's dreaming.
Imagine if Martin Luther King had said, "I have a dream.
Of course, I'm not sure they'll be up to it."
(Laughter) All right. So I'm going to take a piece of Chopin.
This is a beautiful prelude by Chopin.
(Music) Do you know what I think probably happened here?
When I started, you thought, "How beautiful that sounds."
(Music) "I don't think we should go to the same place for our summer holidays next year."
(Laughter) It's funny, isn't it?
It's funny how those thoughts kind of waft into your head.
And of course -- (Applause) Of course, if the piece is long and you've had a long day, you might actually drift off.
Then your companion will dig you in the ribs and say, "Wake up! It's culture!" And then you feel even worse.
(Laughter) But has it ever occurred to you that the reason you feel sleepy in classical music is not because of you, but because of us?
Did anybody think while I was playing, "Why is he using so many impulses?"
If I'd done this with my head you certainly would have thought it.
(Music) (Music ends) And for the rest of your life, every time you hear classical music, you'll always be able to know if you hear those impulses.
So let's see what's really going on here.
The next note is a C.
And it does, doesn't it?
(Laughter) Composers know that.
If they want sad music, they just play those two notes.
(Music) But basically, it's just a B, with four sads.
(Laughter) Now, it goes down to A.
And then to F.
And if we have B, A, G, F, what do we expect next?
(Music) That might have been a fluke.
(Music) Oh, the TED choir.
(Laughter) And you notice nobody is tone-deaf, right?
Nobody is.
You know, every village in Bangladesh and every hamlet in China -- everybody knows: da, da, da, da -- da.
Everybody knows, who's expecting that E.
Chopin didn't want to reach the E there, because what will have happened?
It will be over, like Hamlet. Do you remember?
Act One, scene three, he finds out his uncle killed his father.
He keeps on going up to his uncle and almost killing him.
And then he backs away, he goes up to him again, almost kills him.
The critics sitting in the back row there, they have to have an opinion, so they say, "Hamlet is a procrastinator."
Or they say, "Hamlet has an Oedipus complex."
No, otherwise the play would be over, stupid.
(Laughter) That's why Shakespeare puts all that stuff in Hamlet -- Ophelia going mad, the play within the play, and Yorick's skull, and the gravediggers.
That's in order to delay -- until Act Five, he can kill him.
He's just about to reach the E, and he says, "Oops, better go back up and do it again."
Now, he gets excited.
(Music) That's excitement, don't worry about it.
Now, he gets to F-sharp, and finally he goes down to E, but it's the wrong chord -- because the chord he's looking for is this one, and instead he does ...
I tell my students, "If you have a deceptive cadence, raise your eyebrows, and everybody will know."
(Laughter) (Applause) Right.
He gets to E, but it's the wrong chord.
That chord doesn't work.
Now, he tries E again, and that doesn't work.
And then finally ...
There was a gentleman in the front row who went, "Mmm."
(Laughter) It's the same gesture he makes when he comes home after a long day, turns off the key in his car and says, "Aah, I'm home."
So this is a piece which goes from away to home.
I'm going to play it all the way through and you're going to follow.
B, C, B, C, B, C, B -- down to A, down to G, down to F.
Almost goes to E, but otherwise the play would be over.
He goes back up to B, he gets very excited.
Goes to F-sharp. Goes to E.
And finally goes to E, and it's home.
And what you're going to see is one-buttock playing.
(Laughter) Because for me, to join the B to the E, I have to stop thinking about every single note along the way, and start thinking about the long, long line from B to E.
You know, we were just in South Africa, and you can't go to South Africa without thinking of Mandela in jail for 27 years.
What was he thinking about? Lunch?
No, he was thinking about the vision for South Africa and for human beings.
This is about vision. This is about the long line.
Like the bird who flies over the field and doesn't care about the fences underneath, all right?
So now, you're going to follow the line all the way from B to E.
And I've one last request before I play this piece all the way through.
Would you think of somebody who you adore, who's no longer there?
A beloved grandmother, a lover -- somebody in your life who you love with all your heart, but that person is no longer with you.
Bring that person into your mind, and at the same time, follow the line all the way from B to E, and you'll hear everything that Chopin had to say.
(Music) (Music ends) (Applause) Now, you may be wondering -- (Applause) (Applause ends) You may be wondering why I'm clapping.
Well, I did this at a school in Boston with about 70 seventh graders, 12-year-olds.
I did exactly what I did with you, and I explained the whole thing.
I was clapping. They were clapping.
And one of them said, "Because we were listening."
(Laughter) Think of it. 1,600 people, busy people, involved in all sorts of different things, listening, understanding and being moved by a piece by Chopin.
Now, that is something.
Am I sure that every single person followed that, understood it, was moved by it?
But I'll tell you what happened to me in Ireland during the Troubles, 10 years ago, and I was working with some Catholic and Protestant kids on conflict resolution.
And I did this with them -- a risky thing to do, because they were street kids.
And one of them came to me the next morning and he said, "You know, I've never listened to classical music in my life, but when you played that shopping piece ..."
(Laughter) He said, "My brother was shot last year and I didn't cry for him.
But last night, when you played that piece, he was the one I was thinking about.
And I felt the tears streaming down my face.
And it felt really good to cry for my brother."
So I made up my mind at that moment that classical music is for everybody.
Now, how would you walk -- my profession, the music profession doesn't see it that way.
They say three percent of the population likes classical music.
If only we could move it to four percent, our problems would be over.
(Laughter) How would you walk? How would you talk? How would you be?
If you thought, "Three percent of the population likes classical music, if only we could move it to four percent."
How would you walk or talk? How would you be?
If you thought, "Everybody loves classical music -- they just haven't found out about it yet."
See, these are totally different worlds.
Now, I had an amazing experience.
I was 45 years old, I'd been conducting for 20 years, and I suddenly had a realization.
The conductor of an orchestra doesn't make a sound.
My picture appears on the front of the CD -- (Laughter) But the conductor doesn't make a sound.
He depends, for his power, on his ability to make other people powerful.
And that changed everything for me.
People in my orchestra said, "Ben, what happened?" That's what happened.
And of course, I wanted to know whether I was doing that.
You look at their eyes.
You could light up a village with this guy's eyes.
(Laughter) Right. So if the eyes are shining, you know you're doing it.
If the eyes are not shining, you get to ask a question.
And this is the question: who am I being that my players' eyes are not shining?
We can do that with our children, too.
Who am I being, that my children's eyes are not shining?
That's a totally different world.
Now, we're all about to end this magical, on-the-mountain week, we're going back into the world.
And I say, it's appropriate for us to ask the question, who are we being as we go back out into the world?
And you know, I have a definition of success.
For me, it's very simple.
It's not about wealth and fame and power.
So now, I have one last thought, which is that it really makes a difference what we say -- the words that come out of our mouth.
I learned this from a woman who survived Auschwitz, one of the rare survivors.
And ...
And she told me this, she said, "We were in the train going to Auschwitz, and I looked down and saw my brother's shoes were missing.
I said, 'Why are you so stupid, can't you keep your things together for goodness' sake?'" The way an elder sister might speak to a younger brother.
Unfortunately, it was the last thing she ever said to him, because she never saw him again.
And so when she came out of Auschwitz, she made a vow.
She told me this.
She said, "I walked out of Auschwitz into life and I made a vow.
And the vow was, "I will never say anything that couldn't stand as the last thing I ever say."
Now, can we do that? No.
And we'll make ourselves wrong and others wrong.
(Applause) Shining eyes.
(Applause) Thank you, thank you.
I used to think the whole purpose of life was pursuing happiness.
Everyone said the path to happiness was success, so I searched for that ideal job, that perfect boyfriend, that beautiful apartment.
But instead of ever feeling fulfilled, I felt anxious and adrift.
And I wasn't alone; my friends -- they struggled with this, too.
Eventually, I decided to go to graduate school for positive psychology to learn what truly makes people happy.
But what I discovered there changed my life.
The data showed that chasing happiness can make people unhappy.
And what really struck me was this: the suicide rate has been rising around the world, and it recently reached a 30-year high in America.
Even though life is getting objectively better by nearly every conceivable standard, more people feel hopeless, depressed and alone.
There's an emptiness gnawing away at people, and you don't have to be clinically depressed to feel it.
Sooner or later, I think we all wonder: Is this all there is?
And according to the research, what predicts this despair is not a lack of happiness.
It's a lack of something else, a lack of having meaning in life.
But that raised some questions for me.
Is there more to life than being happy?
And what's the difference between being happy and having meaning in life?
Many psychologists define happiness as a state of comfort and ease, feeling good in the moment.
Meaning, though, is deeper.
The renowned psychologist Martin Seligman says meaning comes from belonging to and serving something beyond yourself and from developing the best within you.
Our culture is obsessed with happiness, but I came to see that seeking meaning is the more fulfilling path.
And the studies show that people who have meaning in life, they're more resilient, they do better in school and at work, and they even live longer.
So this all made me wonder: How can we each live more meaningfully?
To find out, I spent five years interviewing hundreds of people and reading through thousands of pages of psychology, neuroscience and philosophy.
Bringing it all together, I found that there are what I call four pillars of a meaningful life.
And we can each create lives of meaning by building some or all of these pillars in our lives.
The first pillar is belonging.
Belonging comes from being in relationships where you're valued for who you are intrinsically and where you value others as well.
But some groups and relationships deliver a cheap form of belonging; you're valued for what you believe, for who you hate, not for who you are.
True belonging springs from love.
It lives in moments among individuals, and it's a choice -- you can choose to cultivate belonging with others.
Here's an example.
Each morning, my friend Jonathan buys a newspaper from the same street vendor in New York.
They don't just conduct a transaction, though.
They take a moment to slow down, talk, and treat each other like humans.
But one time, Jonathan didn't have the right change, and the vendor said, "Don't worry about it."
But Jonathan insisted on paying, so he went to the store and bought something he didn't need to make change.
But when he gave the money to the vendor, the vendor drew back.
He was hurt.
He was trying to do something kind, but Jonathan had rejected him.
I think we all reject people in small ways like this without realizing it.
I do.
I'll walk by someone I know and barely acknowledge them.
I'll check my phone when someone's talking to me.
These acts devalue others.
They make them feel invisible and unworthy.
But when you lead with love, you create a bond that lifts each of you up.
For many people, belonging is the most essential source of meaning, those bonds to family and friends.
For others, the key to meaning is the second pillar: purpose.
Now, finding your purpose is not the same thing as finding that job that makes you happy.
Purpose is less about what you want than about what you give.
A hospital custodian told me her purpose is healing sick people.
Many parents tell me, "My purpose is raising my children."
The key to purpose is using your strengths to serve others.
Of course, for many of us, that happens through work.
That's how we contribute and feel needed.
But that also means that issues like disengagement at work, unemployment, low labor force participation -- these aren't just economic problems, they're existential ones, too.
Without something worthwhile to do, people flounder.
Of course, you don't have to find purpose at work, but purpose gives you something to live for, some "why" that drives you forward.
The third pillar of meaning is also about stepping beyond yourself, but in a completely different way: transcendence.
Transcendent states are those rare moments when you're lifted above the hustle and bustle of daily life, your sense of self fades away, and you feel connected to a higher reality.
For one person I talked to, transcendence came from seeing art.
For another person, it was at church.
For me, I'm a writer, and it happens through writing.
Sometimes I get so in the zone that I lose all sense of time and place.
These transcendent experiences can change you.
One study had students look up at 200-feet-tall eucalyptus trees for one minute.
But afterwards they felt less self-centered, and they even behaved more generously when given the chance to help someone.
Belonging, purpose, transcendence.
Now, the fourth pillar of meaning, I've found, tends to surprise people.
The fourth pillar is storytelling, the story you tell yourself about yourself.
Creating a narrative from the events of your life brings clarity.
It helps you understand how you became you.
But we don't always realize that we're the authors of our stories and can change the way we're telling them.
Your life isn't just a list of events.
You can edit, interpret and retell your story, even as you're constrained by the facts.
I met a young man named Emeka, who'd been paralyzed playing football.
After his injury, Emeka told himself, "My life was great playing football, but now look at me."
People who tell stories like this -- "My life was good. Now it's bad." -- tend to be more anxious and depressed.
And that was Emeka for a while.
But with time, he started to weave a different story.
His new story was, "Before my injury, my life was purposeless.
I partied a lot and was a pretty selfish guy.
But my injury made me realize I could be a better man."
That edit to his story changed Emeka's life.
After telling the new story to himself, Emeka started mentoring kids, and he discovered what his purpose was: serving others.
The psychologist Dan McAdams calls this a "redemptive story," where the bad is redeemed by the good.
People leading meaningful lives, he's found, tend to tell stories about their lives defined by redemption, growth and love.
But what makes people change their stories?
Some people get help from a therapist, but you can do it on your own, too, just by reflecting on your life thoughtfully, how your defining experiences shaped you, what you lost, what you gained.
That's what Emeka did.
You won't change your story overnight; it could take years and be painful.
After all, we've all suffered, and we all struggle.
But embracing those painful memories can lead to new insights and wisdom, to finding that good that sustains you.
Belonging, purpose, transcendence, storytelling: those are the four pillars of meaning.
When I was younger, I was lucky enough to be surrounded by all of the pillars.
My parents ran a Sufi meetinghouse from our home in Montreal.
Sufism is a spiritual practice associated with the whirling dervishes and the poet Rumi.
Twice a week, Sufis would come to our home to meditate, drink Persian tea, and share stories.
Their practice also involved serving all of creation through small acts of love, which meant being kind even when people wronged you.
But it gave them a purpose: to rein in the ego.
Eventually, I left home for college and without the daily grounding of Sufism in my life, I felt unmoored.
And I started searching for those things that make life worth living.
That's what set me on this journey.
Looking back, I now realize that the Sufi house had a real culture of meaning.
The pillars were part of the architecture, and the presence of the pillars helped us all live more deeply.
Of course, the same principle applies in other strong communities as well -- good ones and bad ones.
Gangs, cults: these are cultures of meaning that use the pillars and give people something to live and die for.
But that's exactly why we as a society must offer better alternatives.
We need to build these pillars within our families and our institutions to help people become their best selves.
But living a meaningful life takes work.
It's an ongoing process.
As each day goes by, we're constantly creating our lives, adding to our story.
And sometimes we can get off track.
Whenever that happens to me, I remember a powerful experience I had with my father.
Several months after I graduated from college, my dad had a massive heart attack that should have killed him.
He survived, and when I asked him what was going through his mind as he faced death, he said all he could think about was needing to live so he could be there for my brother and me, and this gave him the will to fight for life.
When he went under anesthesia for emergency surgery, instead of counting backwards from 10, he repeated our names like a mantra.
He wanted our names to be the last words he spoke on earth if he died.
My dad is a carpenter and a Sufi.
It's a humble life, but a good life.
Lying there facing death, he had a reason to live: love.
His sense of belonging within his family, his purpose as a dad, his transcendent meditation, repeating our names -- these, he says, are the reasons why he survived.
That's the story he tells himself.
That's the power of meaning.
Happiness comes and goes.
But when life is really good and when things are really bad, having meaning gives you something to hold on to.
Thank you.
(Applause)
[Yoruba: Freeborn Ijebu-Ode son,] [of true Ogbogbo Clan,] [whose wealth and resources surpass all that Europe ever had,] [whose altar is filled with gold.] This chant is called the oríkì.
My grandmother used to sing it to me when I was a child in Nigeria.
See, an oríkì is the song of praise of the Yoruba people, and this particularly speaks of treasures that the West does not have.
Mama -- that's what I call my grandmother -- told me many stories about Yoruba mythology.
You see, the Yorubas are an ethnic group from the southwestern part of Nigeria, and I was always fascinated by these stories.
I was always intrigued.
And Yoruba culture has inspired my art since I was a child.
You see, African art is not just what you buy at Harlem markets in New York.
Every artist has a name, and every artist has a story.
This is my story.
See, mama had tattoos on her arms and her legs.
As a child, I thought she was born with them, with beautiful black lines and detailed symbols.
And then she told me that they were actually symbols from the Yoruba mythology.
I never knew how this was going to influence the artist that I am today.
You see, as a young child, I saw art everywhere.
I remember the house we lived in in Ilorin, in Stadium Road.
We had marble floors, and you know, I would look at the marble floors, and I would see all sorts of patterns and designs in it, and I thought everybody could see them.
So I would call my brother, and I would be like, "Ikeolu, come and see this marble design, see this pattern, see this mask."
And he would tell me, "Laolu, I don't see anything."
So I would use ink, and I would trace out what I saw on the floor.
And then when my mom noticed, she got really upset.
(Laughter) But that didn't stop me.
I switched from ink to chalk, because I got in trouble a lot with my teachers and my parents.
So I remember my mom said, "Laolu, we are Christians.
Why don't you draw like other people?
Why don't you draw landscapes or maybe you draw chairs or furniture, or maybe even draw Jesus?"
You know, I could paint the whole house if I had a chance, but when I grew up, I knew being an artist was not an option, so I wanted to be the person my parents wanted me to be, so I went to law school.
Of course, that's my dad there. He was so proud that day.
And this was what my notebooks looked like in law school.
(Laughter) Of course I would miss classes, and I would make up excuses why I wasn't going to class.
But when I started working at the Human Rights Commission as a human rights attorney, my mind was elsewhere.
I saw a very tough reality.
I worked with children who had to choose between getting an education and actually being forced into marriage.
I was so frustrated seeing all the injustice around me, and my only outlet was art, so I started painting.
This piece is called "Dreamscape."
So when you zoom into this piece, you're going to see a girl child and the accidental birth, the fact that our future is controlled by where we are born.
Now, the next one you see a man and a man holding hands, a woman and a woman holding hands.
You see, in Nigeria, same-sex relationship is criminalized.
You can actually get 14 years for that.
With my art, I like to tell stories.
Through my art, I like to start a conversation.
So in this one, you see the map of Africa, you see the questions, you see crying, and there you see syringes plugged into Africa and the natural resources being drained out.
So I asked myself, where does it go?
Who benefits from all of this?
You see, with my art, the way I weave my art around the patterns, the masks, the stories, and the way I use my lines, it's all from the Yoruba culture.
So in 2013, I made a big gamble.
I quit my job and I moved to New York City to practice art full time.
Of course, my parents were like, "Oh, [it's just a phase.] He'll come back."
But life as an artist in New York was not easy, because I was broke, no money, no gallery agents, no representation, so no gallery would show my work.
So I thought to myself, I need to survive.
So I started painting on clothes to make a living.
I started painting on shoes.
I started customizing things for people.
And then soon I realized the power, because people were so proud to wear their stories.
So I started painting on everything.
I painted on guitars, I started doing murals, anything I could find my hand on I painted, and everything became my canvas.
So one day, I was just going on my Instagram feed, and I saw this picture.
It was Reign. She took a picture standing in front my art, and the moment I saw that photo, something happened in that moment.
I could actually see my artwork go into her and come out of her literally, and that's how I started painting on human bodies.
As a child I saw art on the marble floors, I saw art on walls, but now I see art on people's faces and people's bodies.
I remember my grandmother, and I realized that most of my creative instincts were actually based on my childhood memories and the art on my grandmother's skin.
Now I look at all the people I painted, and I think to myself, like, what would it look like if we all walked around like gods and goddesses from Yoruba mythology?
And boom, that's how The Sacred Art of the Ori was born.
You see, Ori in Yoruba mythology means your soul, it means your essence, it means your instincts.
And I realized that only when you tap into your Ori, then you can actually move mountains.
So there's something so immediate about painting on human bodies.
It's like art in motion.
It's like a 3D experience.
So one day, I was just doing my regular work in Brooklyn, and I got an email that said, "Hi, I'm a big fan of your work.
Would you like to paint for my music video?
Signed, Beyoncé."
Like, Beyoncé emailed me.
I was like, what?
(Laughter) I was like, what, how did she even know me?
I thought this can't be true. Of course I thought it was a scam.
The Nigerian in me was like, nah.
(Laughter) (Applause) But incredibly enough, it was real, it was true, and things happened really fast.
You see, Beyoncé wanted to pay homage to New Orleans, and my art reminded her of her creole origins.
So when "Lemonade" dropped, of course, boom, everything just went from zero to 100 real fast.
People featured me in magazines, interviews.
People stopped me in the street.
People knew my name, like -- And sometimes I had to step back and just chill, and, like, take everything in.
You know, as artists, we work so hard all our lives for our art to be recognized, and for this I feel blessed.
However, the attorney in me is still there, so I use my art to fight for what I believe in.
My Yoruba heritage is always there.
I'd like to share with you tonight some of my art in motion.
Please, welcome with me on stage.
(Music) (Applause) Now, this is Geli, and this is Reign.
These are the first two people I ever painted in my life, and I spent the past day painting on them.
Tonight, they represent my hopes and my fears.
Now, I put my fears on the back.
I put my hopes in front.
What are my hopes?
I hope that people know that Africa is not just one huge, nameless continent that is all the same.
I also hope that people know that in Nigeria, we have over 350 ethnic groups and languages, and I am just one artist from one of them.
(Applause) I also hope that you know that I hope I will be able to change the way people talk about African art on the continent and here, and I hope you know that African art is not just what you buy at Harlem markets in New York and that every piece of art you see has a story, and every artist has a name.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm Chetan Bhatt and when I give my name, I'm often asked, "Where are you from?"
And I normally say London.
(Laughter) But of course, I know what they're really asking, so I say something like, "Well, my grandparents and my mum were born in India, my dad and I were born in Kenya, and I was brought up in London.
And then they've got me mapped.
"Ah, you're a Kenyan Asian. I've worked with one of those."
(Laughter) And from my name they probably assume that I'm a Hindu.
And this sort of fixes me for them.
But what about the Christians and the Muslims and the atheists that I grew up with?
Or the socialists and the liberals, even the occasional Tory?
(Laughter) Indeed, all kinds of women and men -- vegetable sellers, factory workers, cooks, car mechanics -- living in my working class area, in some profoundly important way, they are also a part of me and are here with me.
Maybe that's why I find it hard to respond to questions about identity and about origin.
And it's not just a sort of teenage refusal to be labeled.
It's about our own most identities, the ones that we put our hands up to, the ones that we cheer for, the ones that we fight for, the ones that we love or hate.
And it's about how we apprehend ourselves as well as others.
And it's about identities we just assume that we have without thinking too much about them.
But our responses to questions of identity and origin have substantial social and political importance.
We see the wars, the rages of identity going on all around us.
We see violent religious, national and ethnic disputes.
And often the conflict is based on old stories of identity and belonging and origins.
And these identities are based on myths, typically about ancient, primordial origins.
And these could be about Adam and Eve or about the supremacy of a caste or gender or about the vitality of a supposed race or about the past glories of an empire or civilization or about a piece of land that some imagined deity has gifted.
Now, people say that origin stories and identity myths make us feel secure.
What's wrong with that?
They give us a sense of belonging.
Identity is your cultural clothing, and it can make you feel warm and fuzzy inside.
But does it really?
Do we really need identity myths to feel safe?
Because I see religious, national, ethnic disputes as adding to human misery.
Can I dare you to refuse every origin myth that claims you?
What if we reject every single primordial origin myth and develop a deeper sense of personhood, one responsible to humanity as a whole rather than to a particular tribe, a radically different idea of humanity that exposes how origin myths mystify, disguise global power, rapacious exploitation, poverty, the worldwide oppression of women and girls, and of course massive, accelerating inequalities?
Now, origin myths are closely linked to tradition, and the word tradition points to something old and permanent, almost natural, and people assume tradition is just history, simply the past condensed into a nice story.
But let's not confuse tradition with history.
The two are often in severe conflict.
Origin stories are usually recently created fictions of ancient belonging, and they're absurd given the complexity of humanity and our vastly interconnected, even if very unequal world.
And today we see claims to tradition that claim to be ancient changing rapidly in front of our eyes.
I was brought up in the 1970s near Wembley with Asian, English, Caribbean, Irish families living in our street, and the neo-Nazi National Front was massive then with regular marches and attacks on us and a permanent threat and often a frequent reality of violence against us on the streets, in our homes, typically by neo-Nazis and other racists.
And I remember during a general election a leaflet came through our letter box with a picture of the National Front candidate for our area.
And the picture was of our next-door neighbor.
He threatened to shoot me once when I played in the garden as a kid, and many weekends, shaven-headed National Front activists arrived at his house and emerged with scores of placards screaming that they wanted us to go back home.
But today he's one of my mum's best mates.
He's a very lovely, gentle and kind man, and at some point in his political journey out of fascism he embraced a broader idea of humanity.
There was a Hindu family that we got to know well -- and you have to understand that life in our street was a little bit like the setting for an Asian soap opera.
Everyone knew everyone else's business, even if they didn't want it to be known by anyone at all.
But in this family, there was a quiet little boy who went to the same school as I did, and after I left school, I didn't hear much more about him, except that he'd gone off to India.
Now around 2000, I remember seeing this short book.
The book was unusual because it was written by a British supporter of Al Qaeda, and in it the author calls for attacks in Britain.
This is in 1999, so 9/11 and the invasion of Iraq was still in the future, and he helped scout New York bombing targets.
He taught others how to make a dirty bomb to use on the London Underground, and he plotted a massive bombing campaign in London's shopping areas.
He's a very high-risk security prisoner in the UK and one of the most important Al Qaeda figures to be arrested in Britain.
The author of that book was the very same quiet little boy who went to my school.
So a Hindu boy from Britain became an Al Qaeda fighter and a most-wanted international terrorist, and he rejected what people would call his Hindu or Indian or British identity, and he became someone else.
He refused to be who he was.
He recreated himself, and this kind of journey is very common for young men and women who become involved in Al Qaeda or Islamic State or other transnational armed groups.
Al Qaeda's media spokesman is a white American from a Jewish and Catholic mixed background, and neither he nor the boy from my school were from Muslim backgrounds.
There's no point in asking them where are they from.
A more important question is where they're going.
And I would also put it to you that exactly the same journey occurs for those young men and women who were brought up in Muslim family backgrounds.
Most of those who join Al Qaeda and other Salafi jihadi groups from Europe, Asia, North America, even in many cases the Middle East are those who have comprehensively rejected their backgrounds to become, in essence, new people.
They spend an enormous amount of time attacking their parents' backgrounds as profane, impure, blasphemous, the wrong type of Islam, and their vision instead is a fantastical view of cosmic apocalypse.
It's a born again vision.
Discard your past, your society, your family and friends since they're all impure.
Instead, become someone else, your true self, your authentic self.
Now, this isn't about a return to the past.
It's about using a forgery of the past to envision an appalling future which begins today at year zero.
This is why over 80 percent of the victims of Al Qaeda and Islamic State are people from Muslim backgrounds.
The first act by Salafi jihadi groups when they take over an area is to destroy existing Muslim institutions including mosques, shrines, preachers, practices.
Their main purpose is to control and punish people internally, to dictate the spaces that women may go, their clothing, family relations, beliefs, even the minute detail of how one prays.
And you get the impression in the news that they are after us in the West, but they are actually mainly after people from other Muslim backgrounds.
In their view, no other Muslim can ever be pure enough, so ordinary beliefs and practices that have existed for centuries are attacked as impure by teenagers from Birmingham or London who know nothing about the histories that they so joyously obliterate.
Now here, their claim to tradition is at war with history, but they're nevertheless very certain about their purity and about the impurity of others.
Purity, certainty, the return to authentic tradition, the quest for these can lead to lethal visions of perfect societies and perfected people.
This is what the main Hindu fundamentalist organization in India looks like today at its mass rally.
Maybe it reminds you of the 1930s in Italy or Germany, and the movement's roots are indeed in fascism.
It was a member of the same Hindu fundamentalist movement who shot dead Mahatma Gandhi.
Hindu fundamentalists today view this murderer as a national hero, and they want to put up statues of him throughout India.
They've been involved for decades in large-scale mass violence against minorities.
They ban books, art, films.
They attack romantic couples on Valentine's Day, Christians on Christmas Day.
They don't like others talking critically about what they see as their ancient culture or using its images or caricaturing it or drawing cartoons about it.
But the people making the strongest possible claims about ancient, timeless Hindu religion are dressed in brown shorts and white shirts while claiming, oddly, to be the original Aryan race, just like the violent Salafi jihadis who make their claims about their primordial religion while dressed in black military uniforms and wearing balaclavas.
These people are manufacturing pure, pristine identities of conviction and of certainty.
Fundamentalists see religion and culture as their sole property, a property.
But religions and cultures are processes.
They're not things. They're impermanent. They're messy. They're impure.
Look at any religion and you'll see disputes and arguments going all the way down.
Any criticism of religion in any form has to therefore be part of the expansive sense of humanity we should aspire to.
I respect your right to have and to express your religion or your culture or your opinion, but I don't necessarily have to respect the content.
I might like some of it.
I might like how an old church looks, for example, but this isn't the same thing.
Similarly, I have a human right to say something that you may find offensive, but you do not have a human right not to be offended.
In a genuine democracy, we're constantly offended since people express different views all the time.
They also change their views, so their views are impermanent.
You cannot fix someone's political views based on their religious or national or cultural background.
Now, these points about religious purity also apply to nationalism and to racism.
I'm always puzzled to have pride in your national or ethnic identity, pride in the accident of birth from a warm and cozy womb, belief in your superiority because of the accident of birth.
These people have very firm ideas about what belongs and what doesn't belong inside the cozy national cultures that they imagine.
And I'm going to caricature a bit here, but only a little bit.
I want you to imagine the supporter of some Little Englander or British nationalist political party, and he's sitting at home and he's screaming about foreigners invading his country while watching Fox News, an American cable channel owned by an Australian on his South Korean television set which was bought by his Spanish credit card which is paid off monthly by his high-street British bank which has its headquarters in Hong Kong.
He supports a British football team owned by a Russian.
His favorite brand of fish and chips is owned by a Swedish venture capitalist firm.
The church he sometimes goes to has its creed decided in meetings in Ghana.
His Union Jack underpants were made in India.
(Laughter) And -- (Applause) Thank you.
And they're laundered regularly by a very nice Polish lady.
(Laughter) There is no pure ethnicity, national culture, and the ethical choices we have today are far wider than being forced to choose between racist right and religious right visions, dismal visions of culture.
Now, culture isn't just about language, food, clothing and music, but gender relations, ancient monuments, a heritage of sacred texts.
But culture can also be what has been decided to be culture by those who have a political stake in pounding culture into the shape of a prison.
Big political identity claims are elite bids for power.
They're not answers to social or economic or political injustices.
They often obscure them.
And what about the large number of people across the globe who can't point to a monument from their past, who don't possess a sacred written text, who can't hark back to the past glories of a civilization or empire?
Are these people less a part of humanity?
What about you, now, listening to this?
What about you and your identity, because you stitch your experiences and your thoughts into a continuous person moving forward in time.
And this is what you are when you say, "I," "am," or "me."
But this also includes all of your hopes and dreams, all of the you's that could have been, and it includes all the other people and the things that are in the biography of who you are.
They, the others, are also a part of you, moving forward with you.
Your authentic self, if such a thing exists, is a complex, messy and uncertain self, and that is a very good thing.
Why not value those impurities and uncertainties?
Maybe clinging to pure identities is a sign of immaturity, and ethnic, nationalist and religious traditions are bad for you.
Why not be skeptical about every primordial origin claim made on your behalf?
Why not reject the identity myths that call on you to belong, that politicians and community leaders, so-called community leaders, place on you?
If we don't need origin stories and fixed identities, we can challenge ourselves to think creatively about each other and our future.
And here culture always takes care of itself.
I'm not worried about culture.
Cultures are creative, dynamic processes, not imposed laws and boundaries.
This is Abu al-Walid Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Rushd, a very senior Muslim judge and thinker in Cordoba in the 12th century, and his writings were considered deeply blasphemous, heretical and evil.
Long after he died, followers of his work were ruthlessly hunted down, banished and killed over several centuries by the most powerful religious institution of the medieval period.
That institution was the Roman Catholic Church.
Why?
Because ibn Rushd said that something true in religion may conflict with something that your reason finds to be true on earth, but the latter is still true.
There are two distinct worlds of truth, one based on our reason and evidence, and one that is divine, and the state, political power, social law are in the realm of reason.
Religious life is a different realm.
They should be kept separated.
Social and political life should be governed by our reason, not by religion.
And you can see why the church was upset by his writings, as indeed were some Muslims during his lifetime, because he gives us a strong statement of secularism of a kind which is normal in Europe today.
Now, history plays many tricks on us.
It undermines our fixed truths and what we believe to be our culture and their culture.
Ibn Rushd, someone who happens to be a Muslim, is considered one of the key influences in the introduction and spread of secularism in Europe.
So against religious, nationalist and racial purists of all kinds, can you make his story a part of your own, not because he happened to be a Muslim, not because he happened to be an Arab, but because he was a human being with some very good ideas that shook his world and ours.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is my favorite place on earth, Salar de Uyuni in Bolivia.
And when it's covered in a thin layer of water, it reflects the clouds.
There are days when you feel as if you're floating among the clouds.
But there are days when the horizon disappears; there's no longer a top or a bottom.
You feel immersed in something bigger.
It was there that one night I woke up from a dream, and I saw that the stars were also reflected on the water.
And that wasn't a dream.
It was as if you could walk among the stars.
With every step I took, the stars reverberated under my feet.
It was like I was floating in the universe among clouds of galaxies.
But what's floating there today are not just clouds of galaxies but also clouds of plastic.
These are the footprints we're leaving on the planet.
They're signs of an era in which the behavior of some humans is making a global impact on our ecosystems.
This era is called the Anthropocene.
There's also another type of toxic clouds that float in the air, like the ones that form from carbon dioxide emissions and from the burning of fossil fuels -- oil, carbon, gas -- clouds that, when we see them, pollute our dreams.
I don't know about all of you, but I've always dreamed of floating among the clouds.
Maybe today we can imagine together other types of clouds, clouds we can live with.
If you're wondering about that photo, I'll explain: it looks like a collage or photomontage -- something weird.
No; it's reality.
But sometimes I ask myself: What is reality?
According to Alexander Kluge: "Human beings are not interested in reality.
They can’t be; it’s part of the human essence.
They have desires.
These desires are totally opposed to any form of reality.
They prefer to lie than to become divorced from their desires."
But how can we learn to float among the clouds?
As an artist, I thought we could start building a flying museum.
You're probably wondering: With plastic bags?
In 2007, with a community of people all over the world, we began to collect used plastic bags -- not new ones.
And we washed them, we cut them up, we glued them together, and we began to draw on them, creating a huge canvas.
We made a collection of drawings, of personal stories and of friendships.
And when you join them, bend them and fold them, it creates a space full of air.
When the sun comes up from the horizon, the museum rises up to the sky.
That's why we call it, "The Aero-Solar Museum."
And from this simple idea, we learned how to float in the air in a radically new way, without using any type of fuel.
The difference in temperature between the interior and the exterior is what makes us rise up.
That way, we don't use fossil fuels or helium or hydrogen; we don't use solar panels or batteries or motors.
We discovered a way that's simple, clean and accessible to the whole world to lift ourselves up.
I remember when I was at NASA in 2009 with 120 engineers.
You guys know, too, when you go up in a plane, the control panels are gigantic.
And what we're doing is really complex, and when I started coming in with the plastic bags, saying, "But we have a different way ..."
people had a hard time understanding the concept.
Seeing the power of this idea, we started to initiate a new era; one that would leave behind the violence of the Anthropocene and give way to a new era, which we call the "Aerocene" -- an era of ecological awareness, in which we learn to float together, live together in the air, and come to an ethical commitment with the atmosphere and with planet earth.
That's why I've brought this backpack today.
Let's see ...
OK. This is a balloon that we also refer to as a sculpture.
And if it's sunny out tomorrow, we can go out and fly -- though, no, the weather in Vancouver isn't -- (Laughter) it's not very ...
very favorable.
So, what other features does it have?
It has sensors that, when it moves, make sort of drawings in the air.
It also has other sensors.
I always think that first you have to feel it, and then you can measure it; you need to hear the sounds of the atmosphere, of the climate, of the hot air, in order to then measure the ozone, the carbon dioxide.
We're developing these sensors together with different communities all over the world in order to reconnect with the climate, the temperature and the environment, because there are other species in the air; in these excursions towards the atmosphere, we're not alone.
The air is full of clouds of life.
We live at the bottom of an ocean of air.
And this same sculpture, this exact one in my hands, flew 375 miles -- 12 hours -- from Germany to Poland, on a fuel-free trip.
But it wasn't free from crossing borders.
The trip was much more complicated than what we imagined; air space is as regulated and militarized as land space.
To fly using the winds, the heat of the sun and the radiant energy of the earth is complex and beautiful.
But even more complex will be getting the permits to cross the air space of each of the different countries that we fly over using wind.
At COP21, the Paris Climate Conference, we presented these spherical sculptures that could transport us all over the world.
But how can we fly using the wind to arrive at our destination?
Together with MIT, we developed a program that predicts how we can navigate the wind highways.
For example, if I had to return to Berlin from Vancouver, the first thing I would need to do is choose an altitude.
At different altitudes, there are different directions and different speeds.
The red line is tomorrow and the orange, the day after tomorrow.
And there it goes.
You can see, the best day to fly back to Berlin -- so now, traveling using only wind -- is in six days.
And we can get to 105 miles from the center of Berlin without burning a single drop of fuel, being transported only by wind currents.
So we thought that these trajectories that we drew with the wind could become signatures, declaring "Independence from Fossil Fuels Day."
More and more of us are experiencing the air in a different way.
You're all familiar with Earth Day.
We think we should also celebrate Air Day: it's a pact that we make with the earth, an ethical commitment to the atmosphere.
But let's keep thinking and dreaming.
We've learned that the bigger the sculptures are, the more weight they can lift.
Remember, they rise up only with hot air that's been heated by the sun.
Using this approach, we can learn to build gardens in the air.
Could we one day live in a garden the size of the earth?
Could we live in an ecosystem floating among the clouds?
Answering these questions isn't just a technological challenge; it's a way to reexamine the freedom of movement between countries, and of overcoming the political, social, cultural and military restrictions of contemporary societies.
Because in the end, the air belongs to everybody and doesn't answer to any government.
(Applause) And like we said earlier, our imagination is the force that allows us to create these places.
This is an installation I did at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
It asks the question: What might these transnational spaces be like?
And once we inhabit those spaces, we need to learn how to move within them, to walk among the clouds, where every movement affects everyone else's movements; the body weight and proximity between people will cause the space to expand ...
or contract.
There we are, suspended 72 feet in the air.
When two or more people get too close together, even those farthest away are affected -- everyone falls to the same spot.
These are fragile ecosystems.
And it's between these spheres that we build nets that connect us.
There are moments when we have to face the void, and fear can paralyze us.
One of the most beautiful things about this exhibit is the sense of solidarity generated when we face these new "aero-graphs."
Finally, let me tell you one last story.
On July 16, 1945, on the White Sands of New Mexico, an atomic bomb was detonated for the first time.
As a result of this explosion, a cloud of radioactive particles disseminated all over the earth, marking the beginning of the Anthropocene era.
Seventy years later, on November 8, 2015, in the same place, another event occurred.
For the first time in history, we lifted a person into the air using only the sun, without burning any fossil fuels.
As the sun rose up above the horizon, we rose up, too, silently, slowly, with no explosions.
We felt as if gravity had been inverted; it wasn't pulling us toward the center of the earth, but toward the universe.
If Neil Armstrong said, when he walked on the moon, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," perhaps what we ought to ask ourselves is: What steps do we need to take today?
In the Aerocene era, our steps are much smaller, but radically different; they're steps that began with a bag full of air and wishes, but that can carry us to independence from fossil fuels and the opportunity to celebrate Air Day; steps that won't leave footprints on other planets until we've learned to walk in the atmosphere of this one.
The landscapes are tiny and the steps are tiny, but I hope we can take them together.
And I'm sure that these steps will lead us much further than the moon, so we can learn to float with our feet on the ground.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We are all activists now.
(Applause) Thank you.
I'll just stop here.
(Laughter) From the families who are fighting to maintain funding for public schools, the tens of thousands of people who joined Occupy Wall Street or marched with Black Lives Matter to protest police brutality against African Americans, families that join rallies, pro-life and pro-choice, those of us who are afraid that our friends and neighbors are going to be deported or that they'll be added to lists because they are Muslim, people who advocate for gun rights and for gun control and the millions of people who joined the women's marches all across the country this last January.
(Applause) We are all activists now, and that means that we all have something to worry about from surveillance.
Surveillance means government collection and use of private and sensitive data about us.
And surveillance is essential to law enforcement and to national security.
But the history of surveillance is one that includes surveillance abuses where this sensitive information has been used against people because of their race, their national origin, their sexual orientation, and in particular, because of their activism, their political beliefs.
About 53 years ago, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. gave his "I have a dream" speech on the Mall in Washington.
And today the ideas behind this speech of racial equality and tolerance are so noncontroversial that my daughters study the speech in third grade.
But at the time, Dr. King was extremely controversial.
The legendary and notorious FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover believed, or wanted to believe, that the Civil Rights Movement was a Soviet communist plot intended to destabilize the American government.
And so Hoover had his agents put bugs in Dr. King's hotel rooms, and those bugs picked up conversations between civil rights leaders talking about the strategies and tactics of the Civil Rights Movement.
They also picked up sounds of Dr. King having sex with women who were not his wife, and J. Edgar Hoover saw the opportunity here to discredit and undermine the Civil Rights Movement.
The FBI sent a package of these recordings along with a handwritten note to Dr. King, and a draft of this note was found in FBI archives years later, and the letter said, "You are no clergyman and you know it.
King, like all frauds, your end is approaching."
The letter even seemed to encourage Dr. King to commit suicide, saying, "King, there is only one thing left for you to do.
You know what it is.
You better take it before your filthy, abnormal, fraudulent self is bared to the nation."
But the important thing is, Dr. King was not abnormal.
Every one of us has something that we want to hide from somebody.
And even more important, J. Edgar Hoover wasn't abnormal either.
The history of surveillance abuses is not the history of one bad, megalomaniacal man.
Throughout his decades at the FBI, J. Edgar Hoover enjoyed the support of the presidents that he served, Democratic and Republican alike.
After all, it was John F. Kennedy and his brother Robert Kennedy who knew about and approved the surveillance of Dr. King.
Hoover ran a program called COINTELPRO for 15 years which was designed to spy on and undermine civic groups that were devoted to things like civil rights, the Women's Rights Movement, and peace groups and anti-war movements.
And the surveillance didn't stop there.
Lyndon Baines Johnson, during the election campaign, had the campaign airplane of his rival Barry Goldwater bugged as part of his effort to win that election.
And then, of course, there was Watergate.
Burglars were caught breaking into the Democratic National Committee headquarters at the Watergate Hotel, the Nixon administration was involved in covering up the burglary, and eventually Nixon had to step down as president.
COINTELPRO and Watergate were a wake-up call for Americans.
Surveillance was out of control and it was being used to squelch political challengers.
And so Americans rose to the occasion and what we did was we reformed surveillance law.
And the primary tool we used to reform surveillance law was to require a search warrant for the government to be able to get access to our phone calls and our letters.
Now, the reason why a search warrant is important is because it interposes a judge in the relationship between investigators and the citizens, and that judge's job is to make sure that there's good cause for the surveillance, that the surveillance is targeted at the right people, and that the information that's collected is going to be used for legitimate government purposes and not for discriminatory ones.
This was our system, and what this means is that President Obama did not wiretap Trump Tower.
The system is set up to prevent something like that from happening without a judge being involved.
But what happens when we're not talking about phone calls or letters anymore?
Today, we have technology that makes it cheap and easy for the government to collect information on ordinary everyday people.
Your phone call records can reveal whether you have an addiction, what your religion is, what charities you donate to, what political candidate you support.
And yet, our government collected, dragnet-style, Americans' calling records for years.
In 2012, the Republican National Convention highlighted a new technology it was planning to use, facial recognition, to identify people who were going to be in the crowd who might be activists or troublemakers and to stop them ahead of time.
Today, over 50 percent of American adults have their faceprint in a government database.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives concocted a plan to find out what Americans were going to gun shows by using license plate detectors to scan the license plates of cars that were in the parking lots of these events.
Today, we believe that over 70 percent of police departments have automatic license plate detection technology that they're using to track people's cars as they drive through town.
And all of this information, the license plates, the faceprints, the phone records, your address books, your buddy lists, the photos that you upload to Dropbox or Google Photos, and sometimes even your chats and your emails are not protected by a warrant requirement.
So what that means is we have all of this information on regular people that's newly available at very low expense.
It is the golden age for surveillance.
Now, every parent is going to understand what this means.
When you have a little baby and the baby's young, that child is not able to climb out of its crib.
But eventually your little girl gets older and she's able to climb out of the crib, but you tell her, "Don't climb out of the crib. OK?"
And every parent knows what's going to happen.
Some of those babies are going to climb out of the crib.
Right? That's the difference between ability and permission.
Well, the same thing is true with the government today.
It used to be that our government didn't have the ability to do widespread, massive surveillance on hundreds of millions of Americans and then abuse that information.
But now our government has grown up, and we have that technology today.
The government has the ability, and that means the law is more important than ever before.
The law is supposed to say when the government has permission to do it, and it's supposed to ensure that there's some kind of ramification.
We notice when those laws are broken and there's some of kind of ramification or punishment.
The law is more important than ever because we are now living in a world where only rules are stopping the government from abusing this information.
But the law has fallen down on the job.
Particularly since September 11 the law has fallen down on the job, and we do not have the rules in place that we need.
And we are seeing the ramifications of that.
So fusion centers are these joint task forces between local, state and federal government that are meant to ferret out domestic terrorism.
And what we've seen is fusion center reports that say that you might be dangerous if you voted for a third-party candidate, or you own a "Don't Tread On Me" flag, or you watched movies that are anti-tax.
These same fusion centers have spied on Muslim community groups' reading lists and on Quakers who are resisting military recruiting in high schools.
The Internal Revenue Service has disproportionately audited groups that have "Tea Party" or "Patriot" in their name.
And now customs and border patrol is stopping people as they come into the country and demanding our social networking passwords which will allow them to see who our friends are, what we say and even to impersonate us online.
Now, civil libertarians like myself have been trying to draw people's attention to these things and fighting against them for years.
This was a huge problem during the Obama administration, but now the problem is worse.
When the New York Police Department spies on Muslims or a police department uses license plate detectors to find out where the officers' spouses are or those sorts of things, that is extremely dangerous.
But when a president repurposes the power of federal surveillance and the federal government to retaliate against political opposition, that is a tyranny.
And so we are all activists now, and we all have something to fear from surveillance.
But just like in the time of Dr. Martin Luther King, we can reform the way things are.
First of all, use encryption.
Encryption protects your information from being inexpensively and opportunistically collected.
It rolls back the golden age for surveillance.
Second, support surveillance reform.
Did you know that if you have a friend who works for the French or German governments or for an international human rights group or for a global oil company that your friend is a valid foreign intelligence target?
And what that means is that when you have conversations with that friend, the US government may be collecting that information.
And when that information is collected, even though it's conversations with Americans, it can then be funneled to the FBI where the FBI is allowed to search through it without getting a warrant, without probable cause, looking for information about Americans and whatever crimes we may have committed with no need to document any kind of suspicion.
The law that allows some of this to happen is called Section 702 of the FISA Amendments Act, and we have a great opportunity this year, because Section 702 is going to expire at the end of 2017, which means that Congress's inertia is on our side if we want reform.
And we can pressure our representatives to actually implement important reforms to this law and protect our data from this redirection and misuse.
And finally, one of the reasons why things have gotten so out of control is because so much of what happens with surveillance -- the technology, the enabling rules and the policies that are either there or not there to protect us -- are secret or classified.
We need transparency, and we need to know as Americans what the government is doing in our name so that the surveillance that takes place and the use of that information is democratically accounted for.
We are all activists now, which means that we all have something to worry about from surveillance.
But like in the time of Dr. Martin Luther King, there is stuff that we can do about it.
So please join me, and let's get to work.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When someone mentions Cuba, what do you think about?
Classic, classic cars?
Perhaps good cigars?
Maybe you think of a famous baseball player.
What about when somebody mentions North Korea?
You think about those missile tests, maybe their notorious leader or his good friend, Dennis Rodman.
(Laughter) One thing that likely doesn't come to mind is a vision of a country, an open economy, whose citizens have access to a wide range of affordable consumer products.
I'm not here to argue how these countries got to where they are today.
I simply want to use them as an example of countries and citizens who have been affected, negatively affected, by a trade policy that restricts imports and protects local industries.
Recently we've heard a number of countries talk about restricting imports and protecting their local, domestic industries.
Now, this may sound fine in a sound bite, but what it really is is protectionism.
We heard a lot about this during the 2016 presidential election.
We heard about it during the Brexit debates and most recently during the French elections.
In fact, it's been a really important topic being talked about around the world, and many aspiring political leaders are running on platforms positioning protectionism as a good thing.
Now, I could see why they think protectionism is good, because sometimes it seems like trade is unfair.
Some have blamed trade for some of the problems we've been having here at home in the US.
For years we've been hearing about the loss of high-paying US manufacturing jobs.
Many think that manufacturing is declining in the US because companies are moving their operations offshore to markets with lower-cost labor like China, Mexico and Vietnam.
They also think trade agreements sometimes are unfair, like NAFTA and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, because these trade agreements allow companies to reimport those cheaply produced goods back into the US and other countries from where the jobs were taken.
So it kind of feels like the exporters win and the importers lose.
Now, the reality is output in the manufacturing sector in the US is actually growing, but we are losing jobs.
We're losing lots of them.
In fact, from 2000 to 2010, 5.7 million manufacturing jobs were lost.
But they're not being lost for the reasons you might think.
Mike Johnson in Toledo, Ohio didn't lose his jobs at the factory to Miguel Sanchez in Monterrey, Mexico.
No.
Mike lost his job to a machine.
87 percent of lost manufacturing jobs have been eliminated because we've made improvements in our own productivity through automation.
So that means that one out of 10 lost manufacturing jobs was due to offshoring.
Now, this is not just a US phenomenon.
In fact, automation is spreading to every production line in every country around the world.
But look, I get it: if you just lost your job and then you read in the newspaper that your old company just struck up a deal with China, it's easy to think you were just replaced in a one-for-one deal.
When I hear stories like this, I think that what people picture is that trade happens between only two countries.
Manufacturers in one country produce products and they export them to consumers in other countries, and it feels like the manufacturing countries win and the importing countries lose.
Well, reality's a little bit different.
I'm a supply chain professional, and I live and work in Mexico.
And I work in the middle of a highly connected network of manufacturers all collaborating from around the world to produce many of the products we use today.
What I see from my front-row seat in Mexico City actually looks more like this.
And this is a more accurate depiction of what trade really looks like.
I've had the pleasure of being able to see how many different products are manufactured, from golf clubs to laptop computers to internet servers, automobiles and even airplanes.
And believe me, none of it happens in a straight line.
Let me give you an example.
A few months ago, I was touring the manufacturing plant of a multinational aerospace company in Querétaro, Mexico, and the VP of logistics points out a completed tail assembly.
It turns out the tail assemblies are assembled from panels that are manufactured in France, and they're assembled in Mexico using components imported from the US.
When those tail assemblies are done, they're exported via truck to Canada to their primary assembly plant where they come together with thousands of other parts, like the wings and the seats and the little shades over the little windows, all coming in to become a part of a new airplane.
Think about it.
These new airplanes, before they even take their first flight, they have more stamps in their passports than Angelina Jolie.
Now, this approach to processing goes on all around the world to manufacture many of the products we use every day, from skin cream to airplanes.
When you go home tonight, take a look in your house.
You might be surprised to find a label that looks like this one: "Manufactured in the USA from US and foreign parts."
Economist Michael Porter described what's going on here best.
Many decades ago, he said that it's most beneficial for a country to focus on producing the products it can produce most efficiently and trading for the rest.
So what he's talking about here is shared production, and efficiency is the name of the game.
You've probably seen an example of this at home or at work.
Let's take a look at an example.
Think about how your house was built or your kitchen renovated.
Typically, there's a general contractor who is responsible for coordinating the efforts of all the different contractors: an architect to draw the plans, an earth-moving company to dig the foundation, a plumber, a carpenter and so on.
So why doesn't the general contractor pick just one company to do all the work, like, say, the architect?
Because this is silly.
The general contractor selects experts because it takes years to learn and master how to do each of the tasks it takes to build a house or renovate a kitchen, some of them requiring special training.
Think about it: Would you want your architect to install your toilet?
Of course not.
So let's apply this process to the corporate world.
Companies today focus on manufacturing what they produce best and most efficiently, and they trade for everything else.
So this means they rely on a global, interconnected, interdependent network of manufacturers to produce these products.
In fact, that network is so interconnected it's almost impossible to dismantle and produce products in just one country.
Let's take a look at the interconnected web we saw a few moments ago, and let's focus on just one strand between the US and Mexico.
The Wilson Institute says that shared production represents 40 percent of the half a trillion dollars in trade between the US and Mexico.
That's about 200 billion dollars, or the same as the GDP for Portugal.
So let's just imagine that the US decides to impose a 20 percent border tax on all imports from Mexico.
OK, fine.
But do you think Mexico is just going to stand by and let that happen?
No. No way.
So in retaliation, they impose a similar tax on all goods being imported from the US, and a little game of tit-for-tat ensues, and 20 percent -- just imagine that 20 percent duties are added to every good, product, product component crossing back and forth across the border, and you could be looking at more than a 40 percent increase in duties, or 80 billion dollars.
Now, don't kid yourself, these costs are going to be passed along to you and to me.
Now, let's think about what impact that might have on some of the products, or the prices of the products, that we buy every day.
So if a 30 percent increase in duties were actually passed along, we would be looking at some pretty important increases in prices.
A Lincoln MKZ would go from 37,000 dollars to 48,000.
And the price of a Sharp 60-inch HDTV would go from 898 dollars to 1,167 dollars.
And the price of a 16-ounce jar of CVS skin moisturizer would go from 13 dollars to 17 dollars.
Now, remember, this is only looking at one strand of the production chain between the US and Mexico, so multiply this out across all of the strands.
The impact could be considerable.
Now, just think about this: even if we were able to dismantle this network and produce products in just one country, which by the way is easier said than done, we would still only be saving or protecting one out of 10 lost manufacturing jobs.
That's right, because remember, most of those jobs, 87 percent, were lost due to improvements in our own productivity.
And unfortunately, those jobs, they're gone for good.
So the real question is, does it make sense for us to drive up prices to the point where many of us can't afford the basic goods we use every day for the purpose of saving a job that might be eliminated in a couple of years anyway?
The reality is that shared production allows us to manufacture higher quality products at lower costs.
It's that simple.
It allows us to get more out of the limited resources and expertise we have and at the same time benefit from lower prices.
It's really important to remember that for shared production to be effective, it relies on efficient cross-border movement of raw materials, components and finished products.
So remember this: the next time you're hearing somebody try to sell you on the idea that protectionism is a good deal, it's just not.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Where does the end begin?
Well, for me, it all began with this little fellow.
This adorable organism -- well, I think it's adorable -- is called Tetrahymena and it's a single-celled creature.
It's also been known as pond scum.
So that's right, my career started with pond scum.
Now, it was no surprise I became a scientist.
Growing up far away from here, as a little girl I was deadly curious about everything alive.
I used to pick up lethally poisonous stinging jellyfish and sing to them.
And so starting my career, I was deadly curious about fundamental mysteries of the most basic building blocks of life, and I was fortunate to live in a society where that curiosity was valued.
Now, for me, this little pond scum critter Tetrahymena was a great way to study the fundamental mystery I was most curious about: those bundles of DNA in our cells called chromosomes.
And it was because I was curious about the very ends of chromosomes, known as telomeres.
Now, when I started my quest, all we knew was that they helped protect the ends of chromosomes.
It was important when cells divide.
It was really important, but I wanted to find out what telomeres consisted of, and for that, I needed a lot of them.
And it so happens that cute little Tetrahymena has a lot of short linear chromosomes, around 20,000, so lots of telomeres.
And I discovered that telomeres consisted of special segments of noncoding DNA right at the very ends of chromosomes.
But here's a problem.
Now, we all start life as a single cell.
It multiples to two. Two becomes four. Four becomes eight, and on and on to form the 200 million billion cells that make up our adult body.
And some of those cells have to divide thousands of times.
In fact, even as I stand here before you, all throughout my body, cells are furiously replenishing to, well, keep me standing here before you.
So every time a cell divides, all of its DNA has to be copied, all of the coding DNA inside of those chromosomes, because that carries the vital operating instructions that keep our cells in good working order, so my heart cells can keep a steady beat, which I assure you they're not doing right now, and my immune cells can fight off bacteria and viruses, and our brain cells can save the memory of our first kiss and keep on learning throughout life.
But there is a glitch in the way DNA is copied.
It is just one of those facts of life.
Every time the cell divides and the DNA is copied, some of that DNA from the ends gets worn down and shortened, some of that telomere DNA.
And think about it like the protective caps at the ends of your shoelace.
And those keep the shoelace, or the chromosome, from fraying, and when that tip gets too short, it falls off, and that worn down telomere sends a signal to the cells.
"The DNA is no longer being protected."
It sends a signal. Time to die.
So, end of story.
Well, sorry, not so fast.
It can't be the end of the story, because life hasn't died off the face of the earth.
So I was curious: if such wear and tear is inevitable, how on earth does Mother Nature make sure we can keep our chromosomes intact?
Now, remember that little pond scum critter Tetrahymena?
The craziest thing was, Tetrahymena cells never got old and died.
Their telomeres weren't shortening as time marched on.
Sometimes they even got longer.
Something else was at work, and believe me, that something was not in any textbook.
So working in my lab with my extraordinary student Carol Greider -- and Carol and I shared the Nobel Prize for this work -- we began running experiments and we discovered cells do have something else.
It was a previously undreamed-of enzyme that could replenish, make longer, telomeres, and we named it telomerase.
And when we removed our pond scum's telomerase, their telomeres ran down and they died.
So it was thanks to their plentiful telomerase that our pond scum critters never got old.
OK, now, that's an incredibly hopeful message for us humans to be receiving from pond scum, because it turns out that as we humans age, our telomeres do shorten, and remarkably, that shortening is aging us.
Generally speaking, the longer your telomeres, the better off you are.
It's the overshortening of telomeres that leads us to feel and see signs of aging.
My skin cells start to die and I start to see fine lines, wrinkles.
Hair pigment cells die.
You start to see gray.
Immune system cells die.
You increase your risks of getting sick.
In fact, the cumulative research from the last 20 years has made clear that telomere attrition is contributing to our risks of getting cardiovascular diseases, Alzheimer's, some cancers and diabetes, the very conditions many of us die of.
And so we have to think about this.
What is going on?
This attrition, we look and we feel older, yeah.
Our telomeres are losing the war of attrition faster.
And those of us who feel youthful longer, it turns out our telomeres are staying longer for longer periods of time, extending our feelings of youthfulness and reducing the risks of all we most dread as the birthdays go by.
OK, seems like a no-brainer.
Now, if my telomeres are connected to how quickly I'm going to feel and get old, if my telomeres can be renewed by my telomerase, then all I have to do to reverse the signs and symptoms of aging is figure out where to buy that Costco-sized bottle of grade A organic fair trade telomerase, right?
Great! Problem solved.
(Applause) Not so fast, I'm sorry.
Alas, that's not the case.
OK. And why?
It's because human genetics has taught us that when it comes to our telomerase, we humans live on a knife edge.
OK, simply put, yes, nudging up telomerase does decrease the risks of some diseases, but it also increases the risks of certain and rather nasty cancers.
So even if you could buy that Costco-sized bottle of telomerase, and there are many websites marketing such dubious products, the problem is you could nudge up your risks of cancers.
And we don't want that.
Now, don't worry, and because, while I think it's kind of funny that right now, you know, many of us may be thinking, "Well, I'd rather be like pond scum," ...
(Laughter) there is something for us humans in the story of telomeres and their maintenance.
But I want to get one thing clear.
It isn't about enormously extending human lifespan or immortality.
It's about health span.
Now, health span is the number of years of your life when you're free of disease, you're healthy, you're productive, you're zestfully enjoying life.
Disease span, the opposite of health span, is the time of your life spent feeling old and sick and dying.
So the real question becomes, OK, if I can't guzzle telomerase, do I have control over my telomeres' length and hence my well-being, my health, without those downsides of cancer risks?
OK?
So, it's the year 2000.
Now, I've been minutely scrutinizing little teeny tiny telomeres very happily for many years, when into my lab walks a psychologist named Elissa Epel.
Now, Elissa's expertise is in the effects of severe, chronic psychological stress on our mind's and our body's health.
And there she was standing in my lab, which ironically overlooked the entrance to a mortuary, and -- (Laughter) And she had a life-and-death question for me.
"What happens to telomeres in people who are chronically stressed?"
she asked me.
You see, she'd been studying caregivers, and specifically mothers of children with a chronic condition, be it gut disorder, be it autism, you name it -- a group obviously under enormous and prolonged psychological stress.
I have to say, her question changed me profoundly.
See, all this time I had been thinking of telomeres as those miniscule molecular structures that they are, and the genes that control telomeres.
And when Elissa asked me about studying caregivers, I suddenly saw telomeres in a whole new light.
I saw beyond the genes and the chromosomes into the lives of the real people we were studying.
And I'm a mom myself, and at that moment, I was struck by the image of these women dealing with a child with a condition very difficult to deal with, often without help.
And such women, simply, often look worn down.
So was it possible their telomeres were worn down as well?
So our collective curiosity went into overdrive.
Elissa selected for our first study a group of such caregiving mothers, and we wanted to ask: What's the length of their telomeres compared with the number of years that they have been caregiving for their child with a chronic condition?
So four years go by and the day comes when all the results are in, and Elissa looked down at our first scatterplot and literally gasped, because there was a pattern to the data, and it was the exact gradient that we most feared might exist.
It was right there on the page.
The longer, the more years that is, the mother had been in this caregiving situation, no matter her age, the shorter were her telomeres.
And the more she perceived her situation as being more stressful, the lower was her telomerase and the shorter were her telomeres.
So we had discovered something unheard of: the more chronic stress you are under, the shorter your telomeres, meaning the more likely you were to fall victim to an early disease span and perhaps untimely death.
Our findings meant that people's life events and the way we respond to these events can change how you maintain your telomeres.
So telomere length wasn't just a matter of age counted in years.
Elissa's question to me, back when she first came to my lab, indeed had been a life-and-death question.
Now, luckily, hidden in that data there was hope.
We noticed that some mothers, despite having been carefully caring for their children for many years, had been able to maintain their telomeres.
So studying these women closely revealed that they were resilient to stress.
Somehow they were able to experience their circumstances not as a threat day in and day out but as a challenge, and this has led to a very important insight for all of us: we have control over the way we age all the way down into our cells.
OK, now our initial curiosity became infectious.
Thousands of scientists from different fields added their expertise to telomere research, and the findings have poured in.
It's up to over 10,000 scientific papers and counting.
So several studies rapidly confirmed our initial finding that yes, chronic stress is bad for telomeres.
And now many are revealing that we have more control over this particular aging process than any of us could ever have imagined.
A few examples: a study from the University of California, Los Angeles of people who are caring for a relative with dementia, long-term, and looked at their caregiver's telomere maintenance capacity and found that it was improved by them practicing a form of meditation for as little as 12 minutes a day for two months.
Attitude matters.
If you're habitually a negative thinker, you typically see a stressful situation with a threat stress response, meaning if your boss wants to see you, you automatically think, "I'm about to be fired," and your blood vessels constrict, and your level of the stress hormone cortisol creeps up, and then it stays up, and over time, that persistently high level of the cortisol actually damps down your telomerase.
Not good for your telomeres.
On the other hand, if you typically see something stressful as a challenge to be tackled, then blood flows to your heart and to your brain, and you experience a brief but energizing spike of cortisol.
And thanks to that habitual "bring it on" attitude, your telomeres do just fine.
So ...
What is all of this telling us?
Your telomeres do just fine.
You really do have power to change what is happening to your own telomeres.
But our curiosity just got more and more intense, because we started to wonder, what about factors outside our own skin?
Could they impact our telomere maintenance as well?
You know, we humans are intensely social beings.
Was it even possible that our telomeres were social as well?
And the results have been startling.
As early as childhood, emotional neglect, exposure to violence, bullying and racism all impact your telomeres, and the effects are long-term.
Can you imagine the impact on children of living years in a war zone?
People who can't trust their neighbors and who don't feel safe in their neighborhoods consistently have shorter telomeres.
So your home address matters for telomeres as well.
On the flip side, tight-knit communities, being in a marriage long-term, and lifelong friendships, even, all improve telomere maintenance.
So what is all this telling us?
It's telling us that I have the power to impact my own telomeres, and I also have the power to impact yours.
Telomere science has told us just how interconnected we all are.
But I'm still curious.
I do wonder what legacy all of us will leave for the next generation?
Will we invest in the next young woman or man peering through a microscope at the next little critter, the next bit of pond scum, curious about a question we don't even know today is a question?
It could be a great question that could impact all the world.
And maybe, maybe you're curious about you.
Now that you know how to protect your telomeres, are you curious what are you going to do with all those decades of brimming good health?
And now that you know you could impact the telomeres of others, are you curious how will you make a difference?
And now that you know the power of curiosity to change the world, how will you make sure that the world invests in curiosity for the sake of the generations that will come after us?
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a picture of a sunset on Mars taken by NASA's Curiosity rover in 2013.
Mars is a very cold planet, flooded with high levels of UV radiation and extremely dry.
In fact, Mars is considered to be too dry for life as we know it.
I'm an astrobiologist.
I try to understand the origin of life on Earth and the possibilities of finding life elsewhere in the universe.
People sometimes ask me, how can you be an astrobiologist if you don't have your own spaceship?
Well, what I do is that I study life in those environments on Earth that most closely resemble other interesting places in the universe.
All life on Earth requires water, so in my case I focus on the intimate relationship between water and life in order to understand if we could find life in a planet as dry as Mars.
But since I do not have the 2.5 billion dollars to send my own robot to Mars, I study the most Martian place on Earth, the Atacama Desert.
Located in northern Chile, it is the oldest and driest desert on Earth.
To give you an idea of how dry it is, consider here in Vancouver it rains over 1,000 millimeters of rain every year.
In the Atacama, there are places with no reported rains in the last 400 years.
How do I know this?
Well, because I was born and raised in the Atacama -- (Laughter) So I had a unique advantage when I started studying this desert.
So let me tell you guys a few fantastic examples he has found on how life has adapted to live with almost no water at all.
One of my first findings was in the entrance of a cave facing the Pacific Ocean.
In this place, we reported a new type of microalgae that grew only on top of the spiderwebs that covered the cave entrance.
Have you ever seen a spiderweb early in the morning?
It's covered with dew, so this microalgae learned that in order to carry photosynthesis in the coast of the driest desert on Earth, they could use the spiderwebs.
So here they may access the water from the fogs that regularly cover these areas in the morning.
In another cave, we found a different type of microalgae.
This one is able to use ocean mist as a source of water, and strikingly lives in the very bottom of a cave, so it has adapted to live with less than 0.1 percent of the amount of light that regular plants need.
These type of findings suggest to me that on Mars, we may find even photosynthetic life inside caves.
And by the way, that's me.
(Laughter) Now, for almost 15 years this region of Yungay, discovered by NASA, was thought to be the driest place of this desert, but I knew that it was not.
How? You already know the answer.
Because I was born and raised in this desert.
So I remembered that I usually see fogs in Yungay, so after setting sensors in a number of places, where I remember never seeing fogs or clouds, I reported four other sites much drier than Yungay, with this one, María Elena South, being the truly driest place on Earth, as dry as Mars, and amazingly, just a 15-minute ride from the small mining town where I was born.
Now, in this search, we were trying to actually find the dry limit for life on Earth, a place so dry that nothing was able to survive in it.
But even here, well hidden underground, we found a number of different microorganisms, which suggested to me that similarly dry places, like Mars, may be inhabited.
We even have some preliminary evidences that these microorganisms may still be active in the desiccated state, like walking mummies all around us, and that they may be using UV radiation as a source of energy.
If confirmed, this would have a huge impact on our definition of life, on how we look for life elsewhere in the universe.
Due to its clear skies, by 2020, 60 percent of the biggest telescopes on Earth will be located in the Atacama, and while everyone else will be looking among the stars to answer the question, "Are we alone?"
I will be looking down to the ground searching for this same answer in my own backyard.
Thank you.
(Applause)
But anyway, this is about the evils of science, so I think it’s perfect.
♫ My oh my, walking by, who’s the apple of my eye? ♫ ♫ Why, it's my very own Clonie. ♫ ♫ Oh, if I should stroll the hood, who knew I could look so good ♫ ♫ just talking on the phone to Clonie. ♫ ♫ We are pals, it's cool, 'cause we're not lonely, ♫ ♫ shallow gene pool is nothing to my only Clonie. ♫ ♫ Me and you, hustling through, holding on through thick and thin, ♫ ♫ just day by day, our DNA, so the Olson twins got nothing on us. ♫ ♫ We'll survive, side by side. Mother Nature, don’t you call her phony, she’s my Clonie. ♫ ♫ Was wealthy, but not healthy, had no one to dwell with me, ♫ ♫ so look who I got born -- Clonie. ♫ ♫ Far from broke, bored, rich folk, we don't need no natural yolk -- ♫ ♫ our babies come full-formed, Clonie. ♫ ♫ We'll be huggable, get a publicist ♫ ♫ and show them, be the most lovable thing since fucking Eminem. ♫ ♫ Oh my friend, multiply, we’re a franchise, like Walt Disney or Hannibal Lecter. ♫ ♫ We can tell our cancer cells are more benign than old Phil Spector. ♫ ♫ We’ll survive side by side, should have signed with Verve instead of Sony. ♫ ♫ You’re my Clonie. ♫ "Oh Clonie, how I love you."
"Ha, I'm the only person I ever loved."
♫ Gee, that's swell. I guess you're just my fatal attraction-ie. You’re my Clonie. ♫ Thank you.
(Applause)
In my early days as a graduate student, I went on a snorkeling trip off the coast of the Bahamas.
I'd actually never swum in the ocean before, so it was a bit terrifying.
What I remember the most is, as I put my head in the water and I was trying really hard to breathe through the snorkel, this huge group of striped yellow and black fish came straight at me ...
and I just froze.
And then, as if it had suddenly changed its mind, came towards me and then swerved to the right and went right around me.
It was absolutely mesmerizing.
Maybe many of you have had this experience.
Of course, there's the color and the beauty of it, but there was also just the sheer oneness of it, as if it wasn't hundreds of fish but a single entity with a single collective mind that was making decisions.
When I look back, I think that experience really ended up determining what I've worked on for most of my career.
I'm a computer scientist, and the field that I work in is artificial intelligence.
And a key theme in AI is being able to understand intelligence by creating our own computational systems that display intelligence the way we see it in nature.
Now, most popular views of AI, of course, come from science fiction and the movies, and I'm personally a big Star Wars fan.
But that tends to be a very human-centric view of intelligence.
When you think of a fish school, or when I think of a flock of starlings, that feels like a really different kind of intelligence.
For starters, any one fish is just so tiny compared to the sheer size of the collective, so it seems that any one individual would have a really limited and myopic view of what's going on, and intelligence isn't really about the individual but somehow a property of the group itself.
Secondly, and the thing that I still find most remarkable, is that we know that there are no leaders supervising this fish school.
Instead, this incredible collective mind behavior is emerging purely from the interactions of one fish and another.
Somehow, there are these interactions or rules of engagement between neighboring fish that make it all work out.
So the question for AI then becomes, what are those rules of engagement that lead to this kind of intelligence, and of course, can we create our own?
And that's the primary thing that I work on with my team in my lab.
We work on it through theory, looking at abstract rule systems and thinking about the mathematics behind it.
We also do it through biology, working closely with experimentalists.
But mostly, we do it through robotics, where we try to create our own collective systems that can do the kinds of things that we see in nature, or at least try to.
One of our first robotic quests along this line was to create our very own colony of a thousand robots.
So very simple robots, but they could be programmed to exhibit collective intelligence, and that's what we were able to do.
So this is what a single robot looks like.
It's quite small, about the size of a quarter, and you can program how it moves, but it can also wirelessly communicate with other robots, and it can measure distances from them.
And so now we can start to program exactly an interaction, a rule of engagement between neighbors.
And once we have this system, we can start to program many different kinds of rules of engagement that you would see in nature.
So for example, spontaneous synchronization, how audiences are clapping and suddenly start all clapping together, the fireflies flashing together.
We can program rules for pattern formation, how cells in a tissue determine what role they're going to take on and set the patterns of our bodies.
We can program rules for migration, and in this way, we're really learning from nature's rules.
But we can also take it a step further.
We can actually take these rules that we've learned from nature and combine them and create entirely new collective behaviors of our very own.
So for example, imagine that you had two different kinds of rules.
So your first rule is a motion rule where a moving robot can move around other stationary robots.
And your second rule is a pattern rule where a robot takes on a color based on its two nearest neighbors.
So if I start with a blob of robots in a little pattern seed, it turns out that these two rules are sufficient for the group to be able to self-assemble a simple line pattern.
And if I have more complicated pattern rules, and I design error correction rules, we can actually create really, really complicated self assemblies, and here's what that looks like.
So here, you're going to see a thousand robots that are working together to self-assemble the letter K.
The K is on its side.
And the important thing is that no one is in charge.
So any single robot is only talking to a small number of robots nearby it, and it's using its motion rule to move around the half-built structure just looking for a place to fit in based on its pattern rules.
And even though no robot is doing anything perfectly, the rules are such that we can get the collective to do its goal robustly together.
And the illusion becomes almost so perfect, you know -- you just start to not even notice that they're individual robots at all, and it becomes a single entity, kind of like the school of fish.
So these are robots and rules in two dimensions, but we can also think about robots and rules in three dimensions.
So what if we could create robots that could build together?
And here, we can take inspiration from social insects.
So if you think about mound-building termites or you think about army ants, they create incredible, complex nest structures out of mud and even out of their own bodies.
And like the system I showed you before, these insects actually also have pattern rules that help them determine what to build, but the pattern can be made out of other insects, or it could be made out of mud.
And we can use that same idea to create rules for robots.
So here, you're going to see some simulated robots.
So the simulated robot has a motion rule, which is how it traverses through the structure, looking for a place to fit in, and it has pattern rules where it looks at groups of blocks to decide whether to place a block.
And with the right motion rules and the right pattern rules, we can actually get the robots to build whatever we want.
And of course, everybody wants their own tower.
(Laughter) So once we have these rules, we can start to create the robot bodies that go with these rules.
So here, you see a robot that can climb over blocks, but it can also lift and move these blocks and it can start to edit the very structure that it's on.
But with these rules, this is really only one kind of robot body that you could imagine.
You could imagine many different kinds of robot bodies.
So if you think about robots that maybe could move sandbags and could help build levees, or we could think of robots that built out of soft materials and worked together to shore up a collapsed building -- so just the same kind of rules in different kinds of bodies.
Or if, like my group, you are completely obsessed with army ants, then maybe one day we can make robots that can climb over literally anything including other members of their tribe, and self-assemble things out of their own bodies.
Once you understand the rules, just many different kinds of robot visions become possible.
And coming back to the snorkeling trip, we actually understand a great deal about the rules that fish schools use.
So if we can invent the bodies to go with that, then maybe there is a future where I and my group will get to snorkel with a fish school of our own creation.
Each of these systems that I showed you brings us closer to having the mathematical and the conceptual tools to create our own versions of collective power, and this can enable many different kinds of future applications, whether you think about robots that build flood barriers or you think about robotic bee colonies that could pollinate crops or underwater schools of robots that monitor coral reefs, or if we reach for the stars and we thinking about programming constellations of satellites.
In each of these systems, being able to understand how to design the rules of engagement and being able to create good collective behavior becomes a key to realizing these visions.
So, so far I've talked about rules for insects and for fish and for robots, but what about the rules that apply to our own human collective?
And the last thought that I'd like to leave you with is that science is of course itself an incredible manifestation of collective intelligence, but unlike the beautiful fish schools that I study, I feel we still have a much longer evolutionary path to walk.
So in addition to working on improving the science of robot collectives, I also work on creating robots and thinking about rules that will improve our own scientific collective.
There's this saying that I love: who does science determines what science gets done.
Imagine a society where we had rules of engagement where every child grew up believing that they could stand here and be a technologist of the future, or where every adult believed that they had the ability not just to understand but to change how science and technology impacts their everyday lives.
What would that society look like?
I believe that we can do that.
I believe that we can choose our rules, and we engineer not just robots but we can engineer our own human collective, and if we do and when we do, it will be beautiful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today I'm here, actually, to pose you a question.
What is life?
It has been really puzzling me for more than 25 years, and will probably continue doing so for the next 25 years.
This is the thesis I did when I was still in undergraduate school.
While my colleagues still treated computers as big calculators, I started to teach computers to learn.
I built digital lady beetles and tried to learn from real lady beetles, just to do one thing: search for food.
And after very simple neural network -- genetic algorithms and so on -- look at the pattern.
They're almost identical to real life.
A very striking learning experience for a twenty-year-old.
Life is a learning program.
When you look at all of this wonderful world, every species has its own learning program.
The learning program is genome, and the code of that program is DNA.
The different genomes of each species represent different survival strategies.
They represent hundreds of millions of years of evolution.
The interaction between every species' ancestor and the environment.
I was really fascinated about the world, about the DNA, about, you know, the language of life, the program of learning.
So I decided to co-found the institute to read them.
I read many of them.
We probably read more than half of the prior animal genomes in the world.
I mean, up to date.
We did learn a lot.
We did sequence, also, one species many, many times ...
We sequenced the first Asian.
I sequenced it myself many, many times, just to take advantage of that platform.
Look at all those repeating base pairs: ATCG.
You don't understand anything there.
But look at that one base pair.
Those five letters, the AGGAA.
These five SNPs represent a very specific haplotype in the Tibetan population around the gene called EPAS1.
That gene has been proved -- it's highly selective -- it's the most significant signature of positive selection of Tibetans for the higher altitude adaptation.
You know what?
These five SNPs were the result of integration of Denisovans, or Denisovan-like individuals into humans.
This is the reason why we need to read those genomes.
To understand history, to understand what kind of learning process the genome has been through for the millions of years.
By reading a genome, it can give you a lot of information -- tells you the bugs in the genome -- I mean, birth defects, monogenetic disorders.
Reading a drop of blood could tell you why you got a fever, or it tells you which medicine and dosage needs to be used when you're sick, especially for cancer.
A lot of things could be studied, but look at that: 30 years ago, we were still poor in China.
Only .67 percent of the Chinese adult population had diabetes.
Look at now: 11 percent.
Genetics cannot change over 30 years -- only one generation.
It must be something different.
Diet?
The environment?
Lifestyle?
Even identical twins could develop totally differently.
It could be one becomes very obese, the other is not.
One develops a cancer and the other does not.
Not mentioning living in a very stressed environment.
I moved to Shenzhen 10 years ago ...
for some reason, people may know.
If the gene's under stress, it behaves totally differently.
Life is a journey.
A gene is just a starting point, not the end.
You have this statistical risk of certain diseases when you are born.
But every day you make different choices, and those choices will increase or decrease the risk of certain diseases.
But do you know where you are on the curve?
What's the past curve look like?
What kind of decisions are you facing every day?
And what kind of decision is the right one to make your own right curve over your life journey?
What's that?
The only thing you cannot change, you cannot reverse back, is time.
Probably not yet; maybe in the future.
(Laughter) Well, you cannot change the decision you've made, but can we do something there?
Can we actually try to run multiple options on me, and try to predict right on the consequence, and be able to make the right choice?
After all, we are our choices.
These lady beetles came to me afterwards.
25 years ago, I made the digital lady beetles to try to simulate real lady beetles.
Can I make a digital me ...
to simulate me?
I understand the neural network could become much more sophisticated and complicated there.
Can I make that one, and try to run multiple options on that digital me -- to compute that?
Then I could live in different universes, in parallel, at the same time.
Then I would choose whatever is good for me.
I probably have the most comprehensive digital me on the planet.
I've spent a lot of dollars on me, on myself.
And the digital me told me I have a genetic risk of gout by all of those things there.
You need different technology to do that.
You need the proteins, genes, you need metabolized antibodies, you need to screen all your body about the bacterias and viruses covering you, or in you.
You need to have all the smart devices there -- smart cars, smart house, smart tables, smart watch, smart phone to track all of your activities there.
The environment is important -- everything's important -- and don't forget the smart toilet.
(Laughter) It's such a waste, right?
Every day, so much invaluable information just has been flushed into the water.
And you need them.
You need to measure all of them.
You need to be able to measure everything around you and compute them.
And the digital me told me I have a genetic defect.
I have a very high risk of gout.
I don't feel anything now, I'm still healthy.
But look at my uric acid level.
It's double the normal range.
And the digital me searched all the medicine books, and it tells me, "OK, you could drink burdock tea" -- I cannot even pronounce it right -- (Laughter) That is from old Chinese wisdom.
And I drank that tea for three months.
My uric acid has now gone back to normal.
I mean, it worked for me.
All those thousands of years of wisdom worked for me.
I was lucky.
But I'm probably not lucky for you.
All of this existing knowledge in the world cannot possibly be efficient enough or personalized enough for yourself.
The only way to make that digital me work ...
is to learn from yourself.
You have to ask a lot of questions about yourself: "What if?" -- I'm being jet-lagged now here.
You don't probably see it, but I do.
What if I eat less?
When I took metformin, supposedly to live longer?
What if I climb Mt. Everest?
It's not that easy.
Or run a marathon?
What if I drink a bottle of mao-tai, which is a Chinese liquor, and I get really drunk?
I was doing a video rehearsal last time with the folks here, when I was drunk, and I totally delivered a different speech.
(Laughter) What if I work less, right?
I have been less stressed, right?
So that probably never happened to me, I was really stressed every day, but I hope I could be less stressed.
These early studies told us, even with the same banana, we have totally different glucose-level reactions over different individuals.
How about me?
What is the right breakfast for me?
I need to do two weeks of controlled experiments, of testing all kinds of different food ingredients on me, and check my body's reaction.
And I don't know the precise nutrition for me, for myself.
Then I wanted to search all the Chinese old wisdom about how I can live longer, and healthier.
I did it.
Some of them are really unachievable.
I did this once last October, by not eating for seven days.
I did a fast for seven days with six partners of mine.
Look at those people.
One smile.
You know why he smiled?
He cheated.
(Laughter) He drank one cup of coffee at night, and we caught it from the data.
(Laughter) We measured everything from the data.
We were able to track them, and we could really see -- for example, my immune system, just to give you a little hint there.
My immune system changed dramatically over 24 hours there.
And my antibody regulates my proteins for that dramatic change.
And everybody was doing that.
Even if we're essentially totally different at the very beginning.
And that probably will be an interesting treatment in the future for cancer and things like that.
It becomes very, very interesting.
But something you probably don't want to try, like drinking fecal water from a healthier individual, which will make you feel healthier.
This is from old Chinese wisdom.
Look at that, right?
Like 1,700 years ago, it's already there, in the book.
But I still hate the smell.
(Laughter) I want to find out the true way to do it, maybe find a combination of cocktails of bacterias and drink it, it probably will make me better.
So I'm trying to do that.
Even though I'm trying this hard, it's so difficult to test out all possible conditions.
It's not possible to do all kinds of experiments at all ...
but we do have seven billion learning programs on this planet.
Seven billion.
And every program is running in different conditions and doing different experiments.
Can we all measure them?
Seven years ago, I wrote an essay in "Science" to celebrate the human genome's 10-year anniversary.
I said, "Sequence yourself, for one and for all."
But now I'm going to say, "Digitalize yourself for one and for all."
When we make this digital me into a digital we, when we try to form an internet of life, when people can learn from each other, when people can learn from their experience, their data, when people can really form a digital me by themselves and we learn from it, the digital we will be totally different with a digital me.
But it can only come from the digital me.
And this is what I try to propose here.
Join me -- become we, and everybody should build up their own digital me, because only by that will you learn more about you, about me, about us ...
about the question I just posed at the very beginning: "What is life?"
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: One quick question for you.
I mean, the work is amazing.
I suspect one question people have is, as we look forward to these amazing technical possibilities of personalized medicine, in the near-term it feels like they're only going to be affordable for a few people, right?
It costs many dollars to do all the sequencing and so forth.
Is this going to lead to a kind of, you know, increasing inequality?
Or do you have this vision that the knowledge that you get from the pioneers can actually be pretty quickly disseminated to help a broader set of recipients?
Jun Wang: Well, good question.
I'll tell you that seven years ago, when I co-founded BGI, and served as the CEO of the company there, the only goal there for me to do was to drive the sequencing cost down.
It started from 100 million dollars per human genome.
Now, it's a couple hundred dollars for a human genome.
The only reason to do it is to get more people to benefit from it.
So for the digital me, it's the same thing.
Now, you probably need, you know, one million dollars to digitize a person.
I think it has to be 100 dollars.
It has to be free for many of those people that urgently need that.
So this is our goal.
And it seems that with all this merging of the technology, I'm thinking that in the very near future, let's say three to five years, it will come to reality.
And this is the whole idea of why I founded iCarbonX, my second company.
It's really trying to get the cost down to a level where every individual could have the benefit.
CA: All right, so the dream is not elite health services for few, it's to really try and actually make overall health care much more cost effective -- JW: But we started from some early adopters, people believing ideas and so on, but eventually, it will become everybody's benefit.
CA: Well, Jun, I think it's got to be true to say you're one of the most amazing scientific minds on the planet, and it's an honor to have you.
JW: Thank you.
(Applause)
Back home, my friends call me nicknames, such as "The Giant Clam Girl," "Clam Queen," or, "The Mother of Clams."
(Laughter) This is because every time I see them, I talk nonstop about giant clams all day, every day.
Giant clams are these massive and colorful shelled marine animals, the largest of its kind.
Just look at this shell.
The biggest recorded individual was four-and-a-half-feet long and weighed about 550 pounds.
That is almost as heavy as three baby elephants.
South Pacific legends once described giant clams as man-eaters that would lie in wait on the seabed to trap unsuspecting divers.
A story goes that a diver had lost his legs while trying to retrieve a pearl from a giant clam.
I thought, "Really?"
So out of curiosity, I did an experiment using myself as bait.
(Laughter) I carefully placed my hand into the clam's mouth and waited.
Hmm ...
I still have my hand.
It seems that these gentle giants would rather retreat and protect their fleshy bodies than feed on me.
So much for those killer clam myths!
Unfortunately, the reality is, we are the giant clams' biggest threat.
Considered a delicacy throughout the Western Pacific and Indian Oceans, giant clams have been traditionally fished as seafood.
Fishermen are particularly interested in their adductor muscles, which are organs that hold the two shells together like a hinge.
Just for their muscles, giant clams were almost hunted to extinction between the 1960s and 1980s.
Clamshells are also popular in the ornamental trade as jewelry and for display.
In the South China Sea, fishermen went out of their way to collect fossilized clamshells by digging through large areas of coral reefs.
These were later carved and sold as so-called "ivory handicrafts" in China.
Giant clams, dead or alive, are not safe from us.
It's a "clamity!"
(Laughter) (Applause) With the spotlight on more charismatic marine animals such as the whales and coral reefs, it is easy to forget that other marine life needs our help, too.
My fascination with giant clams got me started on conservation research to fill in the knowledge gaps on their ecology and behavior.
One of the discoveries that we made was that giant clams could walk across the seafloor.
Yes, you heard me right: they can walk.
To find out, we placed numerous baby clams on a grid.
Now watch what happens over 24 hours.
We think that walking is important for getting away from predators and finding mates for breeding.
While it can hard to imagine any movement in these enormous animals, giant clams up to 400 pounds can still walk, they just move slower.
During my PhD, I discovered more secrets about the giant clams.
But there was something missing in my work.
I found myself asking, "Why should people care about conserving giant clams?" -- other than myself, of course.
(Laughter) It turns out that giant clams have a giant impact on coral reefs.
These multitasking clams are reef builders, food factories, shelters for shrimps and crabs and water filters, all rolled into one.
In a nutshell, giant clams play a major contributing role as residents of their own reef home, and just having them around keeps the reef healthy.
And because they can live up to 100 years old, giant clams make vital indicators of coral reef health.
So when giant clams start to disappear from coral reefs, their absence can serve as an alarm bell for scientists to start paying attention, similar to the canary in a coal mine.
But giant clams are endangered.
The largest clam in the world is facing the threat of extinction, with more than 50 percent of the wild population severely depleted.
And the ecological benefits of having giant clams on coral reefs are likely to continue only if populations are healthy, making their conservation paramount.
So I stand here today to give a voice to the giant clams, because I care a whole lot for these amazing animals, and they deserve to be cared for.
It is time for the giant clams to step out of their shells, and show the world that they, too, can be the heroes of the oceans.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Cities are like siblings in a large polygamous family.
Each one has a unique personality and is headed in a distinct direction.
But they all have somewhat shared origins.
Sometimes I think postcolonial cities are like the children of the two least-favorite wives, who are constantly being asked, "Ah, why can't you be more like your sister?"
(Laughter) The "why" of cities is largely the same, no matter where they are: an advantageous location that makes trade and administration possible; the potential for scalable opportunities for the skilled and unskilled alike; a popular willingness to be in constant flux and, of course, resilience.
The "how" of cities, however, is a whole other story.
How are they run?
How do they grow?
How do they decide who belongs and who doesn't?
Lagos is my home.
You can always find the Nigerians by following the noise and the dancing, right?
(Laughter) Like any major city, that place is a lot of things, many of which are highly contradictory.
Our public transportation doesn't quite work, so we have these privately owned bright yellow buses that regularly cause accidents.
Luxury car showrooms line badly maintained and often flooded roads.
Street evangelism is only slightly less ubiquitous than street harassment.
Sex workers sometimes have two degrees, a bank job and a prominent role in church.
(Laughter) On any given day, there can be either a party or a burned body in the middle of a street.
There is so much that is possible in Lagos and so much that isn't, and very often the difference between possibility and impossibility is simply who you are, and if you're lucky enough, who you're connected to.
Belonging in Lagos is a fluid concept determined by ethnic origin, sexual orientation, gender, but most visibly and often most violently, class.
Before Nigeria became a country, fisherpeople from the inland creeks started to come down the Lagos lagoon and establish villages along the coast.
About 60 years later, my grandfather, Oludotun Adekunle Kukoyi, also arrived in Lagos.
Like me, he was an alumnus of the University of Ibadan, a young member of the educated elite in the independence era.
Over time, he built an illustrious career as a land surveyor, mapping out now-bustling neighborhoods when they were just waist-high wild grass.
He died when I was nine.
And by that time, my family, like the families of those fisherpeople, knew Lagos as home.
Among the Yoruba, we have a saying, "Èkó gb’olè, ó gb’ọ̀lẹ," which can be translated to mean that Lagos will welcome anyone.
But that saying is becoming less and less true.
Many Lagosians, including the descendants of those fisherpeople who arrived generations before my grandfather, are now being pushed out to make room for an emergent city that has been described as "the new Dubai."
You see, Lagos inspires big dreams, even in its leaders, and successive governments have declared aspirations towards a megacity where poverty does not exist.
Unfortunately, instead of focusing on the eradication of poverty as you would expect, the strategy of choice focuses on eliminating the poor.
Last October, the Governor announced plans to demolish every single waterfront settlement in Lagos.
There are more than 40 of these indigenous communities all over the city, with over 300,000 people living in them.
Otodo Gbame, a hundred-year-old fishing village with a population about three-quarters that of Monaco and similar potential for beachfront luxury -- (Laughter) was one of the first to be targeted.
I first heard of Otodo Gbame after the demolition started.
When I visited in November 2016, I met Magdalene Aiyefoju.
She is a now-homeless woman whose surname means, "the world is blind."
Magdalene's son Basil was one of over 20 people who were shot, drowned or presumed dead in that land grab.
Standing outside her shelter, I saw the two white-sand football fields where Basil used to play.
Spread all around us were the ruins of schools, churches, a primary health center, shops, thousands of homes.
Young children enthusiastically helped to put up shelters, and about 5,000 of the residents, with nowhere else to go, simply stayed put.
And then in April, state security personnel came back.
This time, they cleared the community out completely, with beatings, bullets and fire.
As I speak, there are construction crews preparing Otodo Gbame's beaches for anyone who can afford a multi-million-dollar view.
The new development is called "Periwinkle Estate."
Forced evictions are incredibly violent and, of course, unconstitutional.
And yet, they happen so often in so many of our cities, because the first thing we are taught to forget about poor people is that they are people.
We believe that a home is a thing a person absolutely has a right to, unless the person is poor and the home is built a certain way in a certain neighborhood.
But there is no single definition of the word "home."
After all, what is a slum besides an organic response to acute housing deficits and income inequality?
And what is a shanty if not a person making a home for themselves against all odds?
Slums are an imperfect housing solution, but they are also prime examples of the innovation, adaptability and resilience at the foundation -- and the heart -- of every functional city.
You don't need to be the new Dubai when you're already Lagos.
(Applause) We have our own identity, our own rhythm, and as anyone who knows Lagos can tell you, poor Lagosians are very often the source of the city's character.
Without its poor, Lagos would not be known for its music or its endless energy or even the fact that you can buy an ice cold drink or a puppy through your car window.
(Laughter) The conditions that cause us to define certain neighborhoods as slums can be effectively improved, but not without recognizing the humanity and the agency of the people living in them.
In Lagos, where public goods are rarely publicly available, slum dwellers are often at the forefront of innovating solutions.
After being disconnected from the grid for months because the power company couldn't figure out how to collect bills, one settlement designed a system that collectivized remittances and got everyone cheaper rates into the bargain.
Another settlement created a reform program that hires local bad boys as security.
They know every trick and every hideout, so now troublemakers are more likely to get caught and reported to police and fewer of the youth end up engaging in criminal activity.
Yet another settlement recently completed a flood-safe, eco-friendly communal toilet system.
Models like these are being adopted across Lagos.
Informal settlements are incorrectly named as the problem.
In fact, the real problems are the factors that create them, like the entrenchment of poverty, social exclusion and state failures.
When our governments frame slums as threats in order to justify violent land grabs or forced evictions, they're counting on those of us who live in formal housing to tacitly and ignorantly agree with them.
Rather, we must remind them that governments exist to serve not only those who build and live in luxury homes, but also those who clean and guard them.
Our -- (Applause) our realities may differ, but our rights don't.
The Lagos state government, like far too many on our continent, pays lip service to ideas of inclusion, while acting as though progress can only be achieved by the erasure, exploitation and even elimination of groups it considers expendable.
People living with disabilities who hawk or beg on Lagos streets are rounded up, extorted and detained.
Women in low-income neighborhoods are picked up and charged with prostitution, regardless of what they actually do for a living.
Gay citizens are scapegoated to distract from real political problems.
But people, like cities, are resilient, and no amount of legislation or intimidation or violence can fully eliminate any of us.
Prostitutes, women and women who work as prostitutes still haven't gone extinct, despite centuries of active suppression.
Queer Africans continue to exist, even though queerness is now criminalized in most parts of the continent.
And I'm fairly certain that poor people don't generally tend to just disappear because they've been stripped of everything they have.
We are all already here, and that answers the question of whether or not we belong.
When those fisherpeople started to sail down the lagoon in search of new homes, it could not have occurred to them that the city that would rise up around them would one day insist that they do not belong in it.
I like to believe that my grandfather, in mapping new frontiers for Lagos, was trying to open it up to make room for other people to be welcomed by the city in the same way that he was.
On my way here, my grandma called me to remind me how proud she was, how proud [my grandfather] and my mother would have been.
I am their dreams come true.
But there is no reason why their dreams -- or mine, for that matter -- are allowed to come true while those of others are turned to nightmares.
And lest we forget: the minimum requirement for a dream is a safe place to lay your head.
It is too late now for Basil, but not for Magdalene, not for the hundreds of thousands, the millions still under threat in Lagos or any of our cities.
The world does not have to remain blind to the suffering that is created when we deny people's humanity, or even to the incredible potential for growth that exists when we recognize and value all contributions.
We must hold our governments and ourselves accountable for keeping our shared cities safe for everyone in them, because the only cities worth building -- indeed, the only futures worth dreaming of -- are those that include all of us, no matter who we are or how we make homes for ourselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I teach college students about inequality and race in education, and I like to leave my office open to any of my students who might just want to see me to chat.
And a few semesters ago, one of my more cheerful students, Mahari, actually came to see me and mentioned that he was feeling a bit like an outcast because he's black.
He had just transferred to NYU from a community college on a merit scholarship, and turns out, only about five percent of students at NYU are black.
And so I started to remember that I know that feeling of being an outsider in your own community.
It's partially what drew me to my work.
At my university, I'm one of the few faculty members of color, and growing up, I experienced my family's social mobility, moving out of apartments into a nice house, but in an overwhelmingly white neighborhood.
I was 12, and kids would say that were surprised that I didn't smell like curry.
(Laughter) That's because school is in the morning, and I had Eggo waffles for breakfast.
(Laughter) Curry is for dinner.
(Laughter) So when Mahari was leaving, I asked him how he was coping with feeling isolated.
And he said that despite feeling lonely, he just threw himself at his work, that he built strategies around his grit and his desire to be successful.
A mentor of mine is actually Dr. Angela Duckworth, the psychologist at UPenn who has defined this stick-to-itiveness of grit as being "the perseverance and passion for long-term goals."
Angela's book has become a bestseller, and schools across the country, particularly charter schools, have become interested in citing "grit" as a core value.
But sometimes grit isn't enough, especially in education.
So when Mahari was leaving my office, I worried that he might need something more specific to combat the challenges that he mentioned to me.
As a sociologist, I also study achievement, but from a slightly different perspective.
I research students who have overcome immense obstacles related to their background.
Students from low-income, often single-parent households, students who have been homeless, incarcerated or perhaps undocumented, or some who have struggled with substance abuse or lived through violent or sexual trauma.
So let me tell you about two of the grittiest people I've met.
Tyrique was raised by a single mother, and then after high school, he fell in with the wrong crowd.
He got arrested for armed robbery.
But in prison, he started to work hard.
He took college credit courses, so when he got out, he was able to get a master's, and today he's a manager at a nonprofit.
Vanessa had to move around a lot as a kid, from the Lower East Side to Staten Island to the Bronx.
She was raised primarily by her extended family, because her own mother had a heroin addiction.
Yet at 15, Vanessa had to drop out of school, and she had a son of her own.
But eventually, she was able to go to community college, get her associate's, then go to an elite college to finish her bachelor's.
So some people might hear these stories and say, "Yes, those two definitely have grit.
They basically pulled themselves up by the bootstraps."
But that's an incomplete picture, because what's more important is that they had factors in their lives that helped to influence their agency, or their specific capacity to actually overcome the obstacles that they were facing and navigate the system given their circumstances.
So, allow me to elaborate.
In prison, Tyrique was actually aimless at first, as a 22-year-old on Rikers Island.
This is until an older detainee took him aside and asked him to help with the youth program.
And in mentoring youth, he started to see his own mistakes and possibilities in the teens.
This is what got him interested in taking college-credit courses.
And when he got out, he got a job with Fortune Society, where many executives are people who have been formerly incarcerated.
So then he was able to get a master's in social work, and today, he even lectures at Columbia about prison reform.
And Vanessa ...
well, after the birth of her son, she happened to find a program called Vocational Foundation that gave her 20 dollars biweekly, a MetroCard and her first experiences with a computer.
These simple resources are what helped her get her GED, but then she suffered from a very serious kidney failure, which was particularly problematic because she was only born with one kidney.
She spent 10 years on dialysis waiting for a successful transplant.
After that, her mentors at community college had kept in touch with her, and so she was able to go, and they put her in an honors program.
And that's the pathway that allowed her to become accepted to one of the most elite colleges for women in the country, and she received her bachelor's at 36, setting an incredible example for her young son.
What these stories primarily indicate is that teaching is social and benefits from social scaffolding.
There were factors pushing these two in one direction, but through tailored mentorship and opportunities, they were able to reflect on their circumstances and resist negative influences.
They also learned simple skills like developing a network, or asking for help -- things many of us in this room can forget that we have needed from time to time, or can take for granted.
And when we think of people like this, we should only think of them as exceptional, but not as exceptions.
Thinking of them as exceptions absolves us of the collective responsibility to help students in similar situations.
When Presidents Bush, Obama and now even Trump, have called education "the civil rights issue of our time," perhaps we should treat it that way.
If schools were able to think about the agency that their students have and bring to the table when they push them, what students learn can become more relevant to their lives, and then they can tap into those internal reservoirs of grit and character.
So this here -- My student Mahari got accepted to law school with scholarships, and not to brag, but I did write one of his letters of recommendation.
(Laughter) And even though I know hard work is what got him this achievement, I've seen him find his voice along the way, which as someone who's grown up a little bit shy and awkward, I know it takes time and support.
So even though he will rely a lot on his grit to get him through that first-year law school grind, I'll be there as a mentor for him, check in with him from time to time, maybe take him out to get some curry ...
(Laughter) so that he can keep growing his agency to succeed even more.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Caitlin Quattromani: The election of 2016 felt different.
Political conversations with our family and friends uncovered a level of polarization that many of us had not previously experienced.
People who we always thought were reasonable and intelligent seemed like strangers.
We said to ourselves, "How could you think that?
I thought you were smart."
Lauran Arledge: Caitlin and I met in the summer of 2011, and we bonded around being working moms and trying to keep our very energetic boys busy.
And we soon found out we had almost everything in common.
From our love of Colorado to our love of sushi, there wasn't much we didn't agree on.
We also discovered that we share a deep love of this country and feel a responsibility to be politically active.
But no one's perfect -- (Laughter) and I soon found out two disappointing things about Caitlin.
First, she hates camping.
CQ: I think camping is the worst.
LA: So there would not be any joint camping trips in our future.
The second thing is that she's politically active all right -- as a conservative.
CQ: I may hate camping, but I love politics.
I listen to conservative talk radio just about every day, and I've volunteered for a few different conservative political campaigns.
LA: And I'd say I'm a little to the left, like all the way to the left.
(Laughter) I've always been interested in politics.
I was a political science major, and I worked as a community organizer and on a congressional campaign.
CQ: So as Lauran and I were getting to know each other, it was right in the middle of that 2012 presidential campaign, and most of our early political conversations were really just based in jokes and pranks.
So as an example, I would change Lauran's computer screen saver to a picture of Mitt Romney, or she would put an Obama campaign magnet on the back of my car.
(Laughter) LA: Car, not minivan.
CQ: But over time, those conversations grew more serious and really became a core of our friendship.
And somewhere along the line, we decided we didn't want to have any topic be off limits for discussion, even if those topics pushed us way outside of our friendship comfort zone.
LA: And so to most of us, political conversations are a zero-sum game.
There's a winner and there's a loser.
We go for the attack and we spot a weakness in someone's argument.
And here's the important part: we tend to take every comment or opinion that's expressed as a personal affront to our own values and beliefs.
But what if changed the way we think about these conversations?
What if, in these heated moments, we chose dialogue over debate?
When we engage in dialogue, we flip the script.
We replace our ego and our desire to win with curiosity, empathy and a desire to learn.
Instead of coming from a place of judgment, we are genuinely interested in the other person's experiences, their values and their concerns.
CQ: You make it sound so simple, Lauran.
But getting to that place of true dialogue is hard, especially when we're talking about politics.
It is so easy to get emotionally fired up about issues that we're passionate about, and we can let our ego get in the way of truly hearing the other person's perspective.
And in this crazy political climate we're in right now, unfortunately, we're seeing an extreme result of those heated political conversations, to the point where people are willing to walk away from their relationships.
In fact, Rasmussen released a poll earlier this year that said 40 percent of people reported that the 2016 election negatively impacted a personal relationship, and the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience tells us that people tend to feel their way to their beliefs rather than using reasoning, and that when reason and emotion collide, it's emotion that invariably wins.
So no wonder it's hard to talk about these issues.
LA: And look, we're just two regular friends who happen to think very differently about politics and the role that government should play in our lives.
And I know we were all taught not to talk about politics because it's not polite, but we need to be able to talk about it, because it's important to us and it's a part of who we are.
CQ: We have chosen to avoid political debate and instead engage in dialogue in order to maintain what we fondly call our bipartisan friendship.
(Laughter) LA: And this election and all of the craziness that has followed has given us several opportunities to practice this skill.
(Laughter) Let's start with January and the Women's March.
At this point, you can probably guess which one of us participated.
(Laughter) CQ: Oh, the Women's March.
I was annoyed and irritated that entire day, really because of two things.
Number one, the name "Women's March."
As a conservative woman, the march's platform of issues didn't represent me, and that's OK, but hearing it talked about as this demonstration of sisterhood and solidarity for all women didn't ring true for me.
The other piece was the timing of the event, the fact that it was the day after the presidential inauguration.
It felt like we weren't even giving the new administration to actually do anything, good or bad, before people felt the need to demonstrate against it.
LA: And under normal circumstances, I would agree with Caitlin.
I think an administration does deserve the benefit of the doubt.
But in this case, I was marching to show my concern that a man with such a poor track record with women and other groups had been elected as president.
I had to be part of the collective voice that wanted to send a clear message to the new president that we did not accept or condone his behavior or rhetoric during the election.
CQ: So I'm already feeling kind of aggravated, and then I see this Facebook from Lauran pop up in my social media feed.
(Laughter) Seeing Lauran's sons at the march and holding signs took it to a new level for me, and not in a good way, because I know these boys, I love these boys, and I didn't feel they were old enough to understand what the march stood for.
I didn't understand why Lauran would choose to have them participate in that way, and I assumed it wasn't a choice that the boys made for themselves.
But I also know Lauran.
You're an incredible mom who would never exploit your boys in any way, so I had to stop and check myself.
I had a decision to make.
I could take the easy way out and just choose not to say anything to her, and instead just kind of simmer in my frustration, or I could ask her to learn more about her motivations.
LA: And I shared with Caitlin that we actually started talking about the March weeks before we participated.
And my boys were curious as to why the event was being organized, and this led to some very interesting family conversations.
We talked about how in this country, we have the right and the privilege to demonstrate against something we don't agree with, and my husband shared with them why he thought it was so important that men joined the Women's March.
But the most significant reason we marched as a family is that it was a way for us to honor my parents' legacy.
They spent their careers working to defend the rights of some of our most vulnerable citizens, and they passed these values down to me and my brother, and we want to do the same with our sons.
CQ: After talking to Lauran, I really understood not only why she felt it was so important to march, but why she had her boys with her.
And frankly, my assumptions were wrong.
It was the boys who wanted to march after they talked about the issues as a family.
But what's most important about this example is to think about the alternative.
Had Lauran and I not talked about it, I would have been annoyed with her, and it could have resulted in an undercurrent of disrespect in our friendship.
But by asking Lauran questions, it allowed us to use dialogue to get to a place of true understanding.
Now, to be clear, our conversation didn't really change my mind about how I felt about the March, but it absolutely changed my thinking around why she brought her boys with her.
And for both of us, that dialogue allowed us to understand each other's perspective about the Women's March even though we disagreed.
LA: The second topic that challenged our ability to engage in dialogue was around my need to understand how Caitlin could vote for Trump.
(Laughter) Caitlin is a successful professional woman who is deeply caring and compassionate, and the Caitlin I know would never excuse any man from talking about women the way that Trump did during the campaign.
It was hard for me to reconcile these two things in my mind.
How could you overlook the things that were said?
CQ: So I'm guessing I may not be the only one here that thought we didn't have the best choices for the presidential election last year.
(Laughter) The Republican candidate who I did support didn't make it out of the primary, so when it came time to vote, I had a decision to make.
And you're right, there were some terrible things that came out during the Trump campaign, so much so that I almost decided to just abstain rather than voting for president, something I had never even considered doing before.
But ultimately, I did vote for Donald Trump, and for me it was really a vote for party over person, especially recognizing how important that presidential pick is on influencing our judicial branch.
But I shared with Lauran it was a decision I really wrestled with, and not one that I made lightly.
LA: And so after our conversation, I was struck by a few things.
First, I had fallen victim to my own confirmation bias.
Because of my strong feelings about Trump, I had given all Trump voters the same attributes, and none of them forgiving.
(Laughter) But knowing Caitlin, I started to ask questions.
What were Trump voters really concerned about?
Under all the divisive language, what was really going on?
What could we learn about ourselves and our country from this unlikely event?
I also learned that we shared a deep disappointment in this election, and that we have growing concerns about our two-party political system.
But the most important thing about this conversation is that it happened at all.
Without an open and honest dialogue between the two of us, this election would have been the elephant in the room for the next four years, pun intended.
(Laughter) CQ: So, look -- (Applause) So, look -- we know it takes work to get past the difficult, frustrating and sometimes emotional parts of having discussions about issues like the Women's March or why your friend may have voted for a candidate that you can't stand.
But we need to have these conversations.
Our ability to move past political debate into true dialogue is a critical skill we should all be focused on right now, especially with the people that we care about the most.
LA: And it's not just as adults that we need to bottle this behavior.
It's critical that we do it for our children as well.
My sons were inundated with this election.
We were listening to the news in the morning, and they were having conversations with their friends at school.
I was concerned that they were picking up so much polarizing misinformation, and they were growing really fearful of a Trump presidency.
Then one day, after the election, I was taking my sons to school, and my younger son, completely out of the blue, said, "Mom, we don't know anybody who voted for Trump, right?"
(Laughter) And I paused and I took a deep breath.
"Yes, we do."
(Laughter) "The Quattromanis."
And his response was so great.
He kind of got this confused look on his face, and he said ...
"But we love them."
(Laughter) And I answered, "Yes, we do."
(Laughter) And then he said, "Why would they vote for him?"
And I remember stopping and thinking that it was really important how I answered this question.
Somehow, I had to honor our own family values and show respect for our friends.
So I finally said, "They think that's the right direction for this country."
And before I had even gotten the whole sentence out, he had moved on to the soccer game he was going to play at recess.
CQ: So life with boys.
(Laughter) So what Lauran and I have discovered through our bipartisan friendship is the possibility that lives in dialogue.
We have chosen to be genuinely curious about each other's ideas and perspectives and to be willing to listen to one another even when we disagree.
And by putting aside our ego and our preconceived ideas, we've opened ourselves up to limitless learning.
And perhaps most importantly for our relationship, we have made the commitment to each other that our friendship is way more important than either of us being right or winning a conversation about politics.
So today, we're asking you to have a conversation.
Talk to someone outside of your political party who might challenge your thinking.
Make an effort to engage with someone with whom you might typically avoid a political conversation.
But remember, the goal isn't to win, the goal is to listen and to understand and to be open to learning something new.
LA: So let's go back to election night.
As the polls were closing and it became clear that Trump was going to be our new president, I was devastated.
I was sad, I was confused, and I'll be honest -- I was angry.
And then just before midnight, I received this text message from Caitlin.
[I know this is a hard night for you guys.
We are thinking of you. Love you.] And where there so easy could have been weeks or months of awkwardness and unspoken hostility, there was this -- an offering of empathy rooted in friendship.
And I knew, in that moment, that we would make it through this.
CQ: So we must find a way to engage in meaningful conversations that are going to move us forward as a nation, and we can no longer wait for our elected officials to elevate our national discourse.
LA: The challenges ahead are going to require all of us to participate in a deeper and more meaningful way ...
and it starts with each one of us building connection through dialogue -- in our relationships, our communities and as a country.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today, more than half of the world's population lives in cities.
The urbanization process started in the late 1700s and has been increasing since then.
The prediction is that by 2050, 66 percent of the population will live in cities and the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the World Economic Forum, are warning us, if we don't plan for the increased density, current problems in our cities, like inequality, congestion, crime can only get worse.
As a result, urban planners and city developers are putting a lot of effort and creativity in designing our future, denser, bigger cities.
But I have a different opinion.
I think urbanization is actually reaching the end of its cycle, and now people are going to start moving back to the countryside.
And you may think, "But what about the trend?"
Well, let me tell you, socioeconomic trends don't last forever.
You know, 12,000 years ago everybody was perfectly happy roaming the land, hunting and gathering.
And then, the trend changes, and the new thing is to live in a farm and have cattle, until it changes again.
When we get to the industrial revolution.
Actually, that is what started the urbanization process.
And you know what triggered it?
Steam power, machines, new chemical processes -- in two words, technological innovation.
And I believe technology can also bring the end of this cycle.
I've been working on innovation for most of my career.
I love it. I love my job.
It allows me to work with drones, with 3D printers and smart glasses, and not just those you can buy in the shop but also prototypes.
It's a lot of fun sometimes.
Now, some of these technologies are opening new possibilities that will radically change the way we did things before and in a few years, they may allow us to enjoy the benefits of city life from anywhere.
Think about it.
If you could live in a place with a lower crime rate and more space and a lower cost of living and less traffic, of course many people would want that, but they feel they don't have a choice.
You have to live in the city.
Well, in the past, people moved to the cities not because they loved the city itself but for the things you could have in a city, more job opportunities, easier access to services and goods and a rich social life.
So let's dive deeper.
More jobs and career opportunities.
Is that still true today, because the office people are starting to realize that working in the office and being in the office may not be the same thing anymore.
According to a study by Global Workplace Analytics, more than 80 percent of the US workforce would like to work from home.
And do you know how much it costs for a company to even have an office?
11,000 dollars per employee per year.
If only half of those workers would telework even 50 percent of the time, the savings in the states would exceed 500 billion dollars, and it could reduce greenhouse gases by 54 million tons.
That is the equivalent of 10 million cars off the streets for a whole year.
But even though most people would want to telework, current technology makes the experience isolating.
It's not comfortable.
It doesn't feel like being there.
But that is going to change by the convergence of two technologies: augmented reality and telepresence robots.
Augmented reality already today allows you to take your office environment everywhere with you.
All you need is a wearable computer, a pair of smart glasses, and you can take your emails and your spreadsheets with you wherever you go.
And video conferences and video calls have become very common these days, but they still need improvement.
I mean, all those little faces on a flat screen, sometimes you don't even know who is talking.
Now, we already have something way better than static videocalls: your average telepresence robot.
I call it tablet on a stick.
(Laughter) You can control, you can move around, you can control what you're looking at.
It's way better, but far from perfect.
You know how they say that most human communication is nonverbal?
Well, the robot doesn't give you any of that.
It looks like an alien.
But with advances in augmented reality, it will be easy to wrap the robot in a nice hologram that actually looks and moves like a person.
That will do it.
Or else, forget the robot.
We go full VR, and everybody meets in cyberspace.
Give it a couple of years and that will feel so real, you won't tell the difference.
So what was the next reason why people move to cities?
Access to services and goods.
But today you can do all that online.
According to a study made by comScore, online shoppers in the US last year did more than half of their retail purchases online, and the global market for e-commerce is estimated to be at two trillion dollars.
And it's expected to reach 2.38 by the end of 2017, according to eMarketer.
Now, from a logistics standpoint, density is good for deliveries.
Supplying goods to a shopping mall is easy.
You can send big shipments to the shop, and people will go there, pick it up and take it home themselves.
E-commerce means we need to ship onesies and have them home delivered.
That's more expensive.
It's like the difference between having a birthday party for 20 people or bringing a piece of the cake to each of your 20 friends at their place.
But at least in the city, they live close to each other.
Density helps.
Now, e-commerce deliveries in the countryside, those take forever.
The truck sometimes needs to drive miles between one address and the next one.
Those are the most expensive deliveries of all.
But we already have a solution for that: drones.
A vehicle carrying a squadron of drones.
The driver does some of the deliveries while the drones are flying back and forth from the truck as it moves.
That way, the average cost for delivery is reduced, and voila: affordable e-commerce services in the countryside.
You will see: the new homes of our teleworkers will probably have a drone pod in the yard.
So once the final mile delivery is not a problem, you don't need to be in the city to buy things anymore.
So that's two.
Now, what was the third reason why people move to cities?
A rich social life.
They would need to be in the city for that these days.
Because people these days, they make friends, they chat, gossip and flirt from the comfort of their sofa.
(Laughter) And while wearing their favorite pajamas.
(Laughter) There are over two billion active social media users in the world.
In a way, that makes you think like we are connected no matter where we are.
But OK, not completely.
Sometimes you still need some real human contact.
Ironically, the city, with its population density, is not always the best for that.
Actually, as social groups become smaller, they grow stronger.
A recent study made in the UK by the Office for National Statistics showed a higher life satisfaction rating among people living in rural areas.
So as people settle in the countryside, well, they will buy local groceries, fresh groceries, foodstuff, maintenance services.
So handymen, small workshops, service companies will thrive.
Maybe some of the industrial workers from the cities displaced by the automation will find a nice alternative job here, and they will move too.
And as people move to the countryside, how is that going to be?
Think about autonomous, off-the-grid houses with solar panels, with wind turbines and waste recycling utilities, our new homes producing their own energy and using it to also power the family car.
I mean, cities have always been regarded as being more energy-efficient, but let me tell you, repopulating the countryside can be eco too.
By now, you're probably thinking of all the advantages of country living.
(Laughter) I did it myself.
Six years ago, my wife and I, we packed our stuff, we sold our little apartment in Spain, and for the same money we bought a house with a garden and little birds that come singing in the morning.
(Laughter) It's so nice there.
And we live in a small village, not really the countryside yet.
That is going to be my next move: a refurbished farmhouse, not too far from a city, not too close.
And now we'll make sure to have a good spot for drones to land.
(Laughter) But hey, that's me.
It doesn't have to be you, because it would seem like I'm trying to convince somebody to come join us in the country.
I'm not.
(Laughter) I don't need more people to come.
(Laughter) I just think they will once they realize they can have the same benefits the city has.
But if you don't like the country, I have good news for you, too.
Cities will not disappear.
But as people move out, a lower density will help them recover a better flow and balance.
Anyway, I guess now you have some thinking to do.
Do you still think you need to live in the city?
And more importantly, do you want to?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
It was the end of October in the mountains in Austria.
I was there on a field trip with my architecture students from Zurich.
And when we reached a high valley, I surprised them with the news that there was no hut or hotel booked for the night.
It was not a mistake.
It was totally on purpose.
The challenge was to build our own shelter with whatever we could find.
And we all survived.
It was cold, it was really tough ...
and it was a great learning experience to discover that there are a lot of resources given by nature for free, and all that we need is our sensitivity to see them ...
and our creativity to use them.
I found myself in a similar situation.
When I was an architecture student about 13 years ago, I went to Bangladesh to a remote village called Rudrapur with the aim to design and build a school as my thesis project.
I had lived in that village before when I was 19 and a volunteer at Dipshikha, a Bangladeshi NGO for rural development.
And what I had learned from them was that the most sustainable strategy for sustainable development is to cherish and to use your very own resources and potential, and not get dependent on external factors.
And this is what I tried to do with my architecture as well.
In terms of suitable building materials for my school, I didn't have to look far.
They were right under my feet: mud, earth, dirt, clay, however you call it ...
and bamboo that was growing all around.
Electricity in remote Bangladesh is rare, but we didn't need it.
We had human energy and the people were happy to have the work.
Tools were an issue, too, but we had these guys, water buffalos.
We had also tried a bit cows, but interestingly, they were too intelligent.
They were always stepping in the holes of the previous round.
They wouldn't mix the mud, the straw -- (Laughter) the sand, which are the ingredients in the walls.
And except a small team of consultants like my partner for realization, Eike Roswag, and my basket-weaver cousin, Emmanuel, it was all built by craftsmen from the village.
And this is the METI school after six months of construction.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Load-bearing earth walls that really ground the school, and large bamboo structures that bring the lightness in.
That's the classroom on the ground floor.
Attached to it are the caves.
They're for reading, for snuggling, for solo work, for meditation, for playing ...
and the classroom on the top.
The children all signed with their names in Bengali the doors, and they did not only sign, they also helped building the school.
And I'm sure you all had your hands in mud or clay before.
It's wonderful to touch. I love it.
The children loved it.
And can you imagine the feeling of a small boy or a girl or an illiterate day laborer standing in front of that school building and knowing that you built this out of the ordinary bamboo and just the dirt underneath your feet, using nothing but your hands?
That gives such an enormous boost of trust and confidence in yourself and the community.
And in the material.
Especially mud has a very poor image.
When we think of mud, we think of dirt -- it's ugly, it's nondurable -- and this is the image I want to change.
In fact, it's the 11th rainy season for this school now, really harsh, horizontal monsoon rains, and the walls are standing strong.
(Applause) So how does it work?
First rule, a good foundation that keeps the wall dry from the ground, and second rule, a good roof that protects from the top, and third rule, erosion control.
Mud walls need speed breakers so that the rainwater cannot run down the wall fast, and these speed breakers could be lines of bamboo or stones or straw mixed into the mud, just like a hill needs trees or rocks in order to prevent erosion.
It works just the same way.
And people always ask me if I have to add cement to the mud, and the answer is no.
There is no stabilizer, no coating on these walls, only in the foundation.
So this is the close-up of the wall after 10 rainy seasons, and as much as I grew a bit older, the wall got some wrinkles as well.
The edges my not be as sharp as before, but it still looks pretty good, and if it needs repairing, it is really easy to do.
You just take the broken part, make it wet, and put it back on the wall, and it will look the same as before.
Wish that would work on me, too.
(Laughter) Yeah, and the great thing is, if an earth wall is not needed anymore, it can go back to the ground it came from, turn into a garden, or get fully recycled without any loss of quality.
There's no other material that can do this, and this is why mud is so excellent in terms of environmental performance.
What about the economic sustainability?
When we built the school, I practically lived on the construction site, and in the evening, I used to go with the workers to the market, and I could see how they spent their money.
And they would buy the vegetables from their neighbors, they would get a new haircut or a new blouse from the tailor.
And because the main part of the building budget was spent on craftsmanship, the school wasn't just a building, it became a real catalyst for local development, and that made me happy.
If I had designed the school in cement and steel, this money would have been exported and lost for those families.
(Applause) The building budget at that time was 35,000 euros -- it's probably doubled by now -- and this is a lot of money for that region, and especially because this money is working within the community and rotating fast, and not on the stock market.
So when it comes to the economic sustainability of my project, my main question is, who gets the profit?
How many of you in here have some experience living in a mud house?
Chris Anderson, where is your hand?
(Laughter) You? OK.
Yeah.
It seems totally out of our focus, but approximately three billion people all around the planet are living in earth houses, and it is a traditional building material in Europe just as much as in Africa.
Strangely enough, mud is not considered worthy of being studied at universities ...
so I brought the dirt to Harvard, (Laughter) precisely 60 tons of dirt right in front of the main facade of the Graduate School of Design.
Students and faculty rolled up their sleeves, got their hands dirty and transformed the front into a warm place for people to gather.
Children would climb the structures, skaters would ride the ramp, students having lunch breaks, and it was particularly fascinating to see how many people were touching the wall, and we usually don't go around cities caressing our facades, right?
(Laughter) (Laughter) Of course, this was a small-scale project, but in terms of awareness-building and in terms of education, it was like an acupuncture trigger point.
And in fact, in more and more countries, load-bearing earthen structures are not allowed to be built anymore although they're traditional and have lasted for hundreds of years, and not because the material is weak, but because there are no architects and engineers who know how to deal with that material.
So education on all levels, for craftsmen, engineers and architects, is really strongly needed.
Equally important is technological development, like prefabrication developed by my colleague Martin Rauch, who is an Austrian artist and expert in earthen structures.
And he has created technologies for rammed earth elements, for prefabrication of rammed earth elements that include insulation, wall heatings and coolings and all sorts of electrical fittings that can be layered to multistoried buildings, and this is important in order to scale up and in order to [speed] up the processes, like in the Ricola Herb Center in Switzerland.
And finally, we need good built projects that prove you can build with an ancient material in a very modern way.
It is not a matter of how old a material is; it's a matter of our creative ability to use it today.
These, for example, are three hostels that I did in China in the village Baoxi, about six hours by bus from Shanghai.
The outside shape is woven bamboo, and the inside core is stones and rammed earth.
And it is a traditional building material.
Even large parts of the Great Wall of China have been built with rammed earth, but it's getting replaced by concrete.
And this trend is happening very fast.
Within only a couple of years, China has consumed more cement than the United States in the entire 20th century.
And this trend of replacing natural building materials with materials that require a lot of energy, that are energy-intensive, and that emit CO2 is really clearly contributing to climate change.
And we have alternatives, such as mud, stones, timber, bamboo, earth, that are totally effective options for all sorts of purposes.
This, for example, is an office building that we did for Omicron Electronics in Austria.
Mud is healthy for the planet, but also for the human bodies, and the material is low-tech, but the performance is high-tech.
The earth walls keep the highly sophisticated tools in the building safe by naturally regulating moisture.
And this wall in my own home is our humidfier.
We love our six tons of dirt at home not only because it's healthy and sustainable.
Its archaic warmth is touching deep within.
My personal dream is to build a mud skyscraper right in Manhattan.
(Laughter) Yeah.
(Applause) And this dream isn't so crazy if you think of the mud city of Shibam in Yemen that was built in the 16th century and has lasted now for 500 years.
What was possible that long ago is possible today as well, and we can apply all our technical know-how to these ancient materials so that it meets our needs and our dreams.
All around us, and just below our feet ...
are wonderful natural building materials.
Let's use them.
And I deeply believe our homes, our work spaces, our cities would become more healthy and sustainable and more humane and beautiful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, Ma was trying to explain something to me about Grandma and when they grew up, but I couldn't pay attention to her because I was five years old, and I was petrified.
I had just seen The Green Lady.
Now, about a week earlier, I'd watched that movie "Godzilla," the one about that huge lizard-like beast storming a major city, and the thought of a green monster coming for me was stuck in my mind.
And yet there I was, at the tip of Lower Manhattan with my mom, just staring at her: her horns, her muscles -- all of it just frightened me.
And I didn't know whether she was a monster or a hero.
So I decided to consult the Google of the day -- "Ma! Ma!"
(Laughter) My mother explained that The Green Lady is actually the Statue of Liberty and that she was waving immigrants in.
Now, the part of her explanation that really messed with my young head was the fact that, according to Ma, long before us, The Green Lady was actually brown, brown like me, and that she changed colors over the years, much like America.
Now, the part that really is intriguing about this is that when she changed colors, she made me think about myself.
It all made sense to me, because as a first-generation American, I was surrounded by immigrants.
In fact, within my immediate social circle of the people who support me, who enrich my life, at least two are foreign-born.
My life as a US citizen is in many ways shaped by newcomers, and chances are, so is yours.
There are more than 40 million immigrants in the USA.
According to census data, a quarter of the nation's children have at least one foreign-born parent.
I know all these statistics because I study global migration patterns.
I'm a journalist, and for the last few years, I've been documenting the lives of US citizens who've lost people to deportation.
And the numbers are enormous.
From 2008 to 2016, more than three million people were "ordered removed" -- that's the technical term for being deported.
There is an economic, a political, a psychological and an emotional cost to those deportations -- the moments when these circles are broken.
I once asked a US soldier, "Why did you volunteer to fight this war?"
And she told me, "Because I'm proud to defend my country."
But I pressed to know -- "Really, when you're on base, and you hear bombs exploding in the distance, and you see soldiers coming back who are gravely injured, in that moment, when you know you could be next, what does 'my country' mean?"
She looked at me.
"My country is my wife, my family, my friends, my soldiers."
What she was telling me is that "my country" is a collection of these strong relationships; these social circles.
When the social circles are weakened, a country itself is weaker.
We're missing a crucial aspect in the debate about immigration policy.
Rather than focusing on individuals, we should focus on the circles around them, because these are the people who are left behind: the voters, the taxpayers, the ones who are suffering that loss.
And it's not just the children of the deported who are impacted.
You have brothers and sisters who are separated by borders.
You have classmates, teachers, law enforcement officers, technologists, scientists, doctors, who are all scrambling to make sense of new realities when their social circles are broken.
These are the real lives behind all these statistics that dominate discussions about immigration policy.
But we don't often think about them.
And I'm trying to change that.
Here's just one of the real-life stories that I've collected.
And it still haunts me.
I met Ramon and his son in 2016, the same year both of them were being ordered out of the country.
Ramon was being deported to Latin America, while his son, who was a sergeant in the US military, was being deployed.
Deported ...
deployed.
If you just look at Ramon's case, it wouldn't be clear how deeply connected to the country he is.
But consider his son: a US citizen defending a country that's banished his father.
The social circle is what's key here.
Here's another example that illustrates those critical bonds.
A group of citizens in Philadelphia were concerned about their jobs, because the legal owner of the restaurant where they worked was an undocumented immigrant, and immigration officials had picked him up.
They rallied behind him.
An immigration lawyer argued he was too important to the local community to be deported.
At the hearing, they even submitted restaurant reviews -- restaurant reviews!
In the end, a judge exercised what's called "judicial discretion" and allowed him to stay in the country, but only because they considered the social circle.
There are 23 million noncitizens in the USA, according to verifiable federal data.
And that doesn't include the undocumented, because numbers for that population are at best complex estimates.
Let's just work with what we have.
That's 23 million social circles -- about 100 million individuals whose lives could be impacted by deportation.
And the stress of it all is trickling down through the population.
A 2017 poll by UCLA of LA County residents found that 30 percent of citizens in LA County are stressed about deportation, not because they themselves could be removed, but rather, because members of their social circle were at risk.
I am not suggesting that no one should ever be deported; don't confuse me with that.
But what I am saying is that we need to look at the bigger picture.
If you are within the sound of my voice, I want you to close your eyes for a moment and examine your own social circle.
Who are your foreign-born?
What would it feel like if the circle were broken?
Share your story.
I'm building a global archive of first-person accounts and linking them with mapping technology, so that we can see exactly where these circles break, because this is not just an American issue.
There are a quarter-billion migrants around the world; people living, loving and learning in countries where they were not born.
And in my career, in my life, I've been one of them: in China, in Africa, in Europe.
And each time I become one of these foreigners -- one of these strange-looking guys in a new land -- I can't help but think back to that day when I was in Lower Manhattan with my mom all those decades ago, when I was scared, and I had just spotted that green lady.
And I guess the question that I keep on thinking about when I see her and all the younger replicas of her that are so obviously brown, and even the paintings that showcase her in the beginning as not quite green -- when I look at all of that, the question that my research seeks to answer becomes, to me, the same one that confounded me all those years ago: Is she a monster or a hero?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most people don't know that when I went to high school in this country -- I applied for university at a time when I was convinced I was going to be an artist and be a sculptor.
And I came from a very privileged background. I was very lucky.
My family was wealthy, and my father believed in one thing, and that was to give us all as much education as we wanted.
And I announced I wanted to be a sculptor in Paris.
And he was a clever man. He sort of said, "Well, that's OK, but you've done very well in your math SATs."
In fact, I'd got an 800. And he thought I did very well -- and I did, too -- in the arts: this was my passion.
And he said "If you go to MIT," to which I had been given early admission, "I will pay for every year you're at MIT, in graduate or undergraduate -- as much as you want -- I will pay for an equal number of years for you to live in Paris."
And I thought that was the best deal in town, so I accepted it immediately.
And I decided that if I was good in art, and I was good in mathematics, I'd study architecture, which was the blending of the two.
I went and told my headmaster that, at prep school.
And I said to him what I was doing, that I was going to go study architecture because it was art and mathematics put together.
He said to me something that just went completely over my head.
He said, "You know, I like grey suits, and I like pin-striped suits, but I don't like grey pin-striped suits."
And I thought, "What a turkey this guy is," and I went off to MIT.
I studied architecture, then did a second degree in architecture, and then actually quickly realized that it wasn't architecture.
That really, the mixing of art and science was computers, and that that really was the place to bring both, and enjoyed a career doing that.
And probably, if I were to fill out Jim Citrin's scale, I'd put 100 percent on the side of the equation where you spend time making it possible for others to be creative.
And after doing this for a long time, and the Media Lab passing the baton on, I thought, "Well, maybe it's time for me to do a project.
Something that would be important, but also something that would take advantage of all of these privileges that one had."
And in the case of the Media Lab, knowing a lot of people, knowing people who were either executives or wealthy, and also not having, in my own case, a career to worry about anymore.
My career, I mean, I'd done my career.
Didn't have to worry about earning money.
Didn't have to worry about what people thought about me.
And I said, "Boy, let's really do something that takes advantage of all these features," and thought that if we could address education, by leveraging the children, and bringing to the world the access of the computers, that that was really the thing we should do.
Never shown this picture before, and probably going to be sued for it.
It's taken at three o'clock in the morning, without the permission of the company.
It's about two weeks old. There they are, folks.
(Applause) If you look at the picture, you'll see they're stacked up.
Those are conveyor belts that go around.
This is one of the conveyor belts with the thing going by, but then you'll see the ones up above.
What happens is, they burn into flash memory the software, and then test them for a few hours.
But you've got to have the thing moving on the assembly line, because it's constant.
So they go around in this loop, which is why you see them up there.
So this was great for us because it was a real turning point. But it goes back.
This picture was taken in 1982, just before the IBM PC was even announced.
Seymour Papert and I were bringing computers to schools and developing nations at a time when it was way ahead of itself.
But one thing we learned was that these kids can absolutely jump into it just the same way as our kids do here.
And when people tell me, "Who's going to teach the teachers to teach the kids?"
I say to myself, "What planet do you come from?"
Okay, there's not a person in this room -- I don't care how techie you are -- there's not a person in this room that doesn't give their laptop or cell phone to a kid to help them debug it. OK?
We all need help, even those of us who are very seasoned.
This picture of Seymour -- 25 years ago. Seymour made a very simple observation in 1968, and then basically presented it in 1970 -- April 11 to be precise -- called "Teaching Children Thinking."
What he observed was that kids who write computer programs understand things differently, and when they debug the programs, they come the closest to learning about learning.
That was very important, and in some sense, we've lost that.
Kids don't program enough and boy, if there's anything I hope this brings back, it's programming to kids.
It's really important. Using applications is OK, but programming is absolutely fundamental.
This is being launched with three languages in it: Squeak, Logo, and a third, that I've never even seen before.
The point being, this is going to be very, very intensive on the programming side.
This photograph is very important because it's much later.
This is in the early 2000s. My son, Dimitri -- who's here, many of you know Dimitri -- went to Cambodia, set up this school that we had built, just as the school connected it to the Internet.
And these kids had their laptops. But it was really what spirited this, plus the influence of Joe and others. We started One Laptop per Child.
This is the same village in Cambodia, just a couple of months ago.
These kids are real pros. There were just 7,000 machines out there being tested by kids. Being a nonprofit is absolutely fundamental.
Everybody advised me not to be a nonprofit, but they were all wrong.
And the reason being a nonprofit is important is actually twofold.
There are many reasons, but the two that merit the little bit of time is: one, the clarity of purpose is there. The moral purpose is clear.
I can see any head of state, any executive I want, at any time, because I'm not selling laptops. OK? I have no shareholders.
Whether we sell, it doesn't make any difference whatsoever.
The clarity of purpose is absolutely critical. And the second is very counterintuitive -- you can get the best people in the world.
If you look at our professional services, including search firms, including communications, including legal services, including banking, they're all pro bono. And it's not to save money.
We've got money in the bank. It's because you get the best people.
You get the people who are doing it because they believe in the mission, and they're the best people.
We couldn't afford to hire a CFO. We put out a job description for a CFO at zero salary, and we had a queue of people.
It allows you to team up with people. The U.N.'s not going to be our partner if we're profit making. So announcing this with Kofi Annan was very important, and the U.N. allowed us to basically reach all the countries. And this was the machine we were showing before I met Yves Behar.
And while this machine in some sense is silly, in retrospect, it actually served a very important purpose.
That pencil-yellow crank was remembered by everybody.
Everybody remembered the pencil-yellow crank. It's different.
It was getting its power in a different way. It's kind of childlike.
Even though this wasn't the direction we went because the crank -- it really is stupid to have it on board, by the way.
In spite of what some people in the press don't get it, didn't understand it, we didn't take it off because we didn't want to do -- having it on the laptop itself is really not what you want.
You want a separate thing, like the AC adaptor.
I didn't bring one with me, but they really work much better off-board.
And then, I could tell you lots about the laptop, but I decided on just four things.
Just keep in mind -- because there are other people, including Bill Gates, who said, "Gee, you've got a real computer."
That computer is unlike anything you've had, and does things -- there are four of them -- that you don't come close to. And it's very important to be low power, and I hope that's picked up more by the industry.
That the reason that you want to be below two watts is that's roughly what you can generate with your upper body.
Dual-mode display -- that sunlight display's fantastic.
We were using it at lunch today in the sunlight, and the more sunlight the better.
And that was really critical. The mesh network, it'll become commonplace.
And of course, "rugged" goes without saying.
And the reason I think design matters isn't because I wanted to go to art school.
And by the way, when I graduated from MIT, I thought the worst and silliest thing to do would be to go to Paris for six years. (Laughter) So, I didn't do that. But design matters for a number of reasons.
The most important being that it is the best way to make an inexpensive product.
Most people make inexpensive products by taking cheap design, cheap labor, cheap components, and making a cheap laptop.
And, in English, the word "cheap" has a double meaning, which is really appropriate, because it's cheap, in the pejorative sense, as well as inexpensive.
But if you take a different approach, and you think of very large-scale integration, very advanced materials, very advanced manufacturing -- so you're pouring chemicals in one end, iPods are spewing out the other -- and really cool design, that's what we wanted to do.
And I can race through these and save a lot of time because Yves and I obviously didn't compare notes.
These are his slides, and so I don't have to talk about them.
But it was really, to us, very important as a strategy.
It wasn't just to kind of make it cute, because somebody -- you know, good design is very important.
Yves showed one of the power-generating devices.
The mesh network, the reason I -- and I won't go into it in great detail -- but when we deliver laptops to kids in the remotest and poorest parts of the world, they're connected. There's not just laptops.
And so, we have to drop in satellite dishes. We put in generators.
It's a lot of stuff that goes behind these. These can talk to each other.
If you're in a desert, they can talk to each other about two kilometers apart.
If you're in the jungle, it's about 500 meters. So if a kid bicycles home, or walks a few miles, they're going to be off the grid, so to speak.
They're not going to be near another laptop, so you have to nail these onto a tree, and sort of, get it.
You don't call Verizon or Sprint. You build your own network.
And that's very important, the user interface.
We are launching with 18 keyboards. English is by far the minority.
Latin is relatively rare, too. You just look at some of the languages.
I'm willing to suspect some of you hadn't even heard of them before.
Is there anybody in the room, one person, unless you work with OLPC, is there anybody in the room that can tell me what language the keyboard is that's on the screen? There's only one hand -- so you get it.
Yes, you're right. He's right. It's Amharic, it's Ethiopian. In Ethiopia, there's never been a keyboard.
There is no keyboard standard because there's no market.
And this is the big difference.
Again, when you're a nonprofit, you look at children as a mission, not as a market.
So we went to Ethiopia, and we helped them make a keyboard.
And this will become the standard Ethiopian keyboard.
So what I want to end with is sort of what we're doing to roll it out.
And we changed strategy completely. I decided at the beginning -- it was a pretty good thing to decide in the beginning, it's not what we're doing now -- is to go to six countries.
Big countries, one of them is not so big, but it's rich.
Here's the six. We went to the six, and in each case the head of state said he would do it, he'd do a million.
In the case of Gaddafi, he'd do 1.2 million, and that they would launch it.
We thought, this is exactly the right strategy, get it out, and then the little countries could sort of piggyback on these big countries.
And so I went to each of those countries at least six times, met with the head of state probably two or three times.
In each case, got the ministers, went through a lot of the stuff.
This was a period in my life where I was traveling 330 days per year.
Not something you'd envy or want to do.
In the case of Libya, it was a lot of fun meeting Gaddafi in his tent.
The camel smells were unbelievable.
And it was 45 degrees C. I mean, this was not what you'd call a cool experience. And former countries -- I say former, because none of them really came through this summer -- there was a big difference between getting a head of state to have a photo opportunity, make a press release.
So we went to smaller ones. Uruguay, bless their hearts.
Small country, not so rich. President said he'd do it, and guess what?
He did do it. The tender had nothing in it that related to us, nothing specific about sunlight-readable, mesh-network, low-power, but just a vanilla laptop proposal.
And guess what? We won it hands down.
When it was announced that they were going to do every child in Uruguay, the first 100,000, boom, went to OLPC.
The next day -- the next day, not even 24 hours had passed -- in Peru, the president of Peru said, "We'll do 250." And boom, a little domino effect.
The president of Rwanda stepped in and said he would do it.
The president of Ethiopia said he would do it.
And boom, boom, boom. The president of Mongolia.
And so what happens is, these things start to happen with these countries -- still not enough.
Add up all those countries, it didn't quite get to thing, so we said, "Let's start a program in the United States." So, end of August, early September, we decide to do this. We announced it near the middle, end -- just when the Clinton Initiative was taking place.
We thought that was a good time to announce it.
Launched it on the 12 of November.
We said it would be just for a short period until the 26. We've extended it until the 31.
And the "Give One, Get One" program is really important because it got a lot of people absolutely interested.
The first day it was just wild. And then we said, "Well, let's get people to give many. Not just one, and get one, but maybe give 100, give 1,000." And that's where you come in.
And that's where I think it's very important. I don't want you all to go out and buy 400 dollars worth of laptops. Okay? Do it, but that's not going to help. Okay?
If everybody in this room goes out tonight and orders one of these things for 400 dollars, whatever it is, 300 people in the room doing it -- yeah, great.
I want you do something else.
And it's not to go out and buy 100 or 1,000, though, I invite you to do that, and 10,000 would be even better.
Tell people about it! It's got to become viral, OK?
Use your mailing lists. People in this room have extraordinary mailing lists.
Get your friends to give one, get one.
And if each one of you sends it to 300 or 400 people, that would be fantastic.
I won't dwell on the pricing at all.
Just to say that when you do the "Give One, Get One," a lot of press is a bit about, "They didn't make it, it's 188 dollars, it's not 100."
It will be 100 in two years. It will go below 100.
We've pledged not to add features, but to bring that price down.
But it was the countries that wanted it to go up, and we let them push it up for all sorts of reasons. So what you can do -- I've just said it. Don't just give one, get one.
I just want to end with one last one. This one is not even 24-hours old, or maybe it's 24-hours.
The first kids got their laptops. They got them by ship, and I'm talking now about 7,000, 8,000 at a time went out this week.
They went to Uruguay, Peru, Mexico.
And it's been slow coming, and we're only making about 5,000 a week, but we hope, we hope, sometime in next year, maybe by the middle of the year, to hit a million a month. Now put that number, and a million isn't so much. It's not a big number.
We're selling a billion cell phones worldwide this year.
But a million a month in laptop-land is a big number.
And the world production today, everybody combined, making laptops, is five million a month. So I'm standing here telling you that sometime next year, we're going to make 20 percent of the world production.
And if we do that, there are going to be a lot of lucky kids out there.
And we hope if you have EG two years from now, or whenever you have it again, I won't have bad breath, and I will be invited back, and will have, hopefully by then, maybe 100 million out there to children.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We humans are becoming an urban species, so cities, they are our natural habitat.
That is where we live.
In 2014, over 54 percent of the world population was living in cities, and I can bet you that so many of these people have thought of how they would do things differently, like if I only had the tools to change things in my city, what would I do?
What would my dream city be like?
And these tools, this is just what we gave them.
Two years ago, my team and I, we released a game, "Cities: Skylines."
It is a game about building cities.
So I have always been interested in cities as systems.
It's something that I find immensely interesting.
But what I didn't understand was that I am not alone in this.
People love cities.
They are interested. They have ideas.
The game was an instant hit.
So far, over three and a half million people have played it.
And it's not just about playing.
We also have really awesome sharing systems.
So people play, they create cities and then they are sharing these creations, showing off what they have made.
And what I will show you is some of these cities created by the players.
So the game is about self-expression, creativity, not just overcoming the challenges posed by the simulation.
It is about showing what your cities look like.
So I have a couple of videos.
These are from YouTube.
And these are some of the most interesting city designs I have seen.
So they are all different, and I hope you like all of these.
This one is called The Netherlands.
It's by Silvarret.
And when you start the game, you have an empty piece of land.
This land, it can be based on the real world, it can be hand-crafted in the map editor, or you can, of course, download a city made by someone else and play in that.
But what Silvarret has done here is that what he wanted to make was not a real city.
This is a fantasy city, even though it looks real.
So what he wanted to do was a fantasy city that could be in the Netherlands.
So he kind of investigated what are the characteristics of cities in the Netherlands and combined a couple of those, and this is what he created.
So it is a city, but it is not a real city, but it could be.
It looks just like the Netherlands.
So the places are really densely populated.
So what you need is highways, trains, anything connecting these small town centers together.
Lots of people, lots of moving, so transportation is the key here.
But then let's go even more on the fantasy side.
Let's go into the future.
This is one of my personal favorites.
These city designs are what I love the most.
So this is a tiered city by Conflictnerd, and the basic idea is that you have concentric circle routes.
So the city is a big circle with tinier circles inside.
And the thing is that you put all of the services in the center, and then people actually live on the outer ring, because there is less traffic, less noise, less pollution, so that is where you want to live.
But the services are still really close by.
They are in the center.
And this is the soul of the game.
The player has to understand what are the wishes, what are the needs of the tiny people living in the cities.
So you need to know where you should put the things.
Like, it's not enough to have a hospital.
It needs to be accessible.
Citizens need to reach the hospital.
And this is one way to do it.
So maybe this is something that we might be seeing someday.
And then even more into the future.
Astergea by Yuttho.
So Yuttho does YouTube videos and plays the game.
What he did here was actually a 12-point series of creating this city.
So what he does is he plays the game, he records it and he explains as he's going what he's doing and why.
And as a part of this series, he actually did an interview with an actual urban planner called Jeff Speck.
And Speck is an expert on the concept of walkability.
The basic idea is that if you want your citizens to walk, which is kind of beneficial, you actually need to have walking as a reasonable means of transportation.
It should be a good way to reach places.
So what Yuttho did was that he explained this concept, he had Speck explain it, too, and then he applied it to the city that he was building.
So what we are seeing is Yuttho's vision of the future: lots of public transportation, walkways, plazas, connecting high-rise buildings.
Maybe this is what the future might look like.
And the game system works really well for this.
We are seeing some real-world uses to this game.
So we know that some urban planners are using it as a sketching tool, so while the simulation is not completely realistic, it is realistic enough that if something works in the game, it is highly likely that it will also work in the real world, so that you can actually try out things, see if this intersection might fit this kind of a situation.
If we build a new road, would it help?
And this is what you can do with this game.
There was one really interesting contest held by the Finnish city of Hämeenlinna.
So what they did was that they had a new area that they wanted to develop in the city.
They made a map with the existing city, they left empty the area that they would want to develop and shared this map.
So anyone could download the map, play the game, build the area and submit their creations to the city council.
So they have not yet built anything, but it might just be that they use one of these plans made with the game to actually build the real city.
And these videos that I have shown you, these are the people who are coming up with new kinds of solutions.
We know that cities are growing.
They're getting bigger as we go, and the percentage of population living in cities is projected to rise.
So we need the solutions and these people, playing the game, they are trying out different kinds of solutions.
They might have something that is really important.
So what we are seeing here is dream cities that might be real one day.
So it might be that this is not just a game.
It might be a way to decide our own fate.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today I want to confess something to you, but first of all I'm going to ask you a couple of questions.
How many people here have children?
And how many of you are confident that you know how to bring up your children in exactly the right way?
(Laughter) OK, I don't see too many hands going up on that second one, and that's my confession, too.
I've got three boys; they're three, nine and 12.
And like you, and like most parents, the honest truth is I have pretty much no idea what I'm doing.
I want them to be happy and healthy in their lives, but I don't know what I'm supposed to do to make sure they are happy and healthy.
There's so many books offering all kinds of conflicting advice, it can be really overwhelming.
So I've spent most of their lives just making it up as I go along.
However, something changed me a few years ago, when I came across a little secret that we have in Britain.
It's helped me become more confident about how I bring up my own children, and it's revealed a lot about how we as a society can help all children.
I want to share that secret with you today.
For the last 70 years, scientists in Britain have been following thousands of children through their lives as part of an incredible scientific study.
There's nothing quite like it anywhere else in the world.
Collecting information on thousands of children is a really powerful thing to do, because it means we can compare the ones who say, do well at school or end up healthy or happy or wealthy as adults, and the ones who struggle much more, and then we can sift through all the information we've collected and try to work out why their lives turned out different.
This British study -- it's actually a kind of crazy story.
So it all starts back in 1946, just a few months after the end of the war, when scientists wanted to know what it was like for a woman to have a baby at the time.
They carried out this huge survey of mothers and ended up recording the birth of nearly every baby born in England, Scotland and Wales in one week.
That was nearly 14,000 babies.
The questions they asked these women are very different than the ones we might ask today.
They sound really old-fashioned now.
They asked them things like, "During pregnancy, did you get your full extra ration of a pint of milk a day?"
"How much did you spend on smocks, corsets, nightdresses, knickers and brassieres?"
And this is my favorite one: "Who looked after your husband while you were in bed with this baby?"
(Laughter) Now, this wartime study actually ended up being so successful that scientists did it again.
They recorded the births of thousands of babies born in 1958 and thousands more in 1970.
They did it again in the early 1990s, and again at the turn of the millennium.
Altogether, more than 70,000 children have been involved in these studies across those five generations.
They're called the British birth cohorts, and scientists have gone back and recorded more information on all of these people every few years ever since.
The amount of information that's now been collected on these people is just completely mind-boggling.
It includes thousands of paper questionnaires and terabytes' worth of computer data.
Scientists have also built up a huge bank of tissue samples, which includes locks of hair, nail clippings, baby teeth and DNA.
They've even collected 9,000 placentas from some of the births, which are now pickled in plastic buckets in a secure storage warehouse.
This whole project has become unique -- so, no other country in the world is tracking generations of children in quite this detail.
These are some of the best-studied people on the planet, and the data has become incredibly valuable for scientists, generating well over 6,000 academic papers and books.
But today I want to focus on just one finding -- perhaps the most important discovery to come from this remarkable study.
And it's also the one that spoke to me personally, because it's about how to use science to do the best for our children.
So, let's get the bad news out of the way first.
Perhaps the biggest message from this remarkable study is this: don't be born into poverty or into disadvantage, because if you are, you're far more likely to walk a difficult path in life.
Many children in this study were born into poor families or into working-class families that had cramped homes or other problems, and it's clear now that those disadvantaged children have been more likely to struggle on almost every score.
They've been more likely to do worse at school, to end up with worse jobs and to earn less money.
Now, maybe that sounds really obvious, but some of the results have been really surprising, so children who had a tough start in life are also more likely to end up unhealthy as adults.
They're more likely to be overweight, to have high blood pressure, and then decades down the line, more likely to have a failing memory, poor health and even to die earlier.
Now, I talked about what happens later, but some of these differences emerge at a really shockingly early age.
In one study, children who were growing up in poverty were almost a year behind the richer children on educational tests, and that was by the age of just three.
These types of differences have been found again and again across the generations.
It means that our early circumstances have a profound influence on the way that the rest of our lives play out.
And working out why that is is one of the most difficult questions that we face today.
So there we have it.
The first lesson for successful life, everyone, is this: choose your parents very carefully.
(Laughter) Don't be born into a poor family or into a struggling family.
Now, I'm sure you can see the small problem here.
We can't choose our parents or how much they earn, but this British study has also struck a real note of optimism by showing that not everyone who has a disadvantaged start ends up in difficult circumstances.
As you know, many people have a tough start in life, but they end up doing very well on some measure nevertheless, and this study starts to explain how.
So the second lesson is this: parents really matter.
In this study, children who had engaged, interested parents, ones who had ambition for their future, were more likely to escape from a difficult start.
It seems that parents and what they do are really, really important, especially in the first few years of life.
Let me give you an example of that.
In one study, scientists looked at about 17,000 children who were born in 1970.
They sifted all the mountains of data that they had collected to try to work out what allowed the children who'd had a difficult start in life to go on and do well at school nevertheless.
In other words, which ones beat the odds.
The data showed that what mattered more than anything else was parents.
Having engaged, interested parents in those first few years of life was strongly linked to children going on to do well at school later on.
In fact, quite small things that parents do are associated with good outcomes for children.
Talking and listening to a child, responding to them warmly, teaching them their letters and numbers, taking them on trips and visits.
Reading to children every day seems to be really important, too.
So in one study, children whose parents were reading to them daily when they were five and then showing an interest in their education at the age of 10, were significantly less likely to be in poverty at the age of 30 than those whose parents weren't doing those things.
Now, there are huge challenges with interpreting this type of science.
These studies show that certain things that parents do are correlated with good outcomes for children, but we don't necessarily know those behaviors caused the good outcomes, or whether some other factor is getting in the way.
For example, we have to take genes into account, and that's a whole other talk in itself.
But scientists working with this British study are working really hard to get at causes, and this is one study I particularly love.
In this one, they looked at the bedtime routines of about 10,000 children born at the turn of the millennium.
Were the children going to bed at regular times, or did they go to bed at different times during the week?
The data showed that those children who were going to bed at different times were more likely to have behavioral problems, and then those that switched to having regular bedtimes often showed an improvement in behavior, and that was really crucial, because it suggested it was the bedtime routines that were really helping things get better for those kids.
Here's another one to think about.
In this one, scientists looked at children who were reading for pleasure.
That means that they picked up a magazine, a picture book, a story book.
The data showed that children who were reading for pleasure at the ages of five and 10 were more likely to go on in school better, on average, on school tests later in their lives.
And not just tests of reading, but tests of spelling and maths as well.
This study tried to control for all the confounding factors, so it looked at children who were equally intelligent and from the same social-class background, so it seemed as if it was the reading which really helped those children go on and score better on those school tests later in their lives.
Now at the start, I said the first lesson from this study was not to be born into poverty or into disadvantage, because those children tend to follow more difficult paths in their lives.
But then I said that parenting matters, and that good parenting, if you can call it that, helps children beat the odds and overcome some of those early disadvantages.
So wait, does that actually mean, then, that poverty doesn't matter after all?
You could argue it doesn't matter if a child is born poor -- as long as their parents are good parents, they're going to do just fine.
I don't believe that's true.
This study shows that poverty and parenting matter.
And one study actually put figures on that, so it looked at children growing up in persistent poverty and how well they were doing at school.
The data showed that even when their parents were doing everything right -- putting them to bed on time and reading to them every day and everything else -- that only got those children so far.
Good parenting only reduced the educational gap between the rich and poor children by about 50 percent.
Now that means that poverty leaves a really lasting scar, and it means that if we really want to ensure the success and well-being of the next generation, then tackling child poverty is an incredibly important thing to do.
Now, what does all this mean for you and me?
Are there lessons here we can all take home and use?
As a scientist and a journalist, I like to have some science to inform my parenting ...
and I can tell you that when you're shouting at your kids to go to bed on time, it really helps to have the scientific literature on your side.
(Laughter) And wouldn't it be great to think that all we had to do to have happy, successful children was to talk to them, be interested in their future, put them to bed on time, and give them a book to read?
Our job would be done.
Now, as you can imagine, the answers aren't quite as simple as that.
For one thing, this study looks at what happens to thousands and thousands of children on average, but that doesn't necessarily say what will help my child or your child or any individual child.
In the end, each of our children is going to walk their own path, and that's partly defined by the genes they inherit and of course all the experiences they have through their lives, including their interactions with us, their parents.
I will tell you what I did after I learned all this.
It's a bit embarrassing.
I realized I was so busy working, and ironically, learning and writing about this incredible study of British children, that there were days when I hardly even spoke to my own British children.
So at home, we introduced talking time, which is just 15 minutes at the end of the day when we talk and listen to the boys.
I try better now to ask them what they did today, and to show that I value what they do at school.
Of course, I make sure they always have a book to read.
I tell them I'm ambitious for their future, and I think they can be happy and do great things.
I don't know that any of that will make a difference, but I'm pretty confident it won't do them any harm, and it might even do them some good.
Ultimately, if we want happy children, all we can do is listen to the science, and of course, listen to our children themselves.
Thank you.
We live in a time of fear, and our response to fear can either be to contract and attempt to guard ourselves or to extend ourselves, hold on to each other, and face our fears together.
What is your instinct?
What do you see more of in the world?
The problem with the first approach is that in our mounting isolation, we divide ourselves from others.
Our sense of isolation grows, because our imagination goes into overdrive about the people and the spaces that we no longer engage with.
Our sense of otherness grows, and we lose empathy.
Today I'm going to tell you about a group of people that took the global challenge of terrorism and began creating spaces where strangers connect in solidarity.
My own obsession with what I see as irrational divisions began as a child.
As a fourth-generation Kenyan Muslim of Indian origin, it bothered me that in four generations, there wasn't a single marriage in my family outside of my small religious community.
And I wondered what that was about.
Was it fear?
Was it racism?
Was it cultural preservation?
Did it have something to do with colonialism?
Certainly, we didn't share a lot of the same public spaces with others.
These divisions bothered me deeply, and they drove my career choices.
When I was 20, the US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania were bombed.
A year later, I was on my way to the Middle East to study conflict resolution.
And then from that point on, it wasn't very hard for me to find insecure environments to work in, because the world was quickly shifting in what we now know as the time of terrorism.
I was in Washington, DC when 9/11 happened, and then I moved back home to Kenya to work with refugees and then later worked in Pakistan and in Afghanistan.
In all of these places, what I noticed was how important physical spaces are to making us feel safe and well and like we belong.
In 2013, I came back home to Nairobi from Afghanistan.
Al-Shabaab operatives had besieged Westgate shopping center, killing 67 people in a day of utter horror.
Soon after that, I could see how Nairobi was beginning to change, and it was beginning to feel more like the fear and terror-weary and war-torn cities that I had worked in.
And Nairobi continues to grow in fear-driven ways.
We see more walls, more barriers, more security.
And like other parts of the world, we are experiencing an erosion of human connection.
Divisions along religious lines are deepening, and we're doubting more and more how much we have in common.
We are at a pivotal time when we need to restore our confidence in humanity and stand boldly and visibly together.
So in 2014, I brought together a group of people in Nairobi to figure out what to do: public intellectuals, diplomats, artists, development workers.
And the group articulated our challenge as threefold: one, to reclaim the city from the narrative of terrorism and back into the hands of the people that live there; two, introduce a language beyond race, tribe or religion that would help us transcend our differences; and three, provide a gesture that would help restore empathy and conversation and trust.
One of the people in this group was an artist and architect, Yazmany Arboleda.
He and I have collaborated in other parts of the world over many years.
He has a history of disrupting urban environments and making strangers connect in incredible, beautiful and spectacular ways.
He had an idea.
The idea was to unite people of different faiths by getting them to paint each other's houses of worship, mosques, temples, synagogues, churches, paint them yellow in the name of love.
By focusing on icons of faith, we would get people to reexamine the true essence of their faith, the common belief that we share in kindness, generosity and friendship.
By creating pathways between houses of worship within one neighborhood, we would create islands of stability and networks of people that could withstand threats.
And neighbors, by picking up a paintbrush with other neighbors, would engage not just with their heads but with their hands and with their hearts.
And the painted buildings would become sculptures in the landscape that speak of people from very different backgrounds that stand together.
We'd call the project "Colour in Faith."
We loved the idea and we immediately began approaching houses of worship: churches, temples, mosques, synagogues.
Door to door, we went to more than 60 rabbis, imams, pastors and priests.
As you can imagine, bringing these communities together when prejudices are reinforced by a global pandemic of fear is not easy.
It was complicated.
We were confronted with the hierarchy of decision-making within religious establishments.
For example, with Catholic churches, we were told that the archbishop would have to make the decision.
And so we wrote a letter to the archbishop.
We wrote a letter to the Vatican.
We're still waiting to hear back.
(Laughter) And with other houses of worship, we were told that the patrons, the people that pay for the building and the construction and the painting of the buildings would have to make a decision.
And then we came head-to-head with the long legacy of missionary and donor dependence that so impedes unconditional civic action, and we learned this the hard way.
There was one community that in our repeated conversations would keep asking us to appreciate them.
And so we would keep going back and telling them that we appreciate them, and of course, if we didn't appreciate them, we wouldn't be here.
And then we learned painfully late in the game that the word "appreciation" is code for getting paid to participate.
And so we challenged them and we asked the question, "So what will it cost?
How much could we pay you?
And if we pay for your faith, is it really faith?"
We started the project asking the question, "Where does your faith live?"
And here we found ourselves asking the question, "How much does your faith cost?"
But the most difficult issue was the perceived risk of standing apart.
We had one synagogue that flat-out refused to participate because it feared drawing attention to itself and becoming a target.
Similarly, we had a mosque that also feared becoming a target.
And these fears are justified.
And yet, there were 25 houses of worship that pledged to participate.
(Applause) These bold leaders took the gesture and reinforced it with their own meaning.
For some, it was to tell the world that they're not terrorists.
For others, it was to welcome people through their doors to ask questions.
And for some, it was to bridge the gap between the older and the younger generation, which by the way is something that many faiths are grappling with right now.
And for some it was simply to build neighborhood solidarity in advance of feared election violence.
When asked why yellow, one imam beautifully said, "Yellow is the color of the sun.
The sun shines on us all equally.
It does not discriminate."
He and others spread the word through their congregations and over the radio.
Municipal government officials stepped forward and helped with permits and with convening civil society organizations.
A paint company donated a thousand liters of yellow paint mixed especially for us in what they now call "optimistic yellow."
(Laughter) (Applause) And a poetry collective joined forces with a university and hosted a series of tweet chats that challenged the nation on issues of faith, our faith not just in the context of religion, but our faith in politicians and tribe and nation, our faith in the older generation and in the younger generation.
And then Colour in Faith was launched at a gallery event that invited an incredible mix of gallerygoers and religious leaders and artists and businesspeople.
Already, even before picking up a paintbrush, we had accomplished so much of the conversation and connection that we had hoped for.
And then we began to paint.
Muslims stood by Christians and atheists and agnostics and Hindus and painted a mosque yellow.
And then they all came together again and painted a church yellow, and then another mosque, and then another church.
Poets and musicians performed while we painted.
We painted in Nairobi, and then we painted in Mombasa.
The local and international press did features on Colour in Faith in English and French and Swahili and Spanish and Somali.
CNN highlighted Colour in Faith as a way of bringing communities together.
And our social media platforms lit up, connecting more and more people.
And these neighbors continued to stay in touch.
There are some that are pursuing politics with a platform of peace, and we have communities as far as Argentina and the US and as close as Mali and Rwanda that are asking for our help.
And we would love to help.
It's our dream that this project, this idea, spreads across the world, with or without our support.
Colour in Faith is literally highlighting those who mean well in yellow.
Colour in Faith is binding neighborhoods together, and it's our hope that when threats come knocking, they will collectively sift fact from rumor and stand in solidarity.
We've proven that the human family can come together and send a message far brighter and more powerful than the voices of those that wish to do us harm.
Though fear is infectious, we are showing that so is hope.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I had been a photographer for 18 years before I began the Microsculpture Project.
And in that time, I had shot global ad campaigns, I had the opportunity to photograph some of my generation's icons, and I was traveling the world.
I got to a point in my career that I dreamed of getting to, and yet, for some reason, I still felt a little bit unfulfilled.
Despite the extraordinary things I was shooting and experiencing, they'd started to feel a little bit ordinary to me.
I was also getting concerned about how disposable photography had started to feel in the digital world, and I really wanted to produce images that had a sense of worth again.
And I needed a subject that felt extraordinary.
Sometimes I wish I had the eyes of a child.
And by that I mean, I wish I could look at the world in the same as I did when I was a small boy.
I think there is a danger, as we get older, that our curiosity becomes slightly muted or dulled by familiarity.
And as a visual creator, one of the challenges for me is to present the familiar in a new and engaging way.
Fortunately for me, though, I've got two great kids who are still curious about the world.
Sebastian -- he's still curious about the world, and in 2014, in spring, he brought in a ground beetle from the garden.
There was nothing particularly special about this insect -- you know, it was a common species.
But he was still curious, and he brought it up to my office, and we decided to look at it under his microscope.
He had a little science kit for Christmas.
And this is what we saw.
Now, when I first saw this, it blew me away.
Up here -- this is the back of the ground beetle.
When I first saw it, it reminded me of a galaxy.
And all the time, this had just been outside our window.
You know, I was looking for this extraordinary subject, and it took Seb's eyes and curiosity to bring it in to me.
So I decided to photograph it for him, and this is what I produced.
I basically asked myself two simple questions.
The first one: Could I take all my knowledge and skill of photographic lighting and take that onto a subject that's five millimeters long?
But also: Could I keep creative control over that lighting on a subject that size?
So I practiced on some other found specimens, and I approached the Oxford University Museum of Natural History to see if I could have access to their collection, to progress the project.
And I went up there for a meeting, and I showed them some of the images that I'd been shooting, and they could see the kind of detail I was able to get.
I don't think they'd ever really seen anything quite like it before, and from that point forward, they gave me open access to their entire collection and the assistance of Dr. James Hogan, their entomologist.
Now, over the next two-and-a-half years, I shot 37 insects from their collection.
And the way I work is that I essentially split the insect up into multiple sections, and I treat each one of those sections like a small still life.
So for example, if I was photographing the eye of the insect, which is normally quite smooth and dome-shaped, then I'd use a light source that is large and soft and diffuse, so I don't get any harsh hot spots on that surface.
But once my attention turns over to a hairy leg, that lighting setup will change completely.
And so I make that one tiny section look as beautiful as I possibly can, and I work my way across the insect until I have about 20 or 25 different sections.
The issue with photography at high magnification is that there is inherently a very shallow depth of field.
So to get around that, what I do is, I put my camera on a rail that I can automate to move 10 microns in between each shot.
That's about one-seventh the width of a human hair.
And then that provides me with a deep stack of images.
Each has a tiny sliver of focus all the way through.
And I can squash that down to produce one image that is fully focused from front to back.
So essentially, that gives me 25 sections that are fully focused and beautifully lit.
Now, each one of my images is made up of anywhere between 8- and 10,000 separate shots.
They take about three-and-a-half weeks to create, and the file sizes on average are about four gigabytes.
So I've got plenty of information to play with when I'm printing.
And the prints at the exhibition are around the three-meter mark.
In fact, I had a show in Milan two weeks ago, and we had some prints there that were nine meters long.
But, you know, I realize that these images still have to work in the digital world.
There's no point in me putting all my blood, sweat and tears into these pictures if they're only going to be showing 500 pixels on a screen.
So with the help of Rob Chandler and Will Cookson, we developed a website that enables the viewer to immerse themselves into the full four-gigabyte files, and they can explore all that microscopic detail.
So if you have the time, and I encourage you, please visit microsculpture.net and go and have a play.
It's good fun.
I first showed the work at Oxford, and since then, it's moved on to the Middle East.
It's now back in Europe and goes to Copenhagen this month.
And the feedback has been great.
You know, I get emails, actually, from all over the world -- from teachers, at the moment, who are using the website in school.
The kids are using them on the tablet.
They're zooming into the pictures and using it for art class, biology class.
And that's not something I planned.
That's just a beautiful offshoot of the project.
In fact, one of the things I like to do at the exhibitions is actually look at the kiddies' reactions.
And, you know, standing in front of a three-meter insect, they could have been horrified.
But they're not. They look in wonder.
This little chap here, he stood there for five minutes, motionless.
(Laughter) And at the end of the day, actually, at the end of the day at the exhibitions, we have to wipe down the lower third of the big prints -- (Laughter) just to remove all those sticky handprints, because all they want to do is touch those big bugs.
I do want to leave you with one final image, if that's OK.
This has to do with Charles Darwin.
One of the recent images that I photographed was this one here.
I'm talking about the creature in the box, not my cat.
And this is a shield bug that Charles Darwin brought back from Australia on the HMS Beagle in 1836.
And when I got it home, I stood in my kitchen and stared at it for about 20 minutes.
I couldn't believe I was in possession of this beautiful creature.
And at that moment, I kind of realized that this validated the project for me.
The fact that the museum was willing to risk me playing with this kind of showed me that my images had worth -- you know, they weren't disposable.
That's the image that I produced.
I often wonder, still, when I look at this: What would Charles Darwin make of these images?
Do you think he'd like his picture of his shield bug? I hope so.
So -- (Applause) You know, I think it's strange in a way.
I'm a visual person, I'm a creative person, but I still needed the eyes of a child to find my extraordinary subject.
That's the way it was.
So all I can say is, thank you very much, Sebastian; I am very, very grateful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A little over 100 years ago, in 1915, Einstein published his theory of general relativity, which is sort of a strange name, but it's a theory that explains gravity.
It states that mass -- all matter, the planets -- attracts mass, not because of an instantaneous force, as Newton claimed, but because all matter -- all of us, all the planets -- wrinkles the flexible fabric of space-time.
Space-time is this thing in which we live and that connects us all.
It's like when we lie down on a mattress and distort its contour.
The masses move -- again, not according to Newton's laws, but because they see this space-time curvature and follow the little curves, just like when our bedmate nestles up to us because of the mattress curvature.
(Laughter) A year later, in 1916, Einstein derived from his theory that gravitational waves existed, and that these waves were produced when masses move, like, for example, when two stars revolve around one another and create folds in space-time which carry energy from the system, and the stars move toward each other.
However, he also estimated that these effects were so minute, that it would never be possible to measure them.
I'm going to tell you the story of how, with the work of hundreds of scientists working in many countries over the course of many decades, just recently, in 2015, we discovered those gravitational waves for the first time.
It's a rather long story.
It started 1.3 billion years ago.
A long, long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away -- (Laughter) two black holes were revolving around one another -- "dancing the tango," I like to say.
It started slowly, but as they emitted gravitational waves, they grew closer together, accelerating in speed, until, when they were revolving at almost the speed of light, they fused into a single black hole that had 60 times the mass of the Sun, but compressed into the space of 360 kilometers.
That's the size of the state of Louisiana, where I live.
This incredible effect produced gravitational waves that carried the news of this cosmic hug to the rest of the universe.
It took us a long time to figure out the effects of these gravitational waves, because the way we measure them is by looking for effects in distances.
We want to measure longitudes, distances.
When these gravitational waves passed by Earth, which was in 2015, they produced changes in all distances -- the distances between all of you, the distances between you and me, our heights -- every one of us stretched and shrank a tiny bit.
The prediction is that the effect is proportional to the distance.
But it's very small: even for distances much greater than my slight height, the effect is infinitesimal.
For example, the distance between the Earth and the Sun changed by one atomic diameter.
How can that be measured?
How could we measure it?
Fifty years ago, some visionary physicists at Caltech and MIT -- Kip Thorne, Ron Drever, Rai Weiss -- thought they could precisely measure distances using lasers that measured distances between mirrors kilometers apart.
It took many years, a lot of work and many scientists to develop the technology and develop the ideas.
And 20 years later, almost 30 years ago, they started to build two gravitational wave detectors, two interferometers, in the United States.
Each one is four kilometers long; one is in Livingston, Louisiana, in the middle of a beautiful forest, and the other is in Hanford, Washington, in the middle of the desert.
The interferometers have lasers that travel from the center through four kilometers in-vacuum, are reflected in mirrors and then they return.
We measure the difference in the distances between this arm and this arm.
These detectors are very, very, very sensitive; they're the most precise instruments in the world.
Why did we make two?
It's because the signals that we want to measure come from space, but the mirrors are moving all the time, so in order to distinguish the gravitational wave effects -- which are astrophysical effects and should show up on the two detectors -- we can distinguish them from the local effects, which appear separately, either on one or the other.
In September of 2015, we were finishing installing the second-generation technology in the detectors, and we still weren't at the optimal sensitivity that we wanted -- we're still not, even now, two years later -- but we wanted to gather data.
We didn't think we'd see anything, but we were getting ready to start collecting a few months' worth of data.
And then nature surprised us.
On September 14, 2015, we saw, in both detectors, a gravitational wave.
In both detectors, we saw a signal with cycles that increased in amplitude and frequency and then go back down.
And they were the same in both detectors.
They were gravitational waves.
And not only that -- in decoding this type of wave, we were able to deduce that they came from black holes fusing together to make one, more than a billion years ago.
And that was -- (Applause) that was fantastic.
At first, we couldn't believe it.
We didn't imagine this would happen until much later; it was a surprise for all of us.
It took us months to convince ourselves that it was true, because we didn't want to leave any room for error.
But it was true, and to clear up any doubt that the detectors really could measure these things, in December of that same year, we measured another gravitational wave, smaller than the first one.
The first gravitational wave produced a difference in the distance of four-thousandths of a proton over four kilometers.
Yes, the second detection was smaller, but still very convincing by our standards.
Despite the fact that these are space-time waves and not sound waves, we like to put them into loudspeakers and listen to them.
We call this "the music of the universe."
I'd like you to listen to the first two notes of that music.
(Chirping sound) (Chirping sound) The second, shorter sound was the last fraction of a second of the two black holes which, in that fraction of a second, emitted vast amounts of energy -- so much energy, it was like three Suns converting into energy, following that famous formula, E = mc2.
Remember that one?
We love this music so much we actually dance to it.
I'm going to have you listen again.
(Chirping sound) (Chirping sound) It's the music of the universe!
(Applause) People frequently ask me now: "What can gravitational waves be used for?
And now that you've discovered them, what else is there left to do?"
What can gravitational waves be used for?
When they asked Borges, "What is the purpose of poetry?"
he, in turn, answered, "What's the purpose of dawn?
What's the purpose of caresses?
What's the purpose of the smell of coffee?"
He answered, "The purpose of poetry is pleasure; it's for emotion, it's for living."
And understanding the universe, this human curiosity for knowing how everything works, is similar.
Since time immemorial, humanity -- all of us, everyone, as kids -- when we look up at the sky for the first time and see the stars, we wonder, "What are stars?"
That curiosity is what makes us human.
And that's what we do with science.
We like to say that gravitational waves now have a purpose, because we're opening up a new way to explore the universe.
Until now, we were able to see the light of the stars via electromagnetic waves.
Now we can listen to the sound of the universe, even of things that don't emit light, like gravitational waves.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) But are they useful?
Can't we derive any technology from gravitational waves?
Yes, probably.
But it will probably take a lot of time.
We've developed the technology to detect them, but in terms of the waves themselves, maybe we'll discover 100 years from now that they are useful.
But it takes a lot of time to derive technology from science, and that's not why we do it.
All technology is derived from science, but we practice science for the enjoyment.
What's left to do?
A lot.
A lot; this is only the beginning.
As we make the detectors more and more sensitive -- and we have lots of work to do there -- not only are we going to see more black holes and be able to catalog how many there are, where they are and how big they are, we'll also be able to see other objects.
We'll see neutron stars fuse and turn into black holes.
We'll see a black holes being born.
We'll be able to see rotating stars in our galaxy produce sinusoidal waves.
We'll be able to see explosions of supernovas in our galaxy.
We'll be seeing a whole spectrum of new sources.
We like to say that we've added a new sense to the human body: now, in addition to seeing, we're able to hear.
This is a revolution in astronomy, like when Galileo invented the telescope.
It's like when they added sound to silent movies.
This is just the beginning.
We like to think that the road to science is very long -- very fun, but very long -- and that we, this large, international community of scientists, working from many countries, together as a team, are helping to build that road; that we're shedding light -- sometimes encountering detours -- and building, perhaps, a highway to the universe.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Billy Pilgrim can’t sleep because he knows aliens will arrive to abduct him in one hour.
He knows the aliens are coming because he has become “unstuck” in time, causing him to experience events out of chronological order.
Over the course of Kurt Vonnegut’s Slaughterhouse-five, he hops back and forth between a childhood trip to the Grand Canyon, his life as a middle-aged optometrist, his captivity in an intergalactic zoo, the humiliations he endured as a war prisoner, and more.
The title of Slaughterhouse-five and much of its source material came from Vonnegut’s own experiences in World War II.
As a prisoner of war, he lived in a former slaughterhouse in Dresden, where he took refuge in an underground meat locker while Allied forces bombed the city.
When he and the other prisoners finally emerged, they found Dresden utterly demolished.
After the war, Vonnegut tried to make sense of human behavior by studying an unusual aspect of anthropology: the shapes of stories, which he insisted were just as interesting as the shapes of pots or spearheads.
To find the shape, he graphed the main character’s fortune from the beginning to the end of a story.
The zany curves he generated revealed common types of fairy tales and myths that echo through many cultures.
But this shape can be the most interesting of all.
In a story like this, it’s impossible to distinguish the character’s good fortune from the bad.
Vonnegut thought this kind of story was the truest to real life, in which we are all the victims of a series of accidents, unable to predict how events will impact us long term.
He found the tidy, satisfying arcs of many stories at odds with this reality, and he set out to explore the ambiguity between good and bad fortune in his own work.
When Vonnegut ditched clear-cut fortunes, he also abandoned straightforward chronology.
Instead of proceeding tidily from beginning to end, in his stories “All moments, past, present and future always have existed, always will exist.” Tralfamadorians, the aliens who crop up in many of his books, see all moments at once.
They “can see where each star has been and where it is going, so that the heavens are filled with rarefied, luminous spaghetti.” But although they can see all of time, they don’t try to change the course of events.
While the Trafalmadorians may be at peace with their lack of agency, Vonnegut’s human characters are still getting used to it.
In The Sirens of Titan, when they seek the meaning of life in the vastness of the universe, they find nothing but “empty heroics, low comedy, and pointless death.” Then, from their vantage point within a “chrono-synclastic infundibulum,” a man and his dog see devastating futures for their earthly counterparts, but can’t change the course of events.
Though there aren’t easy answers available, they eventually conclude that the purpose of life is “to love whoever is around to be loved.” In Cat’s Cradle, Vonnegut’s characters turn to a different source of meaning: Bokonism, a religion based on harmless lies that all its adherents recognize as lies.
Though they’re aware of Bokonism’s lies, they live their lives by these tenets anyway, and in so doing develop some genuine hope.
They join together in groups called Karasses, which consist of people we “find by accident but […] stick with by choice”— cosmically linked around a shared purpose.
These are not to be confused with Granfalloons, groups of people who appoint significance to actually meaningless associations, like where you grew up, political parties, and even entire nations.
Though he held a bleak view of the human condition, Vonnegut believed strongly that “we are all here to help each other get through this thing, whatever it is."
We might get pooped and demoralized, but Vonnegut interspersed his grim assessments with more than a few morsels of hope.
His fictional alter ego, Kilgore Trout, supplied this parable: two yeast sat “discussing the possible purposes of life as they ate sugar and suffocated in their own excrement.
Because of their limited intelligence, they never came close to guessing that they were making champagne.” In spite of his insistence that we’re all here to fart around, in spite of his deep concerns about the course of human existence, Vonnegut also advanced the possibility, however slim, that we might end up making something good.
And if that isn’t nice, what is?
I took a cell phone and accidentally made myself famous.
(Laughter) I was just talking about the things that I cared about, but with the click of a button and an incendiary viral video I propelled myself into overnight stardom.
When I say overnight, I mean I literally woke up the next morning with so many notifications on my phone, I thought I slept through a national tragedy.
(Laughter) It was the craziest thing, guys, but when it came to my influence and my exposure, I literally took a quantum leap.
So I made more videos and the subject matter of my videos was often the most divisive subject in American life, but it was the way that I articulated race that made me somewhat of a digital lightning rod.
See, being a survivor myself of police brutality and having lost a childhood friend, Alonzo Ashley, at the hands of the police, I had a little something to say about the topic.
You see, this was at the height of the Black Lives Matter furor and people seemed to be turning to me to articulate their viewpoints, and honestly, it was sort of overwhelming.
You see, the internet has this interesting quality.
In one way, it totally brought the world together, and I remember being a kid and all of this utopian propaganda was being dumped on us about how the World Wide Web was going to span the reaches of people across the globe.
But as it turns out, people are people.
(Laughter) And this magical superhighway also took the demons of our nature and gave them Ferraris.
(Laughter) You see, technology, y'all, is a lot like money.
It just brings out what's already inside you and amplifies it.
And so I soon became familiar with the phenomenon of the internet troll.
These guys seem to live beneath the bridges of said superhighway -- (Laughter) And they also missed the memo about the enlightenment of the internet age.
I remember being called highly colorful racial slurs by those who use the anonymity of the internet as a Klan hood.
And some of them were pretty creative, actually, but others were pretty wounding, especially navigating the post-traumatic world of a police brutality survivor in the height of Black Lives Matter, with all of these people being killed on my timeline.
To these trolls, I wasn't a human.
I was an idea, an object, a caricature.
Did I mention that this race stuff can be kind of divisive?
You see, I'm an innately curious person and as I drew my sword to engage in epic battles in the comment section -- (Laughter) I also began to notice that a few of my trolls actually had brains, which made me even more curious and what to understand them even further.
And although these supposed morons engaged in what appeared to be original thought, I said to myself, "Um, these guys are highly misinformed, at least according to my knowledge."
Where are these guys getting these arguments from?
Like, was there some kind of alternative universe with alternative facts?
(Laughter) (Applause) Was history and gravity optional over there?
But I needed to know. Like, I wanted to know.
And as it turns out, I had no idea about digital echo chambers.
That same target marketing algorithm that feeds you more of the products you like to buy also feeds you more of the news that you like to hear.
I had been living in an online universe that just reflected my worldview back to me.
So my timeline was pretty liberal.
I had no Breitbart or Infowars or Fox News.
No, no, I was all MSNBC and The Daily Show, CNN and theGrio, right?
Well, these trolls were hopping the dimensional doorway and I needed to figure out how.
(Laughter) So what I decided to do was trick the Facebook algorithm into feeding me more news that I didn't necessarily agree with, and this worked fine for a while, but it wasn't enough, because my online footprint already established the patterns that I like to hear.
So with the anonymity of the internet, I went undercover.
(Laughter) I set up this ghost profile and went crazy.
Now, on a practical level, it was very simple, but on an emotional level, it was kind of daunting, especially with the racist vitriol that I had experienced.
But what I didn't realize is that my trolls were inoculating me, thickening my skin, making me immune to viewpoints that I didn't necessarily agree with, and so I didn't react to the same things as I would have several months prior.
All right? So I pressed on.
Noticing that this stuff also worked on YouTube, I became Lucius25, white supremacist lurker -- (Laughter) And digitally I began to infiltrate the infamous alt-right movement.
Now, my doppelgänger was Edgar Rice Burroughs' John Carter character -- (Laughter) a sci-fi hero who was once a Confederate soldier.
And to think, like, years ago, I would have needed acting training and, like, makeup and a fake ID.
Now I could just lurk.
And so I started with a little Infowars, went on into some American Renaissance, National Vanguard Alliance, and, you know, I started commenting on videos, talking bad about Al Sharpton and Black Lives Matter.
I started bemoaning race baiters like Eric Holder and Barack Obama and just mirroring the antiblack sentiments that were thrown at me.
And to be honest, it was kind of exhilarating.
(Laughter) Like, I would literally spend days clicking through my new racist profile -- (Laughter) Goofing off at work in Aryan land. It was something else.
(Laughter) And so I then started visiting some of the pages of my former trolls, and a lot of these guys were just regular Joes, a lot of outdoorsmen, hunters, computer nerds, some of them family guys with videos of their families.
I mean, for all I know, some of y'all could be in this room right now. Right?
(Laughter) But when I went undercover, I found a lovely plethora of characters, luminaries like Milo Yiannopoulos, Richard Spencer and David Duke.
All of these guys were thought leaders in their own right, but over time, the alt-right movement ended up using their information to fuel their momentum.
And I'm going to tell you what else led to the momentum of the alt-right: the left wing's wholesale demonization of everything white and male.
If you are a pale-skinned penis-haver, you're in league with Satan.
(Laughter) Now, would you believe, would you believe that some people find that offensive?
And -- (Laughter) And so, I mean, listen, the fact is that millennials get a lifetime of diet brand history.
I mean, America seems to be hellbent on filling its textbooks with CliffsNotes versions of its dark past.
This severely, severely decontextualizes race and the anger associated with it, and that is fertile ground for alt-facts to grow.
Add in the wild landscape of the internet and it's easy to sell rebranded "Mein Kampf" ideas to a generation who has been failed by public schools.
A lot of these ideas, easily debunked.
Alt-facts have that quality.
However, one theme kept screaming at me through the subtext of those arguments, and that was, why should I be hated for who I cannot help but be?
Now, as a black man in America, that resonated with me.
I have spent so much time defending myself against attempts to demonize me and make me apologize for who I am, trying to portray me as something that I'm not, some kind of thug or gangster, a menace to society.
Unexpected compassion.
Wow.
Now, listen, the historical source of the demonization of black males and white males is highly different, and where you fall on this argument, sadly, tends to be an accident of birth.
Now, you're probably surprised by this perspective, and so was I.
Never in a billion years did I think that I could have some kind of compassion for people who hated my guts.
Now, mind you, not enough compassion like I want to be friends.
I don't have infinite olive branches to extend to people who, like, would not want to see me on this planet. Right?
But just enough compassion to understand how they got to where they are.
And to be honest, there were a couple of fair points.
One of them was how liberals have this wide acceptance for everybody except for those with honestly held conservative viewpoints.
(Laughter) Heaven forbid you love God, this country and mean it. Right?
And another thing that they talked about was this fear that they had of something that they labeled as "white genocide," that diversity would be a force that would wipe them out.
Now listen, I know what it is to fear for the fate of your people.
Between crack, AIDS, gang violence, mass incarceration, gentrification, police shootings, black people have more than enough reasons to stay up at night.
But if nature is into diversity and you are not, you're going to lose that fight, buddy.
(Laughter) (Applause) You see, nature doesn't care about your race. That's man-made.
Nature just cares about healthy organisms, and your precious ethnic features are expendable to that aim.
So the moment that you let go of that racist identity and relatch onto humanity, all your problems go away.
(Applause) I'm going to tell you what race ain't about to die out: the human race.
Join the party. The water's great.
Until the water gets too hot, but that's another TED Talk.
(Laughter) The point is that to get to this point of understanding, you have to let go of that fear and embrace your curiosity, and sadly, too many people will not take that journey to see the world from the other side.
And, I mean, let's be honest, that doesn't just go for progressives, but also to the right wing and conservatives.
You know, as fair as some of their points were, they were still trapped in their own echo chambers, recycling old, outdated points of view, never getting a diversity in perspective, not making them well-rounded in their worldview.
So they're not hearing certain anti-racist and political voices, voices like Tim Wise and Michelle Alexander, Dr. Joy DeGruy, Boyce Watkins, Tariq Nasheed.
All of these voices have the answers to the questions that they want, but unfortunately they will not hear them due to the power of these echo chambers.
We have got to break out of these digital divides, because as our technology advances, the consequences of our tribalism become more dangerous.
And this whole experience taught me something: our gadgets ain't going to save us.
All these technological devices are only mastery of the universe out there, not the one in here.
And so that's all IQ, not EQ.
That's a dangerous imbalance.
Where do you get the emotional intelligence, the character development, the virtues of patience, forbearance, compassion, you know, the things that make sure that these devices, however advanced, become a blessing and not a curse?
Seems to be me that humanity itself needs an upgrade.
Now -- (Applause) That's a big task, understandably, but I don't believe in any kind of unbeatable monster.
There was no giant out there without perhaps a simple Achilles heel.
And what if I told you that one of the best ways to actually overcome this is to have courageous conversations with difficult people, people who do not see the world the same way that you see the world?
Oh yes, folks, conversations may be indeed the key to that upgrade, because remember, language was the first form of virtual reality.
It is literally a symbolic representation of the physical world, and through this device, we change the physical world.
Keep in mind, conversations stop violence, conversations start countries, they build bridges, and when the chips are down, conversations are the last tools that humans use before they pick up their guns.
And I ain't talking about online safe conversations from the security of your laptop.
I'm talking about in-your-face conversations with real, breathing people.
And for me, this looks like running a community forum called Shop Talk Live.
Now, in Shop Talk Live -- somebody's been there, right?
In Shop Talk Live, we have the conversations that change lives.
We meet the community right where they are, and we've done everything from divert gang violence in real time to help find people jobs to mentoring homeless youth.
And the reason why we needed to do this is because there was a severe lack of trust in the black community due to the violence of the crack era.
And so we ended up taking agency into our own hands, solving our own problems, not waiting for anybody else.
And the truth is, from the mayor to the felon, you're going to find them in that barber shop.
And so what we did was just organize what was already going on.
And so what I started doing was mining these alternative viewpoints from these alternative digital universes, dissecting them, breaking them down into controversial talking points.
Then, with my cell phone, I flipped the internet against itself and began to broadcast these live conversations to my online followers.
This made them want to leave the safety of their laptops and meet us in person to have real conversations with real people in real life.
And we did this. Thank you.
(Applause) Sometimes I sit back, and I reflect on the paradox of me just trying to solve the problems, us trying to solve the problems in our own communities -- we build bridges to so many other communities, from the LGBTQ community to the Arab immigrant community and even sat down with somebody with a Confederate flag on their hat and talked about the things that actually matter.
It is time that we stop trying to hack our way around the human experience.
There is no way out of each other.
Stop trying to find one.
(Applause) We have to understand something.
Human beings all want the same things and we have to go through each other to get these things.
These courageous conversations are the way that these bridges are built.
It's time that we start seeing people as people and not simply the ideas that we project onto them or react to.
Human beings are not the barriers but the gateways to the very things that we want.
This is a collective and conscious evolution.
My journey began with a terribly popular cell phone video and a fallen friend.
Your journey begins right about now.
Join the renaissance in human connection.
It is going to happen with or without you.
My suggestion: pick a topic, and start a community dialogue in your neck of the woods.
Meet folks back in real life.
And I'm going to tell you, when you trick the algorithm of your existence, you will get some diversified experiences.
It is time to grow, people.
And when we do this, not if, it will be clear that the key to this upgrade was always our inner world, not some device that we create, and the doorways to this experience is now, and will forever be, each other.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What are you doing on this stage in front of all these people?
(Laughter) Run!
(Laughter) Run now.
That's the voice of my anxiety talking.
Even when there's absolutely nothing wrong, I sometimes get this overwhelming sense of doom, like danger is lurking just around the corner.
You see, a few years ago, I was diagnosed with generalized anxiety and depression -- two conditions that often go hand in hand.
Now, there was a time I wouldn't have told anybody, especially not in front of a big audience.
As a black woman, I've had to develop extraordinary resilience to succeed.
And like most people in my community, I had the misconception that depression was a sign of weakness, a character flaw.
But I wasn't weak; I was a high achiever.
I'd earned a Master's degree in Media Studies and had a string of high-profile jobs in the film and television industries.
I'd even won two Emmy Awards for my hard work.
Sure, I was totally spent, I lacked interest in things I used to enjoy, barely ate, struggled with insomnia and felt isolated and depleted.
But depressed?
No, not me.
It took weeks before I could admit it, but the doctor was right: I was depressed.
Still, I didn't tell anybody about my diagnosis.
I was too ashamed.
I didn't think I had the right to be depressed.
I had a privileged life with a loving family and a successful career.
And when I thought about the unspeakable horrors that my ancestors had been through in this country so that I could have it better, my shame grew even deeper.
I was standing on their shoulders.
How could I let them down?
I would hold my head up, put a smile on my face and never tell a soul.
On July 4, 2013, my world came crashing in on me.
That was the day I got a phone call from my mom telling me that my 22-year-old nephew, Paul, had ended his life, after years of battling depression and anxiety.
There are no words that can describe the devastation I felt.
Paul and I were very close, but I had no idea he was in so much pain.
Neither one of us had ever talked to the other about our struggles.
The shame and stigma kept us both silent.
Now, my way of dealing with adversity is to face it head on, so I spent the next two years researching depression and anxiety, and what I found was mind-blowing.
The World Health Organization reports that depression is the leading cause of sickness and disability in the world.
While the exact cause of depression isn't clear, research suggests that most mental disorders develop, at least in part, because of a chemical imbalance in the brain, and/or an underlying genetic predisposition.
So you can't just shake it off.
For black Americans, stressors like racism and socioeconomic disparities put them at a 20 percent greater risk of developing a mental disorder, yet they seek mental health services at about half the rate of white Americans.
One reason is the stigma, with 63 percent of black Americans mistaking depression for a weakness.
Sadly, the suicide rate among black children has doubled in the past 20 years.
Now, here's the good news: seventy percent of people struggling with depression will improve with therapy, treatment and medication.
Armed with this information, I made a decision: I wasn't going to be silent anymore.
With my family's blessing, I would share our story in hopes of sparking a national conversation.
A friend, Kelly Pierre-Louis, said, "Being strong is killing us."
She's right.
We have got to retire those tired, old narratives of the strong black woman and the super-masculine black man, who, no matter how many times they get knocked down, just shake it off and soldier on.
Having feelings isn't a sign of weakness.
Feelings mean we're human.
And when we deny our humanity, it leaves us feeling empty inside, searching for ways to self-medicate in order to fill the void.
My drug was high achievement.
These days, I share my story openly, and I ask others to share theirs, too.
I believe that's what it takes to help people who may be suffering in silence to know that they are not alone and to know that with help, they can heal.
Now, I still have my struggles, particularly with the anxiety, but I'm able to manage it through daily mediation, yoga and a relatively healthy diet.
(Laughter) If I feel like things are starting to spiral, I make an appointment to see my therapist, a dynamic black woman named Dawn Armstrong, who has a great sense of humor and a familiarity that I find comforting.
I will always regret that I couldn't be there for my nephew.
But my sincerest hope is that I can inspire others with the lesson that I've learned.
Life is beautiful.
Sometimes it's messy, and it's always unpredictable.
But it will all be OK when you have your support system to help you through it.
I hope that if your burden gets too heavy, you'll ask for a hand, too.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to begin today with a story and end with a revolution.
(Laughter) Are you ready?
Audience: Yes!
Naomi McDougall-Jones: Here's the story.
All my life I wanted to be an actress.
From the time I was very small, I could feel the magic of storytelling and I wanted to be a part of it.
So, at the ripe age of 21, I graduated from the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City, bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, and ready to take my rightful place as the next Meryl Streep.
That's my grandmother, not Meryl Streep.
(Laughter) Now, it's important for this story that you understand that I was raised by a raging feminist.
I mean, just to give you some idea: when I was five or six years old and obsessed with "The Sound of Music," and running around, singing, "I am 16 going on 17," all day every day, my mother sat me down for a very serious conversation and she said, "OK, look.
I'm not going to say that you can't sing that song, but if you are going to sing that song, I do need you to understand the extremely problematic gender construct that it reinforces."
(Laughter) So that's where I come from.
So it just honestly never even occurred to me that I would be prevented from doing anything in my life because I'm a woman.
OK. So I graduate.
And I start auditioning and I get work, slowly.
But I just start noticing that the parts available for women are terrible.
But, remember -- I came here to play smart, willful, complicated, interesting complex, confident female characters, right?
Like Meryl.
And all of the sudden, I am wrestling with 300 other gorgeous, talented women to play ...
"[Female] No dialogue.
The character only needs to stand on a balcony, look forlorn, and walk back inside the house.
Only partial nudity."
(Laughter) "[Sarah] Brian's love interest.
Attractive, cute, and flirty, she is the ideal girl and Brian's prize throughout the entire film."
"[Mom] A proper Southern belle who is making peace with the fact that her only purpose in life is to tend to her husband."
"[Abby] Must be OK with a tastefully shot gang rape, along with performing 19th-century dance."
(Laughter) Those are actual casting notices.
And so I just mentioned this to my agent one day, I say, "I feel like I'm not really going in for parts that I'm actually excited about playing.
And he said, "Yeah. I don't really know what to do with you.
You're too smart for the parts that are being written for women in their 20s, and you're not quite pretty enough to be the hot one, so I think you'll work when you're 35."
(Laughter) And I said, "Oh. That's funny.
I always thought that when you were 35, you were kind of, like, over the hill as an actress, that you were relegated to playing 20-year-olds' mothers."
And he said, "Yeah -- (Laughter) It's just the way it is."
So, maybe a year or so after this, I'm having lunch with an actress friend of mine, and we're talking about how insane this is.
And we decide, you know what? No problem.
And I'll write and then I'll write it about two complex female characters.
So we do.
We set out to make this movie, and sort of accidentally, we end up hiring an all-female production team: the writer, directors, producers, and it's a film about two women.
And so pretty soon, we're sitting in the office of a successful male producer, and he goes, "OK, girls.
So, you do understand that at some point you are going to have to hire a male producer onboard, right?
Just so that people will trust you with their money."
Over and over again, people tell us, "Yeah, but people don't really want to see films about women, so maybe you should think about making something else.
It's just the way it is."
So we make the movie, anyway.
We scrape together 80,000 dollars, and we make it, and it does so well.
It gets into tons of festivals and we win a lot of awards and it's big and exciting.
But these experiences I've had just keep rubbing at me.
And so, I just start talking about them, first, at Q and A's after screenings of the film, and then I get invited to be on panels and talk at conferences.
And the really amazing thing is that, to begin with, when I'm just talking to audiences and other people, you know, coming up in the film industry, the universal reaction is, "Oh my god! This is terrible. What do we do about this?"
But the bigger panels I get on, suddenly an Oscar nominee tells me, "Look, I totally agree with everything you're saying.
You just need to be really careful about where you say it."
An Oscar-winning producer tells me that she doesn't think it's a good idea to play the woman card.
It's just the way it is.
And I think this is how sexism continues on in 2016, right?
For the most part, it happens casually -- unconsciously, even.
It happens because people are just trying to get along within an existing system.
It happens, maybe, out of a genuine desire to teach a young woman the way that the world "just is."
The problem is that unless we do something about it, that is the way the world will always be.
So why should you care about this?
Right?
I mean, we're facing some rather significant problems in the world just at present, what does it really matter if I can't get a job, or you're stuck watching "Transformer 17," right?
(Laughter) Well, let me put it to you this way: the year "Jaws" came out, Americans suddenly started listing "sharks" among their top 10 major fears.
In 1995, BMW paid the James Bond franchise three million dollars to have James Bond switch from driving an Aston Martin to a BMW Z3.
That one move caused so many people to go out and buy that car, that BMW made 240 million dollars in pre-sales alone.
The year that "Brave" and "Hunger Games" came out, female participation in archery went up 105 percent.
(Laughter) In fact, studies show that the movies you watch don't just affect your hobbies, they affect your career choices, your emotions, your sense of identity, your relationships, your mental health -- even your marital status.
So now, consider this: if you have watched mostly American movies in your lifetime, 95 percent of all the films you have ever seen were directed by men.
Somewhere between 80 and 90 percent of all of the leading characters that you have ever seen were men.
And even if we just talk about the last five years, 55 percent of the time that you have seen a woman in a movie, she was naked or scantily clad.
That affects you.
That affects all of us.
We actually can't even imagine how much it affects us, because this is all we've ever had.
Stories -- and movies are just modern stories -- are not frivolous.
They're actually the mechanism through which we process our experience of being alive.
They're the way that we understand the world and our place in it.
They're the way we develop empathy for people who have experiences different than our own.
And right now, all of that is being funneled at us through the prism of this one perspective.
It's not that it's a bad perspective, but don't we deserve to hear them all?
How would the world be different if all of the stories were told?
So what do we do about this?
This may be the first time a lot of you are hearing about this, but a lot of us within the film industry have spent years -- a lot of people, a lot longer than I have -- giving speeches and doing panels and writing articles and doing studies, and really just yelling at Hollywood to do a better job about this.
I mean, we have really yelled at them.
And yet, Paramount and Fox recently released their slates, and of the 47 films that they will release between now and 2018, not a single one will be directed by a woman.
So it is beginning to occur to me that waiting for Hollywood to grow a conscience may not actually be a winning strategy.
In fact, it seems to me that whenever there is a small, ruling class of people who have all of the money and power and resources, they're not actually that excited about giving it up.
And so you don't get change by asking them or even yelling at them.
You have to make that change happen through a revolution.
Now, please don't worry -- I promise you, here, now, today, our body count will be very low.
(Laughter) So, now before I get to my four-point plan for the revolution -- yes, I have a four-point plan -- I have two pieces of very good and important news for you.
Good news number one: there are female filmmakers.
(Cheers and applause) Yes! I know!
(Applause) We exist!
We actually graduate from film schools at the same rate that men do -- 50 percent.
So here we have our 50 women.
The problem is that as soon as you get to the micro-budget film, so even the very smallest films, we're already only directing 18 percent.
Then you get to slightly bigger films, indies in the $1-5 million budget range, and we go down to 12 percent.
So by the time you get to the studio system, we're only directing five percent of movies.
Now, I know some of you out there will look at this and secretly think to yourselves, "Well, maybe women just aren't as good at directing movies."
And that's not a totally insane question.
I mean, we like to believe the film industry is a meritocracy, right?
(Laughs) (Laughter) But look at this trajectory.
Either you have to accept that women are actually five percent as talented as men, which I don't, or you have to accept that there are serious systemic issues preventing us from getting from here to there.
But the good news is, we exist, and there is a vast amount of untapped potential over here.
Good news number two, and this is really good news: films by and about women make more money.
Yes! Yes! It's true!
(Cheers and applause) It's true.
The Washington Post recently released a study showing that films that feature women make 23 cents more on every dollar than films that don't.
Furthermore, my colleagues and I commissioned a study comparing 1,700 films made over the last five years and, looking at the average returns on investment -- so, how much money does that movie make -- comparing if a man or a woman filled each of the following roles: director, producer, screenwriter and lead actor.
And in every single category, the return on investment is higher if it's a woman.
Fact: women buy 51 percent of all movie tickets.
Films by and about women make more money.
And of course, at least some portion of the male population does also like women -- (Laughter) so "women films" are not just for women.
And yet, Hollywood only targets 18 percent of all of their films as "women films."
So what you're left with is a giant underserved audience and untapped profit potential.
So we exist, and we have stories to tell.
We have so many stories to tell.
And despite everything we've heard: you want to see them.
The problem is, we've got this thing -- let's call it "Hollywood" -- (Laughter) no, no, I'm just kidding; I've met some very nice people in Hollywood -- Hollywood, preventing us from getting to you.
So here is my four-point plan for the revolution, and everybody -- man or woman, in this room or anywhere in the world -- is going to get to help.
And this revolution is not just for women.
Anyone who has been disenfranchised, anyone whose story has not been told, the same principles apply, and I really hope we can do the revolution together.
My four-point plan.
Number one: watch movies.
Isn't this a good revolution?
(Laughter) OK, first I want to talk to anyone who watches movies.
Who watches movies in here?
Great!
Will you pledge to watch one film by a female filmmaker per month?
That's it, just start there. Great!
If you need help finding them, you can go to the website, moviesbyher.com It's an easily searchable database of films by women.
And as you start watching all movies, I just want you to pay attention to the female characters.
How many of them are there?
What are they wearing?
Or not?
Do they get to do cool things, or are they just there to emotionally support the men?
I'm telling you, once you see this, you're not going to be able to unsee it.
And as you start noticing this, it's going to shift your viewing habits.
And this already sizable market is going to continue to grow.
Step two: make movies.
So now I'm talking to all the female filmmakers out there: we need you to be very brave.
It will be harder for you to make movies.
In fact, there will be an entire industry constantly telling you that your stories don't matter.
And we need you to make them, anyway.
That 18 percent in the micro-budget range -- that is on us to fix.
Don't wait for permission.
Don't wait for somebody to pick you, because 95 percent says they are not going to.
Crowd fund.
Write letters to eccentric relatives.
I know how hard it is, but you have to make your movies -- now, today, features, not shorts.
There is an audience for them, and they want and need to see them.
Three: invest in each other.
Fellow female filmmakers, I feel like we need to stop wasting so much energy on a system that does not want us.
We need to find our audience and invest in cultivating them.
If we can figure out how to make our movies and deliver them to the audiences that want them, that's it.
That's the whole game.
And whatever they're doing in the middle is going to cease to be quite so important.
Audiences, invest in us.
Help us make the movies that you want to see.
If you can give a female filmmaker 25 dollars in a crowdfunding campaign, great, do that.
If you can invest more seriously and help us over that critical million-dollar hurdle, do that.
But invest in seeing the other half of the story.
Four: disrupt through business.
So now I'm talking to all of the businesspeople and entrepreneurs.
This does not happen very often in the world, but right here we have a golden situation in which you can enact significant social change while also making money.
Hollywood is a system ripe for disruption.
The old models of financing and distribution are crumbling -- please come in and disrupt it.
I'll give you an example.
Right now, with some incredible women, I am launching the "The 51 Fund."
It's a venture capital fund that will finance films written, directed and produced by women in that critical $1-5 million range.
We will give a significant number of female filmmakers the chance to make their movies and we will deliver them to the audiences who want them.
Good for equality, good for business.
But that's only one example, we need more.
There is room for so many more.
So I say to you: Hollywood is leaving money on the table.
Come pick it up.
(Applause) Now, all of this may seem like a lot, but it is actually so doable.
Entrenched systems don't change because you ask the people in charge, they change because all of the people who don't have what they want rise up and make that change happen.
And don't you want to?
I want to see what the other 51 percent of the population has to say.
I want to watch movies that teach me about people who are different than I am.
I want to see women's bodies on film that aren't perfect.
I want to give our little boys the chance to empathize with female characters so that they can become more whole men.
And I definitely want to give a little girl who may not have a real-life role model the chance to watch movies and see women doing everything she dreams of achieving.
This is not about making one industry better.
This is about making a better world.
Will you help?
The time for waiting is over.
The time for the revolution is now.
(Cheers and applause)
Some months back, I was visiting this East African city, and we were stuck in traffic.
And this vendor suddenly approaches my window with a half-opened alphabet sheet.
I took a quick look at the alphabet sheet, and I thought of my daughter, how it would be nice to spread it on the floor and just play all over it with her while getting her to learn the alphabet.
So the traffic moved a bit, and I quickly grabbed a copy, and we moved on.
When I had time to fully open the alphabet sheet and take a more detailed look at it, I knew I was not going to use that to teach my daughter.
I regretted my purchase.
Why so?
Looking at the alphabet sheet reminded me of the fact that not much has changed in the education curricula in Africa.
Some decades back, I was taught out of a similar alphabet sheet.
And because of that, I struggled for years.
I struggled to reconcile my reality with the formal education I received in school, in the schools I attended.
I had identity crises.
I looked down on my reality.
I looked at my ancestry, I looked at my lineage with disrespect.
I had very little patience for what my life had to offer around me.
Why?
"A is for apple."
"A is for apple."
"A is for apple" is for that child in that part of the world where apples grow out; who has an apple in her lunch bag; who goes to the grocery store with her mom and sees red, green, yellow -- apples of all shapes and colors and sizes.
And so, introducing education to this child with an alphabet sheet like this fulfills one of the major functions of education, which is to introduce the learner to an appreciation of the learner's environment and a curiosity to explore more in order to add value.
In my own case, when and where I grew up in Africa, apple was an exotic fruit.
Two or three times a year, I could get some yellowish apples with brown dots, you know, signifying thousands of miles traveled -- warehouses storing -- to get to me.
I grew up in the city to very financially comfortable parents, so it was my dignified reality, exactly the same way cassava fufu or ugali would not regularly feature in an American, Chinese or Indian diet, apples didn't count as part of my reality.
So what this did to me, introducing education to me with "A is for apple," made education an abstraction.
It made it something out of my reach -- a foreign concept, a phenomenon for which I would have to constantly and perpetually seek the validation of those it belonged to for me to make progress within it and with it.
That was tough for a child; it would be tough for anyone.
As I grew up and I advanced academically, my reality was further separated from my education.
In history, I was taught that the Scottish explorer Mungo Park discovered the Niger River.
And so it bothered me.
My great-great-grandparents grew up quite close to the edge of the Niger River.
(Laughter) And it took someone to travel thousands of miles from Europe to discover a river right under their nose?
(Laughter) No!
(Applause and cheers) What did they do with their time?
(Laughter) Playing board games, roasting fresh yams, fighting tribal wars?
I mean, I just knew my education was preparing me to go somewhere else and practice and give to another environment that it belonged to.
It was not for my environment, where and when I grew up.
And this continued.
This philosophy undergirded my studies all through the time I studied in Africa.
It took a lot of experiences and some studies for me to begin to have a change of mindset.
I will share a couple of the remarkable ones with us.
I was in the United States in Washington, DC studying towards my doctorate, and I got this consultancy position with the World Bank Africa Region.
And so I remember one day, my boss -- we were having a conversation on some project, and he mentioned a particular World Bank project, a large-scale irrigation project that cost millions of dollars in Niger Republic that was faltering sustainably.
He said this project wasn't so sustainable, and it bothered those that instituted the whole package.
But then he mentioned a particular project, a particular traditional irrigation method that was hugely successful in the same Niger Republic where the World Bank project was failing.
And that got me thinking.
So I did further research, and I found out about Tassa.
Tassa is a traditional irrigation method where 20- to 30-centimeter-wide and 20- to 30-centimeter-deep holes are dug across a field to be cultivated.
Then, a small dam is constructed around the field, and then crops are planted across the surface area.
What happens is that when rain falls, the holes are able to store the water and appropriate it to the extent that the plant needs the water.
The plant can only assimilate as much water as needed until harvest time.
Niger is 75 percent scorched desert, so this is something that is a life-or-death situation, and it has been used for centuries.
In an experiment that was conducted, two similar plots of land were used in the experiment, and one plot of land did not have the Tassa technique on it.
Similar plots.
The other one had Tassa technique constructed on it.
Then similar grains of millet also were planted on both plots.
During harvest time, the plot of land without Tassa technique yielded 11 kilograms of millet per hectare.
The plot of land with Tassa technique yielded 553 kilograms of millet per hectare.
(Applause) I looked at the research, and I looked at myself.
I said, "I studied agriculture for 12 years, from primary to Senior Six, as we say in East Africa, SS3 in West Africa or 12th grade.
No one ever taught me of any form of traditional African knowledge of cultivation -- of harvesting, of anything -- that will work in modern times and actually succeed, where something imported from the West would struggle to succeed.
That was when I knew the challenge, the challenge of Africa's curricula, And I thus began my quest to dedicate my life, concern my life work, to studying, conducting research on Africa's own knowledge system and being able to advocate for its mainstreaming in education, in research, policy across sectors and industries.
Another conversation and experience I had at the bank I guess made me take that final decision of where I was going to go, even though it wasn't the most lucrative research to go into, but it was just about what I believed in.
And so one day, my boss said that he likes to go to Africa to negotiate World Bank loans and to work on World Bank projects.
And I was intrigued. I asked him why.
He said, "Oh, when I go to Africa, it's so easy.
I just write up my loan documents and my project proposal in Washington, DC, I go to Africa, and they all just get signed.
I get the best deal, and I'm back to base.
My bosses are happy with me."
But then he said, "I hate going to Asia or ..."
and he mentioned a particular country, Asia and some of these countries.
"They keep me for this, trying to get the best deal for their countries.
They get the best deal.
They tell me, 'Oh, that clause will not work for us in our environment.
It's not our reality. It's just so Western.' And they tell me, 'Oh, we have enough experts to take care of this.
You don't have enough experts.
We know our aim.' And they just keep going through all these things.
By the time they finish, yes, they get the best deal, but I'm so exhausted and I don't get the best deal for the bank, and we're in business."
"Really?" I thought in my head, "OK."
I was privileged to sit in on a loan negotiating session in an African country.
So I would do these consultancy positions during summer, you know, since I was a doctoral student.
And then I traveled with the team, with the World Bank team, as more like someone to help out with organizational matters.
But I sat in during the negotiating session.
I had mostly Euro-Americans, you know, with me from Washington, DC.
And I looked across the table at my African brothers and sisters.
I could see intimidation on their faces.
They didn't believe they had anything to offer the great-great-grandchildren of Mungo Park -- the owners of "apple" in "A is for apple."
They just sat and watched: "Oh, just give us, let us sign.
You own the knowledge. You know it all.
Just, where do we sign? Show us, let us sign."
They had no voice. They didn't believe in themselves.
Excuse me.
And so, I have been doing this for a decade.
I have been conducting research on Africa's knowledge system, original, authentic, traditional knowledge.
In the few cases where this has been implemented in Africa, there has been remarkable successes recorded.
I think of Gacaca.
Gacaca is Rwanda's traditional judicial system that was used after the genocide.
In 1994, when the genocide ended, Rwanda's national court system was in shambles: no judges, no lawyers to try hundreds of thousands of genocide cases.
So the government of Rwanda came up with this idea to resuscitate a traditional judicial system known as Gacaca.
Gacaca is a community-based judicial system, where community members come together to elect men and women of proven integrity to try cases of crimes committed within these communities.
So by the time Gacaca concluded its trial of genocide cases in 2012, 12,000 community-based courts had tried approximately 1.2 million cases.
That's a record.
(Applause) Most importantly is that Gacaca emphasized Rwanda's traditional philosophy of reconciliation and reintegration, as against the whole punitive and banishment idea that undergirds present-day Western style.
And not to compare, but just to say that it really emphasized Rwanda's traditional method of philosophy.
And so it was Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, former president of Tanzania -- (Applause) who said that you cannot develop people.
People will have to develop themselves.
I agree with Mwalimu.
I am convinced that Africa's further transformation, Africa's advancement, rests simply in the acknowledgment, validation and mainstreaming of Africa's own traditional, authentic, original, indigenous knowledge in education, in research, in policy making and across sectors.
This is not going to be easy for Africa.
It is not going to be easy for a people used to being told how to think, what to do, how to go about it, a people long subjected to the intellectual guidance and direction of others, be they the colonial masters, aid industry or international news media.
But it is a task that we have to do to make progress.
I am strengthened by the words of Joseph Shabalala, founder of the South African choral group Ladysmith Black Mambazo.
He said that the task ahead of us can never, ever be greater than the power within us.
We can do it.
We can unlearn looking down on ourselves.
We can learn to place value on our reality and our knowledge.
Thank you.
(Swahili) Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause)
"Robam kbach boran," or the art of Khmer classical dance, is more than 1,000 years old.
It was developed as a prayer in movement for rain and fertility, and a prosperity that this meant for an agricultural society.
Dancers who were both men and women were offered to temples where they served as living bridges between heaven and earth.
Their dancing bodies carried the prayers of the people up to the gods, and the will of the deities was delivered back through them to the people and the land.
There are a lot of curves in Khmer dance.
Our backs are arched, our knees are bent, our toes are curled, our elbows are hyperflexed and our fingers are curved backwards.
All of these curves create a serpentine impression, and this is important because before the introduction of major religions, Khmers, and people all over the world practiced animism.
Serpents were especially important in this belief system because in their fluid, curvilinear movement, they mimicked the flow of water.
So to invoke the serpent in your dancing body then was to conjure the image of rivers cutting across the earth: inspire the flow of life-giving waters.
As you can see then, Khmer classical dance is a transformation of nature, of both the physical world around us and of our own internal universe.
We have four primary hand gestures that we use.
Can we do them together?
Yeah? OK.
This is a tree.
That tree will grow, and then it will have leaves.
After it has leaves, it'll have flowers, and after it has flowers, it'll have fruit.
That fruit will drop and a new tree will grow.
And in those four gestures is the cycle of life.
These four gestures are then used to create a whole entire language with which dancers express themselves.
So for example, I can say, "I."
"I."
In dance that would be ...
"I."
Or I can say ...
"Hey you, come here, come here."
In dance ...
"Come here," or, "Go, go."
(Laughter) "Go."
And everything from ...
love ...
to sadness, to -- (Stomping) anger can be expressed through the dance as well.
There's a certain magic in the way that things are filtered, transformed and put together to create limitless possibilities in art.
The Khmer word for art, silapak, in fact, at its root, means "magic."
The artist -- the silapakar, or the silapakarani, then, is nothing short of a magician.
I am very proud to say that I belong to a long line of magicians, from my teacher, Sophiline Cheam Shapiro, to her teachers who were stars in the royal palace, to the ancient dancers of Angkor and to the primal villagers from which the art form originally took life.
That said, our cherished heritage was once almost completely destroyed.
If you are wearing glasses, please stand up.
If you speak more than one language, please stand up.
If you have light skin, please stand up.
Your glasses meant that you could afford health care.
That second or third language you spoke indicated your elite education.
Your light skin meant you didn't have to work beneath the sun.
Under the Khmer Rouge, who took over Cambodia from 1975 to 1979, we would all be dead now, targeted because of our assumed privilege.
You see, the Khmer Rouge looked to Cambodia, and they saw centuries of rigid inequality.
The king and the few elites around him had all the pleasures and comforts of the world while the mass majority suffered from backbreaking labor and harsh poverty.
You don't need a history book to see that this is true.
The Khmer word for "I," for "me," is khnhom.
This very same word can also mean "slave" and dancers were in fact known as knhom preah robam, or "slaves of the sacred dance."
The Khmer Rouge sought to end slavery in Cambodia, yet somehow they turned everyone into slaves to do it.
They became the oppression that they sought to end.
They evacuated the capital and forced people into labor camps.
They tore families apart and brainwashed children against their own parents.
Everywhere, people were dying and being killed, losing their lives from disease, overwork, execution and starvation.
The result of this is that an entire third of Cambodia's population was lost in less than four years, and in that number were 90 percent of Khmer dance artists.
In other words, nine out of 10 visions for the tradition and future were lost.
Thankfully, however, it was my teacher's teachers, Chea Samy, Soth Sam On and Chheng Phon, who would lead the revival of the art form from the ashes of war and genocide: one student, one gesture, one dance at a time.
They wrote the love, magic, beauty, history and philosophy of our lineage into the bodies of the next generation.
Nearly 40 years later, Khmer classical dance has been revived to new heights.
Yet somehow it still exists in a vulnerable environment.
The disastrous effects of war still haunt Khmer people today.
It is written in our bodies, manifested in a genetic passage of PTSD and in families facing cyclical poverty and immense cultural rifts and language barriers.
Yet beauty is a most resilient thing.
Beauty has this ability to grow anywhere and everywhere at any time.
Beauty is what connects people through time and place.
Beauty is a liberation from suffering.
As Khmer artists work to revive our culture and country, we find that there are many paths in which to move forward into the future.
And in a tradition where we often don't know the dancer's names, who they were, what their lives were like, what they felt, let me propose that we move forward honestly and openly from "khnhom."
Khnhom not as in slave, but as in conscious service.
Khnhom: "I," "me," "flowering."
My name is Prumsodun Ok.
I am Khmer, and I am American.
I am the child of refugees, a creator, a healer, and a builder of bridges.
I am my teacher's first male student in a tradition understood by many as female, and I founded Cambodia's first gay dance company.
I am the incarnation of the beauty, dreams and power of those who came before me.
The convergence of past, present and future, and of individual and collective.
Let me then play that ancient and ageless role of the artist as messenger, by sharing the words of Chheng Phon "A garden with only one type of flower, or flowers of only one color, is no good."
This is a reminder that our strength, growth, survival and very existence, lies in diversity.
It is, however, a message of courage as well.
For a flower does not ask for anyone's permission to bloom.
It was born to offer itself to the world.
Fearless love is its nature.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want us to start by thinking about this device, the phone that's very likely in your pockets right now.
Over 40 percent of Americans check their phones within five minutes of waking up every morning.
And then they look at it another 50 times during the day.
Grownups consider this device to be a necessity.
But now I want you to imagine it in the hands of a three-year-old, and as a society, we get anxious.
Parents are very worried that this device is going to stunt their children's social growth; that it's going to keep them from getting up and moving; that somehow, this is going to disrupt childhood.
So, I want to challenge this attitude.
I can envision a future where we would be excited to see a preschooler interacting with a screen.
These screens can get kids up and moving even more.
They have the power to tell us more about what a child is learning than a standardized test can.
And here's the really crazy thought: I believe that these screens have the power to prompt more real-life conversations between kids and their parents.
Now, I was perhaps an unlikely champion for this cause.
I studied children's literature because I was going to work with kids and books.
But about 20 years ago, I had an experience that shifted my focus.
I was helping lead a research study about preschoolers and websites.
And I walked in and was assigned a three-year-old named Maria.
Maria had actually never seen a computer before.
So the first thing I had to do was teach her how to use the mouse, and when I opened up the screen, she moved it across the screen, and she stopped on a character named X the Owl.
And when she did that, the owl lifted his wing and waved at her.
Maria dropped the mouse, pushed back from the table, leaped up and started waving frantically back at him.
Her connection to that character was visceral.
This wasn't a passive screen experience.
This was a human experience.
And it was exactly appropriate for a three-year-old.
I've now worked at PBS Kids for more than 15 years, and my work there is focused on harnessing the power of technology as a positive in children's lives.
I believe that as a society, we're missing a big opportunity.
We're letting our fear and our skepticism about these devices hold us back from realizing their potential in our children's lives.
Fear about kids and technology is nothing new; we've been here before.
Over 50 years ago, the debate was raging about the newly dominant media: the television.
That box in the living room?
It might be separating kids from one another.
It might keep them away from the outside world.
But this is the moment when Fred Rogers, the long-running host of "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood," challenged society to look at television as a tool, a tool that could promote emotional growth.
Here's what he did: he looked out from the screen, and he held a conversation, as if he were speaking to each child individually about feelings.
And then he would pause and let them think about them.
You can see his influence across the media landscape today, but at the time, this was revolutionary.
He shifted the way we looked at television in the lives of children.
Today it's not just one box.
Kids are surrounded by devices.
And I'm also a parent -- I understand this feeling of anxiety.
But I want us to look at three common fears that parents have, and see if we can shift our focus to the opportunity that's in each of them.
So.
Fear number one: "Screens are passive.
This is going to keep our kids from getting up and moving."
Chris Kratt and Martin Kratt are zoologist brothers who host a show about animals called "Wild Kratts."
And they approached the PBS team to say, "Can we do something with those cameras that are built into every device now?
Could those cameras capture a very natural kid play pattern -- pretending to be animals?"
So we started with bats.
And when kids came in to play this game, they loved seeing themselves on-screen with wings.
But my favorite part of this, when the game was over and we turned off the screens?
The kids kept being bats.
They kept flying around the room, they kept veering left and right to catch mosquitoes.
And they remembered things.
They remembered that bats fly at night.
And they remembered that when bats sleep, they hang upside down and fold their wings in.
This game definitely got kids up and moving.
But also, now when kids go outside, do they look at a bird and think, "How does a bird fly differently than I flew when I was a bat?"
The digital technology prompted embodied learning that kids can now take out into the world.
Fear number two: "Playing games on these screens is just a waste of time.
It's going to distract children from their education."
Game developers know that you can learn a lot about a player's skill by looking at the back-end data: Where did a player pause?
Where did they make a few mistakes before they found the right answer?
My team wanted to take that tool set and apply it to academic learning.
Our producer in Boston, WGBH, created a series of Curious George games focused on math.
And researchers came in and had 80 preschoolers play these games.
They then gave all 80 of those preschoolers a standardized math test.
We could see early on that these games were actually helping kids understand some key skills.
But our partners at UCLA wanted us to dig deeper.
They focus on data analysis and student assessment.
And they wanted to take that back-end game-play data and see if they could use it to predict a child's math scores.
So they made a neural net -- they essentially trained the computer to use this data, and here are the results.
This is a subset of the children's standardized math scores.
And this is the computer's prediction of each child's score, based on playing some Curious George games.
The prediction is astonishingly accurate, especially considering the fact that these games weren't built for assessment.
The team that did this study believes that games like these can teach us more about a child's cognitive learning than a standardized test can.
What if games could reduce testing time in the classroom?
What if they could reduce testing anxiety?
How could they give teachers snapshots of insight to help them better focus their individualized learning?
So the third fear I want to address is the one that I think is often the biggest.
And that's this: "These screens are isolating me from my child."
Let's play out a scenario.
Let's say that you are a parent, and you need 25 minutes of uninterrupted time to get dinner ready.
And in order to do that, you hand a tablet to your three-year-old.
Now, this is a moment where you probably feel very guilty about what you just did.
But now imagine this: Twenty minutes later, you receive a text message.
on that cell phone that's always within arm's reach.
And it says: "Alex just matched five rhyming words.
Ask him to play this game with you.
Can you think of a word that rhymes with 'cat'?
Or how about 'ball'?"
In our studies, when parents receive simple tips like these, they felt empowered.
They were so excited to play these games at the dinner table with their kids.
And the kids loved it, too.
Not only did it feel like magic that their parents knew what they had been playing, kids love to play games with their parents.
Just the act of talking to kids about their media can be incredibly powerful.
Last summer, Texas Tech University published a study that the show "Daniel Tiger's Neighborhood" could promote the development of empathy among children.
But there was a really important catch to this study: the greatest benefit was only when parents talked to kids about what they watched.
Neither just watching nor just talking about it was enough; it was the combination that was key.
So when I read this study, I started thinking about how rarely parents of preschoolers actually talk to kids about the content of what they're playing and what they're watching.
And so I decided to try it with my four-year-old.
I said, "Were you playing a car game earlier today?"
And Benjamin perked up and said, "Yes! And did you see that I made my car out of a pickle?
It was really hard to open the trunk."
(Laughter) This hilarious conversation about what was fun in the game and what could have been better continued all the way to school that morning.
I'm not here to suggest to you that all digital media is great for kids.
There are legitimate reasons for us to be concerned about the current state of children's content on these screens.
And it's right for us to be thinking about balance: Where do screens fit against all the other things that a child needs to do to learn and to grow?
But when we fixate on our fears about it, we forget a really major point, and that is, that kids are living in the same world that we live in, the world where the grownups check their phones more than 50 times a day.
Screens are a part of children's lives.
And if we pretend that they aren't, or if we get overwhelmed by our fear, kids are never going to learn how and why to use them.
What if we start raising our expectations for this media?
What if we start talking to kids regularly about the content on these screens?
What if we start looking for the positive impacts that this technology can have in our children's lives?
That's when the potential of these tools can become a reality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So there's a lot of valid concern these days that our technology is getting so smart that we've put ourselves on the path to a jobless future.
And I think the example of a self-driving car is actually the easiest one to see.
So these are going to be fantastic for all kinds of different reasons.
But did you know that "driver" is actually the most common job in 29 of the 50 US states?
What's going to happen to these jobs when we're no longer driving our cars or cooking our food or even diagnosing our own diseases?
Well, a recent study from Forrester Research goes so far to predict that 25 million jobs might disappear over the next 10 years.
To put that in perspective, that's three times as many jobs lost in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
And it's not just blue-collar jobs that are at risk.
On Wall Street and across Silicon Valley, we are seeing tremendous gains in the quality of analysis and decision-making because of machine learning.
So even the smartest, highest-paid people will be affected by this change.
What's clear is that no matter what your job is, at least some, if not all of your work, is going to be done by a robot or software in the next few years.
And that's exactly why people like Mark Zuckerberg and Bill Gates are talking about the need for government-funded minimum income levels.
But if our politicians can't agree on things like health care or even school lunches, I just don't see a path where they'll find consensus on something as big and as expensive as universal basic life income.
Instead, I think the response needs to be led by us in industry.
We have to recognize the change that's ahead of us and start to design the new kinds of jobs that will still be relevant in the age of robotics.
The good news is that we have faced down and recovered two mass extinctions of jobs before.
From 1870 to 1970, the percent of American workers based on farms fell by 90 percent, and then again from 1950 to 2010, the percent of Americans working in factories fell by 75 percent.
The challenge we face this time, however, is one of time.
We had a hundred years to move from farms to factories, and then 60 years to fully build out a service economy.
The rate of change today suggests that we may only have 10 or 15 years to adjust, and if we don't react fast enough, that means by the time today's elementary-school students are college-aged, we could be living in a world that's robotic, largely unemployed and stuck in kind of un-great depression.
But I don't think it has to be this way.
You see, I work in innovation, and part of my job is to shape how large companies apply new technologies.
Certainly some of these technologies are even specifically designed to replace human workers.
But I believe that if we start taking steps right now to change the nature of work, we can not only create environments where people love coming to work but also generate the innovation that we need to replace the millions of jobs that will be lost to technology.
I believe that the key to preventing our jobless future is to rediscover what makes us human, and to create a new generation of human-centered jobs that allow us to unlock the hidden talents and passions that we carry with us every day.
But first, I think it's important to recognize that we brought this problem on ourselves.
And it's not just because, you know, we are the one building the robots.
But even though most jobs left the factory decades ago, we still hold on to this factory mindset of standardization and de-skilling.
We still define jobs around procedural tasks and then pay people for the number of hours that they perform these tasks.
We've created narrow job definitions like cashier, loan processor or taxi driver and then asked people to form entire careers around these singular tasks.
These choices have left us with actually two dangerous side effects.
The first is that these narrowly defined jobs will be the first to be displaced by robots, because single-task robots are just the easiest kinds to build.
But second, we have accidentally made it so that millions of workers around the world have unbelievably boring working lives.
(Laughter) Let's take the example of a call center agent.
Over the last few decades, we brag about lower operating costs because we've taken most of the need for brainpower out of the person and put it into the system.
For most of their day, they click on screens, they read scripts.
They act more like machines than humans.
And unfortunately, over the next few years, as our technology gets more advanced, they, along with people like clerks and bookkeepers, will see the vast majority of their work disappear.
To counteract this, we have to start creating new jobs that are less centered on the tasks that a person does and more focused on the skills that a person brings to work.
For example, robots are great at repetitive and constrained work, but human beings have an amazing ability to bring together capability with creativity when faced with problems that we've never seen before.
It's when every day brings a little bit of a surprise that we have designed work for humans and not for robots.
Our entrepreneurs and engineers already live in this world, but so do our nurses and our plumbers and our therapists.
You know, it's the nature of too many companies and organizations to just ask people to come to work and do your job.
But if you work is better done by a robot, or your decisions better made by an AI, what are you supposed to be doing?
Well, I think for the manager, we need to realistically think about the tasks that will be disappearing over the next few years and start planning for more meaningful, more valuable work that should replace it.
We need to create environments where both human beings and robots thrive.
I say, let's give more work to the robots, and let's start with the work that we absolutely hate doing.
Here, robot, process this painfully idiotic report.
(Laughter) And move this box. Thank you.
(Laughter) And for the human beings, we should follow the advice from Harry Davis at the University of Chicago.
He says we have to make it so that people don't leave too much of themselves in the trunk of their car.
I mean, human beings are amazing on weekends.
Think about the people that you know and what they do on Saturdays.
They're artists, carpenters, chefs and athletes.
But on Monday, they're back to being Junior HR Specialist and Systems Analyst 3.
(Laughter) You know, these narrow job titles not only sound boring, but they're actually a subtle encouragement for people to make narrow and boring job contributions.
But I've seen firsthand that when you invite people to be more, they can amaze us with how much more they can be.
A few years ago, I was working at a large bank that was trying to bring more innovation into its company culture.
So my team and I designed a prototyping contest that invited anyone to build anything that they wanted.
We were actually trying to figure out whether or not the primary limiter to innovation was a lack of ideas or a lack of talent, and it turns out it was neither one.
It was an empowerment problem.
And the results of the program were amazing.
We started by inviting people to reenvision what it is they could bring to a team.
This contest was not only a chance to build anything that you wanted but also be anything that you wanted.
And when people were no longer limited by their day-to-day job titles, they felt free to bring all kinds of different skills and talents to the problems that they were trying to solve.
We saw technology people being designers, marketing people being architects, and even finance people showing off their ability to write jokes.
(Laughter) We ran this program twice, and each time more than 400 people brought their unexpected talents to work and solved problems that they had been wanting to solve for years.
Collectively, they created millions of dollars of value, building things like a better touch-tone system for call centers, easier desktop tools for branches and even a thank you card system that has become a cornerstone of the employee working experience.
Over the course of the eight weeks, people flexed muscles that they never dreamed of using at work.
People learned new skills, they met new people, and at the end, somebody pulled me aside and said, "I have to tell you, the last few weeks has been one of the most intense, hardest working experiences of my entire life, but not one second of it felt like work."
And that's the key.
For those few weeks, people got to be creators and innovators.
They had been dreaming of solutions to problems that had been bugging them for years, and this was a chance to turn those dreams into a reality.
And that dreaming is an important part of what separates us from machines.
For now, our machines do not get frustrated, they do not get annoyed, and they certainly don't imagine.
But we, as human beings -- we feel pain, we get frustrated.
And it's when we're most annoyed and most curious that we're motivated to dig into a problem and create change.
Our imaginations are the birthplace of new products, new services, and even new industries.
I believe that the jobs of the future will come from the minds of people who today we call analysts and specialists, but only if we give them the freedom and protection that they need to grow into becoming explorers and inventors.
If we really want to robot-proof our jobs, we, as leaders, need to get out of the mindset of telling people what to do and instead start asking them what problems they're inspired to solve and what talents they want to bring to work.
Because when you can bring your Saturday self to work on Wednesdays, you'll look forward to Mondays more, and those feelings that we have about Mondays are part of what makes us human.
And as we redesign work for an era of intelligent machines, I invite you all to work alongside me to bring more humanity to our working lives.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I recently read about what the young generation of workers want in Harvard Business Review.
One thing that stuck out to me was: don't just talk about impact, but make an impact.
I'm a little bit older than you, maybe much older than you, but this is exactly the same goal that I had when I was in college.
I wanted to make my own impact for those who live under injustice; it's the reason that I became a documentary journalist, the reason I became a prisoner in North Korea for 140 days.
It was March 17, 2009.
It is St. Patrick's Day for all of you, but it was the day that turned my life upside down.
My team and I were making a documentary about North Korean refugees living below human life in China.
We were at the border.
It was our last day of filming.
There was no wire fence or bars or sign to show that it is the border, but this is a place that a lot of North Korean defectors use as an escape route.
It was still winter, and the river was frozen.
When we were in the middle of the frozen river, we were filming about the condition of the cold weather and the environment that North Koreans had to deal with when they seek their freedom.
And suddenly, one of my team members shouted, "Soldiers!"
So I looked back, and there were two small soldiers in green uniforms with rifles, chasing after us.
We all ran as fast as we could.
I prayed that, please don't let them shoot my head.
And I was thinking that, if my feet are on Chinese soil, I'll be safe.
And I made it to Chinese soil.
Then I saw my colleague Laura Ling fall on her knees.
I didn't know what to do at that short moment, but I knew that I could not leave her alone there when she said, "Euna, I can't feel my legs."
In a flash, we were surrounded by these two Korean soldiers.
They were not much bigger than us, but they were determined to take us to their army base.
I begged and yelled for any kind of help, hoping that someone would show up from China.
Here I was, being stubborn towards a trained soldier with a gun.
I looked at his eyes.
He was just a boy.
At that moment, he raised his rifle to hit me, but I saw that he was hesitating.
His eyes were shaking, and his rifle was still up in the air.
So I shouted at him, "OK, OK, I'll walk with you."
And I got up.
When we arrived at their army base, my head was spinning with these worst-case scenarios, and my colleague's statement wasn't helping.
She said, "We are the enemy."
She was right: we were the enemy.
And I was supposed to be frightened, too.
But I kept having these odd experiences.
This time, an officer brought me his coat to keep me warm, because I lost my coat on the frozen river while battling with one of these soldiers.
I will tell you what I mean by these odd experiences.
I grew up in South Korea.
To us, North Korea was always the enemy, even before I was born.
South and North have been under armistice for 63 years, since the end of the Korean War.
And growing up in the South in the '80s and '90s, we were taught propaganda about North Korea.
And we heard so many graphic stories, such as, a little young boy being brutally killed by North Korean spies just because he said, "I don't like communists."
Or, I watched this cartoon series about a young South Korean boy defeating these fat, big, red pig, which represented the North Koreans' first leader at the time.
And the effect of hearing these horrible stories over and over instilled one word in a young mind: "enemy."
And I think at some point, I dehumanized them, and the people of North Korea became equated with the North Korean government.
Now, back to my detention.
It was the second day of being in a cell.
I had not slept since I was out at the border.
This young guard came to my cell and offered me this small boiled egg and said, "This will give you strength to keep going."
Do you know what it is like, receiving a small kindness in the enemy's hand?
Whenever they were kind to me, I thought the worst case was waiting for me after the kindness.
One officer noticed my nervousness.
He said, "Did you think we were all these red pigs?"
referring to the cartoon that I just showed you.
Every day was like a psychological battle.
The interrogator had me sit at a table six days a week and had me writing down about my journey, my work, over and over until I wrote down the confession that they wanted to hear.
After about three months of detention, the North Korean court sentenced me to 12 years in a labor camp.
So I was just sitting in my room to be transferred.
At that time, I really had nothing else to do, so I paid attention to these two female guards and listened to what they were talking about.
Guard A was older, and she studied English.
She seemed like she came from an affluent family.
She often showed up with these colorful dresses, and then loved to show off.
And Guard B was the younger one, and she was a really good singer.
She loved to sing Celine Dion's "My Heart Will Go On" -- sometimes too much.
She knew just how to torture me without knowing.
(Laughter) And this girl spent a lot of time in the morning to put on makeup, like you can see in any young girl's life.
And they loved to watch this Chinese drama, a better quality production.
I remember Guard B said, "I can no longer watch our TV shows after watching this."
She got scolded for degrading her own country's produced TV shows.
Guard B had more of a free mind than Guard A, and she often got scolded by Guard A whenever she expressed herself.
One day, they invited all these female colleagues -- I don't know where they came from -- to where I was held, and they invited me to their guard room and asked if one-night stands really happen in the US.
(Laughter) This is the country where young couples are not even allowed to hold hands in public.
I had no idea where they had gotten this information, but they were shy and giggly even before I said anything.
I think we all forgot that I was their prisoner, and it was like going back to my high school classroom again.
And I learned that these girls also grew up watching a similar cartoon, but just propaganda towards South Korea and the US.
I started to understand where these people's anger was coming from.
If these girls grew up learning that we are enemies, it was just natural that they would hate us just as I feared them.
But at that moment, we were all just girls who shared the same interests, beyond our ideologies that separated us.
I shared these stories with my boss at Current TV at the time after I came home.
His first reaction was, "Euna, have you heard of Stockholm Syndrome?"
Yes, and I clearly remember the feeling of fear and being threatened, and tension rising up between me and the interrogator when we talked about politics.
There definitely was a wall that we couldn't climb over.
But we were able to see each other as human beings when we talked about family, everyday life, the importance of the future for our children.
It was about a month before I came home.
I got really sick.
Guard B stopped by my room to say goodbye, because she was leaving the detention center.
She made sure that no one watched us, no one heard us, and quietly said, "I hope you get better and go back to your family soon."
It is these people -- the officer who brought me his coat, the guard who offered me a boiled egg, these female guards who asked me about dating life in the US -- they are the ones that I remember of North Korea: humans just like us.
North Koreans and I were not ambassadors of our countries, but I believe that we were representing the human race.
Now I'm back home and back to my life.
The memory of these people has blurred as time has passed.
And I'm in this place where I read and hear about North Korea provoking the US.
I realized how easy it is to see them as an enemy again.
But I have to keep reminding myself that when I was over there, I was able to see humanity over hatred in my enemy's eyes.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You'll be happy to know that I'll be talking not about my own tragedy, but other people's tragedy.
It's a lot easier to be lighthearted about other people's tragedy than your own, and I want to keep it in the spirit of the conference.
So, if you believe the media accounts, being a drug dealer in the height of the crack cocaine epidemic was a very glamorous life, in the words of Virginia Postrel.
There was money, there was drugs, guns, women, you know, you name it -- jewelry, bling-bling -- it had it all.
What I'm going to tell you today is that, in fact, based on 10 years of research, a unique opportunity to go inside a gang -- to see the actual books, the financial records of the gang -- that the answer turns out not to be that being in the gang was a glamorous life.
But I think, more realistically, that being in a gang -- selling drugs for a gang -- is perhaps the worst job in all of America.
And that's what I'd like to convince you of today.
So there are three things I want to do.
First, I want to explain how and why crack cocaine had such a profound influence on inner-city gangs.
Secondly, I want to tell you how somebody like me came to be able to see the inner workings of a gang -- an interesting story, I think.
And then third, I want to tell you, in a very superficial way, about some of the things we found when we actually got to look at the financial records, the books, of the gang.
So before I do that, just one warning, which is that this presentation has been rated 'R' by the Motion Picture Association of America.
It contains adult themes, adult language.
Given who is up on the stage, you'll be delighted to know that, in fact, there'll be no nudity -- (Laughter) Unexpected wardrobe malfunctions aside.
(Laughter) So let me start by talking about crack cocaine, and how it transformed the gang.
To do that, you have to actually go back to a time before crack cocaine, in the early '80s, and look at it from the perspective of a gang leader.
Being a gang leader in the inner city wasn't such a bad deal in the mid-'80s -- the early '80s, let me say.
Now, you had a lot of power, and you got to beat people up -- you got a lot of prestige, a lot of respect.
But the thing is, there was no money in it.
The gang had no way to make money.
You couldn't charge dues to the people in the gang, because the people in the gang didn't have any money.
You couldn't really make any money selling marijuana -- marijuana's too cheap, it turns out.
You can't get rich selling marijuana.
You couldn't sell cocaine; cocaine's a great product -- powdered cocaine -- but you've got to know rich white people.
And most of the inner-city gang members didn't know any rich white people, so couldn't sell to that market.
You couldn't really do petty crime, either.
Turns out, petty crime's a terrible way to make a living.
As a result, as a gang leader, you had, you know, power -- it's a pretty good life -- but the thing was, in the end, you were living at home with your mother.
And so it wasn't really a career.
There were limits to how powerful and important you could be if you had to live at home with your mother.
Then along comes crack cocaine.
And in the words of Malcolm Gladwell, crack cocaine was the extra-chunky version of tomato sauce for the inner city.
(Laughter) Because crack cocaine was an unbelievable innovation.
I don't have time to talk about it today, but if you think about it, I would say that in the last 25 years, of every invention or innovation that's occurred in this country, the biggest one in terms of impact on the well-being of people who live in the inner city, was crack cocaine.
And for the worse -- not for the better, but for the worse.
It had a huge impact on life.
So what was it about crack cocaine?
It was a brilliant way of getting the brain high.
Because you could smoke crack cocaine -- you can't smoke powdered cocaine -- and smoking is a much more efficient mechanism of delivering a high than snorting it.
And it turned out there was this audience that didn't know it wanted crack cocaine, but when it came, it really did.
And it was a perfect drug; you could buy the cocaine that went into it for a dollar, sell it for five dollars.
Highly addictive -- the high was very short.
So for fifteen minutes, you get this great high, and then when you come down, all you want to do is get high again.
It created a wonderful market.
And for the people who were there running the gang, it was a great way, seemingly, to make a lot of money.
At least for the people on the top.
So this is where we enter the picture.
Not really me -- I'm really a bit player in all this.
My co-author, Sudhir Venkatesh, is the main character.
He was a math major in college who had a good heart, and decided he wanted to get a sociology PhD, came to the University of Chicago.
Now, the three months before he came to Chicago, he had spent following the Grateful Dead.
And in his own words, he "looked like a freak."
He's a South Asian -- very dark-skinned South Asian.
Big man, and he had hair, in his words, "down to his ass."
Defied all kinds of boundaries: Was he black or white? Was he man or woman?
He was really a curious sight to be seen.
So he showed up at the University of Chicago, and the famous sociologist William Julius Wilson was doing a book that involved surveying people all across Chicago.
He took one look at Sudhir, who was going to go do some surveys for him, and decided he knew exactly the place to send him, which was to one of the toughest, most notorious housing projects not just in Chicago, but in the entire United States.
So Sudhir, the suburban boy who had never really been in the inner city, dutifully took his clipboard and walked down to this housing project, gets to the first building.
The first building? Well, there's nobody there.
But he hears some voices up in the stairwell, so he climbs up the stairwell, comes around the corner, and finds a group of young African-American men playing dice.
This is about 1990, peak of the crack epidemic.
This is a very dangerous job, being in a gang.
You don't like to be surprised by people who come around the corner.
And the mantra was: shoot first; ask questions later.
Now, Sudhir was lucky -- he was such a freak, and that clipboard probably saved his life, because they figured no other rival gang member would be coming up to shoot at them with a clipboard.
(Laughter) So his greeting was not particularly warm, but they did say, well, OK -- let's hear your questions on your survey.
So -- I kid you not -- the first question on the survey that he was sent to ask was: "How do you feel about being poor and Black in America?"
(Laughter) Makes you wonder about academics.
(Laughter) So the choice of answers were: [A) Very Good B) Good C) Bad D) Very Bad] (Laughter) What Sudhir found out is, in fact, that the real answer was the following: [A) Very Good B) Good C) Bad D) Very Bad E) Fuck you] (Laughter) The survey was not, in the end, going to be what got Sudhir off the hook.
He was held hostage overnight in the stairwell.
There was a lot of gunfire, there were a lot of philosophical discussions he had with the gang members.
By morning, the gang leader arrived, checked out Sudhir, decided he was no threat, and they let him go home.
So Sudhir went home, took a shower, took a nap.
And you and I, probably, faced with the situation, would think, "I guess I'm going to write my dissertation on The Grateful Dead, I've been following them for the last three months."
(Laughter) Sudhir, on the other hand, got right back, walked down to the housing project, went up to the second floor, and said: "Hey, guys, I had so much fun hanging out with you last night, I wonder if I could do it again tonight."
And that was the beginning of what turned out to be a beautiful relationship that involved Sudhir living in the housing project on and off for 10 years, hanging out in crack houses, going to jail with the gang members, having the windows shot out of his car, having the police break into his apartment and steal his computer disks -- you name it.
But ultimately, the story has a happy ending for Sudhir, who became one of the most respected sociologists in the country.
And especially for me, as I sat in my office with my Excel spreadsheet open, waiting for Sudhir to come and deliver to me the latest load of data that he would get from the gang.
(Laughter) It was one of the most unequal co-authoring relationships ever -- (Laughter) But I was glad to be the beneficiary of it.
So what did we find?
Well, let me say one thing: We really got access to everybody in the gang.
We got an inside look at the gang, from the very bottom up to the very top.
They trusted Sudhir, in ways that really no academic has ever -- or really anybody, any outsider -- has ever earned the trust of these gangs, to the point where they actually opened up what was most interesting for me -- their books, the financial records they kept.
They made them available to us, and we not only could study them, but we could ask them questions about what was in them.
So if I have to kind of summarize very quickly in the short time I have what the bottom line of what I take away from the gang is, it's that, if I had to draw a parallel between the gang and any other organization, it would be that the gang is just like McDonald's, in a lot of different respects -- the restaurant McDonald's.
So first, in one way, which isn't maybe the most interesting way, but it's a good way to start -- is in the way it's organized, the hierarchy of the gang, the way it looks.
I don't know if you know much about org charts, but if you were to assign a stripped-down and simplified McDonald's org chart, this is exactly what it would look like.
It's amazing, but the top level of the gang, they actually call themselves the "Board of Directors."
(Laughter) And Sudhir says it's not like these guys had a very sophisticated view of what happened in American corporate life, but they had seen movies like "Wall Street," and they had learned a little bit about what it was like to be in the real world.
Now, below that board of directors, you've got essentially what are regional VPs -- people who control, say, the South Side of Chicago, or the West Side of Chicago.
Sudhir got to know very well the guy who had the unfortunate assignment of trying to take the Iowa franchise, which, it turned out, for this black gang, was not one of the more brilliant financial endeavors they undertook.
(Laughter) But the thing that really makes the gang seem like McDonald's is its franchisees.
The guys who are running the local gangs -- the four-square-block by four-square-block areas -- they're just like the guys, in some sense, who are running the McDonald's.
They are the entrepreneurs.
They get the exclusive property rights to control the drug-selling.
They get the name of the gang behind them, for merchandising and marketing.
And they're the ones who basically make the profit or lose a profit, depending on how good they are at running the business.
Now, the group I really want you to think about, though, are the ones at the bottom -- the foot soldiers.
These are the teenagers, typically, who'd be standing out on the street corner, selling the drugs.
Extremely dangerous work.
And important to note is that almost all of the weight, all of the people in this organization are at the bottom -- just like McDonald's.
So in some sense, the foot soldiers are a lot like the people who are taking your order at McDonald's, and it's not just by chance that they're like them.
In fact, in these neighborhoods, they'd be the same people.
So the same kids who are working in the gang were actually, at the very same time, typically working part-time at a place like McDonald's.
Which already foreshadows the main result that I've talked about, about what a crappy job it was, being in the gang.
Because obviously, if being in the gang were such a wonderful, lucrative job, why in the world would these guys moonlight at McDonald's?
So what do the wages look like? You might be surprised.
But based on being able to talk to them and to see their records, this is what it looks like in terms of the wages.
The hourly wage the foot soldiers were earning was $3.50 an hour.
It was below the minimum wage. And this is well-documented.
It's easy to see by the patterns of consumption they have.
It really is not fiction -- it's fact.
There was very little money in the gang, especially at the bottom.
Now if you managed to rise up, say, and be that local leader, the guy who's the equivalent of the McDonald's franchisee, you'd be making 100,000 dollars a year.
And that, in some ways, was the best job you could hope to get if you were growing up in one of these neighborhoods as a young black male.
If you managed to rise to the very top, 200,000 or 400,000 dollars a year is what you'd hope to make.
Truly, you would be a great success story.
And one of the sad parts of this is that, indeed, among the many other ramifications of crack cocaine is that the most talented individuals in these communities -- this is what they were striving for.
They weren't trying to make it in legitimate ways, because there were no legitimate channels out.
This was the best way out.
And it actually was the right choice, probably, to try to make it out this way.
You look at this, the relationship to McDonald's breaks down here.
The money looks about the same.
Why is it such a bad job?
Well, the reason it's such a bad job is that there's somebody shooting at you a lot of the time.
So, with shooting at you, what are the death rates?
We found, in our gang -- and admittedly, this was not really a standard situation; this was a time of intense violence, of a lot of gang wars, as this gang actually became quite successful.
And so the death rate -- not to mention the rate of being arrested, sent to prison, being wounded -- the death rate in our sample was seven percent per person per year.
You're in the gang for four years, you expect to die with about a 25 percent likelihood.
That is about as high as you can get.
So for comparison's purposes, let's think about some other walk of life you may expect might be extremely risky.
Let's say that you were a murderer and you were convicted of murder, and you're sent to death row.
It turns out, the death rates on death row from all causes, including execution: two percent a year.
(Laughter) So it's a lot safer being on death row than it is selling drugs out on the street.
That gives you some pause, for those of you who believe that a death penalty's going to have an enormous deterrent effect on crime.
To give you a sense of just how bad the inner city was during crack -- and I'm not really focusing on the negatives, but really, there's another story to tell you there -- if you look at the death rates just of random, young black males growing up in the inner city in the United States, the death rates during crack were about one percent.
That's extremely high.
And this is violent death -- it's unbelievable, in some sense.
To put it into perspective: if you compare this to the soldiers in Iraq, for instance, right now fighting the war: 0.5 percent.
So in some very literal way, the young black men who were growing up in this country were living in a war zone, very much in the sense that the soldiers over in Iraq are fighting in a war.
So why in the world, you might ask, would anybody be willing to stand out on a street corner selling drugs for $3.50 an hour, with a 25 percent chance of dying over the next four years?
Why would they do that?
I think the first one is that they got fooled by history.
It used to be the gang was a rite of passage; that the young people controlled the gang; that as you got older, you dropped out of the gang.
So what happened was, the people who happened to be in the right place at the right time -- the people who happened to be leading the gang in the mid-to-late-'80s -- became very, very wealthy.
And so the logical thing to think was that they are going to age out of the gang like everybody else has, and the next generation is going to take over and get the wealth.
There are striking similarities, I think, to the Internet boom.
The first set of people in Silicon Valley got very, very rich.
And then all of my friends said, "Maybe I should go do that, too."
And they were willing to work very cheap for stock options that never came.
In some sense, that's what happened, exactly, to the set of people we were looking at.
They were willing to start at the bottom, just like, say, a first-year lawyer at a law firm is willing to start at the bottom, work 80-hour weeks for not that much money, because they think they're going to make partner.
But the rules changed, and they never got to make partner.
Indeed, the same people who were running all of the major gangs in the late 1980s are still running the major gangs in Chicago today.
They never passed on any of the wealth, So everybody got stuck at that $3.50-an-hour job, and it turned out to be a disaster.
The other thing the gang was very good at was marketing and trickery.
And so for instance, one thing the gang would do is -- the gang leaders would have big entourages, and they'd drive fancy cars and have fancy jewelry.
So what Sudhir eventually realized as he hung out with them more, is that, really, they didn't own those cars -- they just leased them, because they couldn't afford to own the fancy cars.
And they didn't really have gold jewelry, they had gold-plated jewelry.
It goes back to, you know, the real-real versus the fake-real.
And really, they did all sorts of things to trick the young people into thinking what a great deal the gang was going to be.
So for instance, they would give a 14-year-old kid a whole roll of bills to hold.
That 14-year-old kid would say to his friends, "Hey, look at all the money I got in the gang."
It wasn't his money -- until he spent it, and then he was in debt to the gang, and was sort of an indentured servant for a while.
So I have a couple minutes.
Let me do one last thing I hadn't thought I'd have time to do, which is to talk about what we learned more generally about economics, from the study of the gang.
So, economists tend to talk in technical words.
Often, our theories fail quite miserably when we over the data, but what's kind of interesting is that in this setting, it turned out that some of the economic theories that worked not so well in the real economy worked very well in the drug economy, in some sense, because it's unfettered capitalism.
Here's an economic principle.
This is one of the basic ideas in labor economics, called a "compensating differential."
It's the idea that the increment to wages that a worker requires to leave him indifferent between performing two tasks, one which is more unpleasant than the other.
Compensating differential -- it's why we think garbagemen might be paid more than people who work in parks.
The words of one of the members of the gang, I think, make this clear.
So it turns out -- I'm sort of getting ahead of myself -- it turns out, in the gang, when there's a war going on, they actually pay the foot soldiers twice as much money.
It's exactly this concept.
Because they're not willing to be at risk.
And the words of a gang member capture it quite nicely, he says: "Would you stand around here when all this shit ..." -- the shooting -- "... if all this shit's going on? No, right?
So if I gonna be asked to put my life on the line, then front me the cash, man."
I think the gang member says it much more articulately than the economist, about what's going on.
(Laughter) Here's another one.
Economists talk about game theory, that every two-person game has a Nash equilibrium.
Here's the translation you get from the gang member.
They're talking about the decision of why they don't go shoot -- One thing that turns out to be a great business tactic in the gang: if you go and just shoot guns in the air in the other gang's territory -- people are afraid to go buy drugs there, they're going to come into your neighborhood.
Here's what he says about why they don't do that: "If we start shooting around there, the other gang's territory, nobody, I mean, you dig it, nobody gonna step on their turf.
But we gotta be careful, 'cause they can shoot around here too and then we all fucked."
(Laughter) So that's the same concept.
One thing we observed in the data is that it looked like -- the gang leader always got paid.
No matter how bad it was economically, he always got himself paid.
We had some theories related to cash flow, and lack of access to capital markets, and things like that.
Then we asked the gang member, "Why is it you always get paid and your workers don't always get paid?"
His response is, "You got all these niggers below you who want your job, you dig?
And I thought about it and said, "CEOs often pay themselves million-dollar bonuses, even when companies are losing a lot of money.
And it never would really occur to an economist that this idea of 'weak and shit' could really be important."
(Laughter) Maybe "weak and shit" is an important hypothesis that needs more analysis.
Thank you very much.
A long time ago, I was a professional animator.
(Music) [Eric Dyer] [Animator] [Compositor] And at night, I would make my own experimental films.
(Music) And I was spending a lot of time, way too much time, in front of a screen for work that would be presented on a screen, and I had this great need to get my hands back on the work again.
Now, before "The Simpsons," before "Gumby," before "Betty Boop," before there was such a thing as cinema and television, animation was hugely popular in this form.
This is a zoetrope.
And you spin this drum, and you look through the slits into the inside of the drum, and you see the animation pop to life.
This is animation in physical form, and it's animation I could get my hands on again.
I took these ideas to Denmark.
I went there with my family on a Fulbright Fellowship.
That's my daughter, Mia.
I rode around the city on my bicycle and shot all the interesting moving elements of Copenhagen: the boaters in the canals, the colors that explode in spring, the free-use city bikes, love, textures, the healthy cuisine -- (Laughter) And I brought all that video back into the physical world by printing it out on these long strips of ink-jet paper and cutting out the forms.
Now, I invented my own form of the zoetrope, which removes the drum and replaces the slits with a video camera.
And this was very exciting for me, because it meant that I could make these physical objects, and I could make films from those objects.
That's me riding on my bicycle.
(Laughter) I made about 25 paper sculptures, each the size of a bicycle wheel.
I brought them into the studio, spun them and shot them to make the film "Copenhagen Cycles."
(Music) This project not only allowed me to get my hands back on the work again but it helped me get my life back.
Instead of spending 12, 15 hours a day with my face plastered to a screen, I was having these little adventures with our new family and shooting video along the way, and it was kind of a symbiosis of art and life.
And I think that it's no mistake that zoetrope translates into "wheel of life."
(Music) But film and video does flatten sculpture, so I tried to imagine a way that animated sculpture could be experienced as such, and also a completely immersive kind of animated sculpture.
And that's where I came up with the idea for the zoetrope tunnel.
You walk through with a handheld strobe, and wherever you point the flashlight, the animation pops to life.
I plan to finish this project in the next 30 to 40 years.
(Laughter) But I did build a half-scale prototype.
It's covered in Velcro, and I could lay inside on this bridge and stick animated sequences to the walls and test stuff out.
People would comment that it reminded them of an MRI.
And that medical connection spoke to me, because at the age of 14, I was diagnosed with a degenerative retinal condition that's slowly taking my vision away, and I'd never responded to that in my work.
So I responded to it in this piece called, "Implant."
It is an imaginary, super-magnified medical device that fits around the optic nerve.
And the public is, in a sense, miniaturized to experience it.
With a handheld strobe, they can explore the sculpture, and discover thousands of cell-sized robots hard at work, leaping in and out of the optic nerve, being deployed to the retina to repair it.
It's my science fiction fantasy cure of my own incurable disorder.
(Machine buzzes) Now, in the real-world gene therapy and gene therapy research, healthy genes are being administered to unhealthy cells using viruses.
There's a lot of colorful, fluffy hope in this, and there's also some creepy, threatening idea of viruses maybe becoming an invasive species in your body.
Vision loss has helped to take me away from the things that disconnect me from the world.
Instead of being sealed off in an automobile, I ride my bike, take buses and trains and walk a lot.
And instead of a visually intensive process in the studio, primarily, I'm also getting outdoors a lot more and using more of my senses.
This landscape is a couple hours east of San Diego, California.
My brother lives out that way.
He and I went camping there for four days.
And I grabbed my camera, and I walked through the canyons.
And I tried to imagine and figure out what kind of motion would be present in this place that was so still and so devoid of motion.
I think it's the stillest place I've ever been.
And I realized that it was the movement of my own body through the landscape that was creating the animation.
It was the motion of changing perspective.
So I created this piece called "Mud Caves" from those photographs.
It's a multilayered print piece, and you can think of it as a zoetrope laid flat.
It's kind of my western landscape panorama.
And next to the print piece there's a video monitor that shows the animation hidden within the artwork.
I think one of the best parts about this project for me was that I got to hang out with my brother a lot, who lives 2,500 miles away from me.
And we would just sit in this seemingly eternal landscape sculpted by water over millions of years and talk.
We'd talk about our kids growing up and the slowing pace of our parents, and our dad who's suffering from leukemia, memory loss and infection.
And it struck me that, as individuals, we're finite, but as a family, we are an ongoing cycle -- a kind of wheel of life.
Now, I want to leave you with a tribute to one of my mentors.
She reminds me that physical presence is important and that play is not a luxury, but a necessity.
She's Pixie, and she's our family dog.
And she loves to jump.
(Dog barking) (Dog barking and spring boinging) And this is a new kind of zoetrope that I developed at the Imaging Research Center at UMBC in Baltimore.
And I call it a "real-time zoetrope."
(Dog barking) (Dog barking and spring boinging) Thank you.
(Applause)
Workplace romance can be a tricky topic.
(Music) [The Way We Work] How do we manage the boundaries between our personal and professional lives?
How do we deal with gender imbalances and power dynamics in the workplace?
There's a lot of gray area in workplace romance.
I'd like to take a few minutes and answer some of your frequently asked questions.
So, question one: Should I date my coworker?
Uh ... it depends.
Do you want to date your coworker for a bit of fun?
Do you want to date your coworker to hook up?
Because then you're really better off on Tinder.
If you want to date your coworker because you really, sincerely think you're falling in love with them or there's a real potential for a long-term, committed relationship, maybe you should date your coworker.
Studies show that your coworkers are generally positive about it if they perceive that you're falling in love and genuinely care about each other.
It's when your coworkers sense that something else is in play -- that can be disruptive.
Question two: Should I date my boss?
In almost all cases, no, you should not date your boss, because now, you've got a power dynamic.
When there's a relationship between a boss and a subordinate, it generates a lot of negative feelings, and the negative feelings tend to fall on the person who's lower on the totem pole.
People usually assume some kind of favoritism, some kind of inside knowledge, and there can be resentment stirred up by that.
There was a study published last year that suggested dating a superior can even have a negative impact on your career.
The researchers asked third-party evaluators online to imagine that they worked at a law firm.
They asked them to make recommendations on which employee should get picked for a special training program and which should get promoted to partner.
They looked at credentials for imaginary employees, and when it was stated that an employee had been dating or was in a relationship with a superior, the evaluators were less likely to pick that person for the training program or the promotion, even if they had the exact same credentials as someone who wasn't dating their boss.
The evaluators were also quick to dismiss their accomplishments.
Question three: Can I date someone who reports to me?
Still a big no.
You may not feel like you're really the boss, right?
But you are, and there's a power dynamic there that's simply not there for other couples.
If you really believe there is a sincere, honestly felt, personal connection that would be lasting and meaningful, one of you may need to move, and it shouldn't always be the person who's lower in the company pecking order.
Question four: I've just started seeing a coworker.
How do we handle things?
I get this question a lot.
"Are they dating? Are they not dating?"
Don't keep it a secret.
You don't have to make a big deal of it, but secrecy tends to be corrosive.
People tend to see workplace couples as a coalition or a unit, so try to make it clear to your coworkers that you're not the same person; you love each other, but you are going to disagree.
Question five: Why are coworkers often attracted to each other?
Well, the obvious answer is people tend to be attracted to each other the more time they spend together.
But there's another ingredient that has to be added: attraction tends to happen when there's work that demands close collaboration.
So imagine you have a big group project with a tight deadline and you're working late nights and brainstorming ideas.
You look up, and across the table, one of your colleagues throws out a really great idea.
You may feel something, and that's natural.
We call this task interdependence.
It's a ripe ground for attraction.
The second reason why people at work are attracted to each other is they may often be similar to each other.
There's two old adages: "Birds of a feather flock together." And "Opposites attract."
Well, the psychological research suggests ...
birds of a feather flock together, and we like people who are like us.
Question six: My coworkers are flirting.
I'm annoyed. What do I do?
Some researchers argue that for people flirting at work, flirting is good and it boosts creativity.
But my own research suggests things are different for people who are watching or who are subjected to the flirting.
It can be awkward, right?
Witnessing flirtation in the workplace creates a sense of not knowing the rules, not knowing what's going on, or maybe seeing something that you shouldn't be seeing.
People who frequently witness flirting at work -- they actually report feeling less satisfied in their jobs, and they feel less valued by their company.
They're more likely to give a negative appraisal of the work environment, and they may even consider leaving.
For women, this association can be even stronger.
This appears to be the case even when people report not being bothered by the flirting.
It's true even when they say they enjoy it.
So, a flirtatious environment really could be toxic.
Question seven: Do I need a policy on workplace relationships?
You certainly need a policy on a sexual harassment, and I think most HR departments recognize that.
But for the kind of consensual behavior we've been talking about, it's a little different.
As much as people in HR would love to wave a magic wand and say, "Thou shall not fall in love at work," it's just not realistic.
Emotional connection and sexuality is who we are.
I kind of want you to flip the script a little bit.
I encourage HR to really think more broadly about their role in not necessarily stamping out office romance, because I don't think that's realistic, but how do I help create a workplace climate and culture where people feel respected for their individual contributions, not for their appearance or their gender, or their personal relationships?
So the larger question is, how do you make sure people are valued and respected?
I've been trying to figure out what I was going to say here for months.
Because there's no bigger stage than TED, it felt like getting my message right in this moment was more important than anything.
And so I searched and searched for days on end, trying to find the right configuration of words.
And although intellectually, I could bullet point the big ideas that I wanted to share about Me Too and this movement that I founded, I kept finding myself falling short of finding the heart.
I wanted to pour myself into this moment and tell you why even the possibility of healing or interrupting sexual violence was worth standing and fighting for.
I wanted to rally you to your feet with an uplifting speech about the important work of fighting for the dignity and humanity of survivors.
But I don't know if I have it.
The reality is, after soldiering through the Supreme Court nomination process and attacks from the White House, gross mischaracterizations, internet trolls and the rallies and marches and heart-wrenching testimonies, I'm faced with my own hard truth.
I'm numb.
And I'm not surprised.
I've traveled all across the world giving talks, and like clockwork, after every event, more than one person approaches me so that they can say their piece in private.
And I always tried to reassure them.
You know, I'd give them local resources and a soft reassurance that they're not alone and this is their movement, too.
I'd tell them that we're stronger together and that this is a movement of survivors and advocates doing things big and small every day.
And more and more people are joining this movement every single day.
That part is clear.
People are putting their bodies on the line and raising their voices to say, "Enough is enough."
So why do I feel this way?
Well ...
Someone with credible accusations of sexual violence against him was confirmed to the Supreme Court of the United States of America, again.
The US President, who was caught on tape talking about how he can grab women's body parts wherever he wants, however he wants, can call a survivor a liar at one of his rallies, and the crowds will roar.
And all across the world, where Me Too has taken off, Australia and France, Sweden, China and now India, survivors of sexual violence are all at once being heard and then vilified.
And I've read article after article bemoaning ...
wealthy white men who have landed softly with their golden parachutes, following the disclosure of their terrible behavior.
And we're asked to consider their futures.
But what of survivors?
This movement is constantly being called a watershed moment, or even a reckoning, but I wake up some days feeling like all evidence points to the contrary.
It's hard not to feel numb.
I suspect some of you may feel numb, too.
But let me tell you what else I know.
Sometimes when you hear the word "numb," you think of a void, an absence of feelings, or even the inability to feel.
But that's not always true.
Numbness can come from those memories that creep up in your mind that you can't fight off in the middle of the night.
They can come from the tears that are locked behind your eyes that you won't give yourself permission to cry.
For me, numbness comes from looking in the face of survivors and knowing everything to say but having nothing left to give.
It's measuring the magnitude of this task ahead of you versus your own wavering fortitude.
Numbness is not always the absence of feeling.
Sometimes it's an accumulation of feelings.
And as survivors, we often have to hold the truth of what we experience.
But now, we're all holding something, whether we want to or not.
Our colleagues are speaking up and speaking out, industries across the board are reexamining workplace culture, and families and friends are having hard conversations about closely held truths.
Everybody is impacted.
And then, there's the backlash.
We've all heard it.
"The Me Too Movement is a witch hunt."
Right?
"Me Too is dismantling due process."
Or, "Me Too has created a gender war."
The media has been consistent with headline after headline that frames this movement in ways that make it difficult to move our work forward, and right-wing pundits and other critics have these talking points that shift the focus away from survivors.
So suddenly, a movement that was started to support all survivors of sexual violence is being talked about like it's a vindictive plot against men.
And I'm like, "Huh?"
(Laughter) How did we get here?
We have moved so far away from the origins of this movement that started a decade ago, or even the intentions of the hashtag that started just a year ago, that sometimes, the Me Too movement that I hear some people talk about is unrecognizable to me.
But be clear: This is a movement about the one in four girls and the one in six boys who are sexually assaulted every year and carry those wounds into adulthood.
It's about the 84 percent of trans women who will be sexually assaulted this year and the indigenous women who are three-and-a-half times more likely to be sexually assaulted than any other group.
Or people with disabilities, who are seven times more likely to be sexually abused.
It's about the 60 percent of black girls like me who will be experiencing sexual violence before they turn 18, and the thousands and thousands of low-wage workers who are being sexually harassed right now on jobs that they can't afford to quit.
This is a movement about the far-reaching power of empathy.
And so it's about the millions and millions of people who, one year ago, raised their hands to say, "Me too," and their hands are still raised while the media that they consume erases them and politicians who they elected to represent them pivot away from solutions.
It's understandable that the push-pull of this unique, historical moment feels like an emotional roller-coaster that has rendered many of us numb.
This accumulation of feelings that so many of us are experiencing together, across the globe, is collective trauma.
But ...
it is also the first step towards actively building a world that we want right now.
What we do with this thing that we're all holding is the evidence that this is bigger than a moment.
It's the confirmation that we are in a movement.
And the most powerful movements have always been built around what's possible, not just claiming what is right now.
Trauma halts possibility.
Movement activates it.
Dr. King famously quoted Theodore Parker saying, "The arc of the moral universe is long, and it bends toward justice."
We've all heard this quote.
But somebody has to bend it.
The possibility that we create in this movement and others is the weight leaning that arc in the right direction.
Movements create possibility, and they are built on vision.
My vision for the Me Too Movement is a part of a collective vision to see a world free of sexual violence, and I believe we can build that world.
Full stop.
But in order to get there, we have to dramatically shift a culture that propagates the idea that vulnerability is synonymous with permission and that bodily autonomy is not a basic human right.
In other words, we have to dismantle the building blocks of sexual violence: power and privilege.
So much of what we hear about the Me Too Movement is about individual bad actors or depraved, isolated behavior, and it fails to recognize that anybody in a position of power comes with privilege, and it renders those without that power more vulnerable.
Teachers and students, coaches and athletes, law enforcement and citizen, parent and child: these are all relationships that can have an incredible imbalance of power.
But we reshape that imbalance by speaking out against it in unison and by creating spaces to speak truth to power.
We have to reeducate ourselves and our children to understand that power and privilege doesn't always have to destroy and take -- it can be used to serve and build.
And we have to reeducate ourselves to understand that, unequivocally, every human being has the right to walk through this life with their full humanity intact.
Part of the work of the Me Too Movement is about the restoration of that humanity for survivors, because the violence doesn't end with the act.
The violence is also the trauma that we hold after the act.
Remember, trauma halts possibility.
It serves to impede, stagnate, confuse and kill.
So our work rethinks how we deal with trauma.
For instance, we don't believe that survivors should tell the details of their stories all the time.
We shouldn't have to perform our pain over and over again for the sake of your awareness.
We also try to teach survivors to not lean into their trauma, but to lean into the joy that they curate in their lives instead.
And if you don't find it, create it and lean into that.
But when your life has been touched by trauma, sometimes trying to find joy feels like an insurmountable task.
Now imagine trying to complete that task while world leaders are discrediting your memories or the news media keeps erasing your experience, or people continuously reduce you to your pain.
Movement activates possibility.
There's folklore in my family, like most black folks, about my great-great-grandaddy, Lawrence Ware.
He was born enslaved, his parents were enslaved, and he had no reason to believe that a black man in America wouldn't die a slave.
And yet, legend has it that when he was freed by his enslavers, he walked from Georgia to South Carolina so that he could find the wife and child that he was separated from.
And every time I hear this story, I think to myself, "How could he do this?
Wasn't he afraid that he would be captured and killed by white vigilantes, or he would get there and they would be gone?"
And so I asked my grandmother once why she thought that he took this journey up, and she said, "I guess he had to believe it was possible."
I have been propelled by possibility for most of my life.
I am here because somebody, starting with my ancestors, believed I was possible.
In 2006, 12 years ago, I laid across a mattress on my floor in my one-bedroom apartment, frustrated with all the sexual violence that I saw in my community.
I pulled out a piece of paper, and I wrote "Me Too" on the top of it, and I proceeded to write out an action plan for building a movement based on empathy between survivors that would help us feel like we can heal, that we weren't the sum total of the things that happened to us.
Possibility is a gift, y'all.
It births new worlds, and it births visions.
I know some of y'all are tired, because I'm tired.
I'm exhausted, and I'm numb.
Those who came before us didn't win every fight, but they didn't let it kill their vision.
It fueled it.
So I can't stop, and I'm asking you not to stop either.
We owe future generations a world free of sexual violence.
I believe we can build that world.
Do you?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Off the rugged coast of the pacific northwest, pods of killer whales inhabit the frigid waters.
Each family is able to survive here thanks mainly to one member, its most knowledgeable hunter: the grandmother.
These matriarchs can live eighty years or more, while most males die off in their thirties.
Though killer whales inhabit every major ocean, until recently we knew very little about them.
The details of their lives eluded scientists until an organization called the Center for Whale Research began studying a single population near Washington State and British Columbia in 1976.
Thanks to their ongoing work, we’ve learned a great deal about these whales, known as the Southern Residents.
And the more we learn, the more this population’s elders’ vital role comes into focus.
Each grandmother starts her life as a calf born into her mother’s family group, or matriline.
The family does everything together, hunting and playing, even communicating through their own unique set of calls.
Both sons and daughters spend their entire lives with their mothers’ families.
That doesn’t mean a young whale only interacts with her relatives.
Besides their own special calls, her matriline shares a dialect with nearby families, and they socialize regularly.
Once a female reaches age fifteen or so, these meetings become opportunities to mate with males from other groups.
The relationships don’t go much beyond mating— she and her calves stay with her family, while the male returns to his own mother.
Until approximately age forty, she gives birth every 6 years on average.
Then, she goes through menopause— which is almost unheard of in the animal kingdom.
In fact, humans, killer whales and a few other whales are the only species whose females continue to live for years after they stop reproducing.
After menopause, grandmothers take the lead hunting for salmon, the Southern Residents’ main food source.
Most of the winter they forage offshore, supplementing salmon with other fish.
But when the salmon head towards shore in droves to spawn, the killer whales follow.
The matriarch shows the younger whales where to find the most fertile fishing grounds.
She also shares up to 90% of the salmon she catches.
With each passing year, her contributions become more vital: overfishing and habitat destruction have decimated salmon populations, putting the whales at near-constant risk of starvation.
These grandmothers’ expertise can mean the difference between life and death for their families– but why do they stop having calves?
It’s almost always advantageous for a female to continue reproducing, even if she also cares for her existing children and grandchildren.
A couple unique circumstances change this equation for killer whales.
The fact that neither sons or daughters leave their families of origin is extremely rare— in almost all animal species, one or both sexes disperse.
This means that as a female killer whale ages, a greater percentage of her family consists of her children and grandchildren, while more distant relatives die off.
Because older females are more closely related to the group than younger females, they do best to invest in the family as a whole, whereas younger females should invest in reproducing.
In the killer whale’s environment, every new calf is another mouth to feed on limited, shared resources.
An older female can further her genes without burdening her family by supporting her adult sons, who sire calves other families will raise.
This might be why the females have evolved to stop reproducing entirely in middle age.
Even with the grandmothers’ contributions, the Southern Resident killer whales are critically endangered, largely due to a decline in salmon.
We urgently need to invest in restoring salmon populations to save them from extinction.
In the long term, we’ll need more studies like the Center for Whale Research’s.
What we’ve learned about the Southern Residents may not hold true for other groups.
By studying other populations closely, we might uncover more startling adaptations, and anticipate their vulnerabilities to human interference before their survival is at risk.
Roald Amundsen had spent nearly two years preparing his Arctic expedition.
He had secured funding from the Norwegian Crown and hand-picked a trusted crew.
He’d even received the blessing of the famed explorer Fridtjof Nansen, along with the use of his ship, Fram, specially constructed to withstand the ice.
Now, with the voyage departing, he had one final announcement to his shipmates: They were going to head in the opposite direction.
By the early 20th century, nearly every region of the globe had been visited and mapped, with only two key locations remaining: the North Pole, deep in the frozen waters of the Arctic region, and the South Pole, nestled within a recently discovered icy continent in the vast Antarctic Ocean.
A veteran of several expeditions, Amundsen had long dreamed of reaching the North Pole.
But in 1909, amidst his preparations, news came that the American explorers Frederick Cook and Robert Peary had staked rival claims to the achievement.
Instead of abandoning the planned voyage, Amundsen decided to alter its course to what he called “the last great problem.” But Amundsen’s crew weren’t the only ones kept in the dark.
British naval officer Robert F. Scott had already visited the Antarctic, and was leading his own South Pole expedition.
Now, as Scott’s ship Terra Nova reached Melbourne in 1910, he was greeted with the news that Amundsen was also heading south.
Reluctantly, Scott found himself pitted against the Norwegian in what the newspapers called a ‘race to the Pole.’ Yet if it was a race, it was a strange one.
The expeditions left at different times from different locations, and they had very different plans for the journey.
Amundsen was focused solely on reaching the Pole.
Informed by his Arctic exploration, he drew on both Inuit and Norwegian experience, arriving with a small team of men and more than a hundred dogs.
His explorers were clothed in sealskin and furs, as well as specially designed skis and boots.
But Scott's venture was more complicated.
Launching an extensive scientific research expedition, he traveled with over three times more men than Amundsen, alongside over 30 dogs, 19 Siberian ponies, and three state-of-the-art motorized sledges.
But these additional tools and bodies weighed down the ship as it battled the storms of the southern ocean.
And as they finally began to lay supplies, they found both their ponies and motor-sledges ineffective in the harsh ice and snow.
In the spring of 1911, after waiting out the long polar night, both parties began the journey south.
Scott’s team traveled over the Beardmore Glacier, following the path of Ernest Shackleton's earlier attempt to reach the pole.
But although this course had been documented, it proved slow and laborious.
Meanwhile, despite an initial false start, Amundsen’s five-man team made good time using a previously uncharted route through the same Transantarctic Mountains.
They stayed ahead of Scott’s team, and on December 14, arrived first at their desolate destination.
To avoid the ambiguity that surrounded Cook and Peary’s North Pole claims, Amundsen’s team traversed the area in a grid to make sure they covered the Pole’s location.
Along with flags and a tent marker, they left a letter for Scott, which would not be found until over a month later.
But when Scott’s party finally reached the pole, losing the ‘race’ was the least of their problems.
On the way back towards the camp, two of the five men succumbed to frostbite starvation, and exhaustion.
The remaining explorers hoped for a prearranged rendezvous with a team sent from their base, but due to a series of mishaps, misjudgements and miscommunications, their rescue never arrived.
Their remains, along with Scott’s diary, would not be found until spring.
Today, scientists from various countries live and work at Antarctic research stations.
But the journeys of these early explorers are not forgotten.
Despite their divergent fates, they are forever joined in history, and in the name of the research base that marks the South Pole.
When I was in high school at the age of 17 -- I graduated from high school in Decatur, Georgia, as valedictorian of my high school -- I was very proud of myself.
I was from a low-income community, I had grown up in Mississippi, we'd moved from Mississippi to Georgia so my parents could pursue their degrees as United Methodist ministers.
We were poor, but they didn't think we were poor enough, so they were going for permanent poverty.
(Laughter) And so, while they studied at Emory, I studied at Avondale, and I became valedictorian.
Well, one of the joys of being valedictorian in the state of Georgia is that you get invited to meet the governor of Georgia.
I was mildly interested in meeting him.
It was kind of cool.
I was more intrigued by the fact that he lived in a mansion, because I watched a lot of "General Hospital" and "Dynasty" as a child.
(Laughter) And so I got up that morning, ready to go to visit the governor.
My mom and my dad, who were also invited, got up, and we went outside.
But we didn't get in our car.
And in the south, a car is a necessary thing.
We don't have a lot of public transit, there aren't a lot of options.
But if you're lucky enough to live in a community where you don't have a car, the only option is public transit.
And that's what we had to take.
And so we got on the bus.
And we took the bus from Decatur all the way to Buckhead, where the Governor's Mansion sat on this really beautiful acreage of land, with these long black gates that ran the length of the property.
We get to the Governor's Mansion, we pull the little lever that lets them know this is our stop, we get off the bus, my mom, my dad and I, we walk across the street.
We walk up the driveway, because there are cars coming up, cars bringing in students from all across the state of Georgia.
So we're walking along the side.
And as we walk single file along the side, my mom and dad sandwiching me to make sure I don't get hit by one of the cars bringing in the other valedictorians, we approach the guard gate.
When we get to the guard gate, the guard comes out.
He looks at me, and he looks at my parents, and he says, "You don't belong here, this is a private event."
My dad says, "No, this is my daughter, Stacey. She's one of the valedictorians."
But the guard doesn't look at the checklist that's in his hands.
He doesn't ask my mom for the invitation that's at the bottom of her very voluminous purse.
Instead, he looks over our shoulder at the bus, because in his mind, the bus is telling him a story about who should be there.
And the fact that we were too poor to have our own car -- that was a story he told himself.
And he may have seen something in my skin color, he may have seen something in my attire; I don't know what went through his mind.
But his conclusion was to look at me again, and with a look of disdain, say, "I told you, this is a private event. You don't belong here."
Now, my parents were studying to become United Methodist ministers, but they were not pastors yet.
(Laughter) And so they proceeded to engage this gentleman in a very robust discussion of his decision-making skills.
(Laughter) My father may have mentioned that he was going to spend eternity in a very fiery place if he didn't find my name on that checklist.
And indeed, the man checks the checklist eventually, and he found my name, and he let us inside.
But I don't remember meeting the governor of Georgia.
I don't recall meeting my fellow valedictorians from 180 school districts.
The only clear memory I have of that day was a man standing in front of the most powerful place in Georgia, looking at me and telling me I don't belong.
And so I decided, 20-some-odd years later, to be the person who got to open the gates.
(Cheers) (Applause) Unfortunately, you may have read the rest of the story.
It didn't quite work out that way.
And now I'm tasked with figuring out: How do I move forward?
Because, you see, I didn't just want to open the gates for young black women who had been underestimated and told they don't belong.
I wanted to open those gates for Latinas and for Asian Americans.
I wanted to open those gates for the undocumented and the documented.
I wanted to open those gates as an ally of the LGBTQ community.
I wanted to open those gates for the families that have to call themselves the victims of gun violence.
I wanted to open those gates wide for everyone in Georgia, because that is our state, and this is our nation, and we all belong here.
(Cheers) (Applause) But what I recognized is that the first try wasn't enough.
And my question became: How do I move forward?
How do I get beyond the bitterness and the sadness and the lethargy and watching an inordinate amount of television as I eat ice cream?
(Laughter) What do I do next?
And I'm going to do what I've always done.
I'm going to move forward, because going backwards isn't an option and standing still is not enough.
(Applause) You see, I began my race for governor by analyzing who I was and what I wanted to be.
And there are three questions I ask myself about everything I do, whether it's running for office or starting a business; when I decided to start the New Georgia Project to register people to vote; or when I started the latest action, Fair Fight Georgia.
No matter what I do, I ask myself three questions: What do I want?
Why do I want it?
And how do I get it?
And in this case, I know what I want.
I want change.
That is what I want.
But the question is: What change do I want to see?
And I know that the questions I have to ask myself are: One, am I honest about the scope of my ambition?
Because it's easy to figure out that once you didn't get what you wanted, then maybe you should have set your sights a little lower, but I'm here to tell you to be aggressive about your ambition.
Do not allow setbacks to set you back.
(Applause) Number two, let yourself understand your mistakes.
But also understand their mistakes, because, as women in particular, we're taught that if something doesn't work out, it's probably our fault.
And usually, there is something we could do better, but we've been told not to investigate too much what the other side could have done.
And this isn't partisan -- it's people.
We're too often told that our mistakes are ours alone, but victory is a shared benefit.
And so what I tell you to do is understand your mistakes, but understand the mistakes of others.
And be clearheaded about it.
And be honest with yourself and honest with those who support you.
But once you know what you want, understand why you want it.
And even though it feels good, revenge is not a good reason.
(Laughter) Instead, make sure you want it because there's something not that you should do, but something you must do.
It has to be something that doesn't allow you to sleep at night unless you're dreaming about it; something that wakes you up in the morning and gets you excited about it; or something that makes you so angry, you know you have to do something about it.
But know why you're doing it.
And know why it must be done.
You've listened to women from across this world talk about why things have to happen.
But figure out what the "why" is for you, because jumping from the "what" to the "do" is meaningless if you don't know why.
Because when it gets hard, when it gets tough, when your friends walk away from you, when your supporters forget you, when you don't win your first race -- if you don't know why, you can't try again.
So, first know what you want.
Second, know why you want it, but third, know how you're going to get it done.
I faced a few obstacles in this race.
(Laughter) Just a few.
But in the pursuit, I became the first black woman to ever become the nominee for governor in the history of the United States of America for a major party.
(Cheers) (Applause) But more importantly, in this process, we turned out 1.2 million African American voters in Georgia.
That is more voters than voted on the Democratic side of the ticket in 2014.
(Applause) Our campaign tripled the number of Latinos who believed their voices mattered in the state of Georgia.
We tripled the number of Asian Americans who stood up and said, "This is our state, too."
Those are successes that tell me how I can get it done.
But they also let me understand the obstacles aren't insurmountable.
They're just a little high.
But I also understand that there are three things that always hold us hostage.
The first is finances.
Now, you may have heard, I'm in a little bit of debt.
If you didn't hear about it, you did not go outside.
(Laughter) And finances are something that holds us back so often, our dreams are bounded by how much we have in resources.
But we hear again and again the stories of those who overcome those resource challenges.
But you can't overcome something you don't talk about.
And that's why I didn't allow them to debt-shame me in my campaign.
I didn't allow anyone to tell me that my lack of opportunity was a reason to disqualify me from running.
And believe me, people tried to tell me I shouldn't run.
Friends told me not to run.
Allies told me not to run.
"USA Today" mentioned maybe I shouldn't run.
(Laughter) But no matter who it was, I understood that finances are often a reason we don't let ourselves dream.
I can't say that you will always overcome those obstacles, but I will tell you, you will be damned if you do not try.
(Applause) The second is fear.
And fear is real.
It is paralyzing.
It is terrifying.
But it can also be energizing, because once you know what you're afraid of, you can figure out how to get around it.
And the third is fatigue.
Sometimes you just get tired of trying.
You get tired of reading about processes and politics and the things that stop you from getting where you want to be.
Sometimes, fatigue means that we accept position instead of power.
We let someone give us a title as a consolation prize, rather than realizing we know what we want and we're going to get it, even if we're tired.
That's why God created naps.
(Laughter) But we also learn in those moments that fatigue is an opportunity to evaluate how much we want it.
Because if you are beaten down, if you have worked as hard as you can, if you have done everything you said you should, and it still doesn't work out, fatigue can sap you of your energy.
But that's why you go back to the "why" of it.
Because I know we have to have women who speak for the voiceless.
I know we have to have people of good conscience who stand up against oppression.
I know we have to have people who understand that social justice belongs to us all.
And that wakes me up every morning, and that makes me fight even harder.
Because I am moving forward, knowing what is in my past.
I know the obstacles they have for me.
I know what they're going to do, and I'm fairly certain they're energizing and creating new obstacles now.
But they've got four years to figure it out.
(Laughter) (Applause) Maybe two.
(Cheers) (Applause) But here's my point: I know what I want, and that is justice.
I know why I want it, because poverty is immoral, and it is a stain on our nation.
And I know how I'm going to get it: by moving forward every single day.
Thank you so much.
(Cheers) (Applause)
Those of you who know me know how passionate I am about opening the space frontier.
So when I had the chance to give the world's expert in gravity the experience of zero gravity, it was incredible.
And I want to tell you that story.
I first met him through the Archon X PRIZE for Genomics.
It's a competition we're holding, the second X PRIZE, for the first team to sequence 100 human genomes in 10 days.
We have something called the Genome 100 -- 100 individuals we're sequencing as part of that.
Craig Venter chairs that event.
And I met Professor Hawking, and he said his dream was to travel into space.
And I said, "I can't take you there, but I can take you into weightlessness into zero-g.
And he said, on the spot, "Absolutely, yes."
Well, the only way to experience zero-g on Earth is actually with parabolic flight, weightless flight.
You take an airplane, you fly over the top, you're weightless for 25 seconds.
Come back down, you weigh twice as much.
You do it again and again.
You can get eight, 10 minutes of weightlessness -- how NASA's trained their astronauts for so long.
We set out to do this.
It took us 11 years to become operational.
And we announced that we were going to fly Stephen Hawking.
We had one government agency and one company aircraft operator say, you're crazy, don't do that, you're going kill the guy.
(Laughter) And he wanted to go.
We worked hard to get all the permissions.
And six months later, we sat down at Kennedy Space Center.
We had a press conference, we announced our intent to do one zero-g parabola, give him 25 seconds of zero-g.
And if it went really well, we might do three parabolas.
Well, we asked him why he wanted to go up and do this.
And what he said, for me, was very moving.
He said, "Life on Earth is at an ever-increasing risk of being wiped out by disaster ...
I think the human race doesn't have a future if it doesn't go into space.
I therefore want to encourage public interest in space."
We took him out to the Kennedy Space Center, up inside the NASA vehicle, into the back of the zero-g airplane.
We had about 20 people who made donations -- we raised $150,000 in donations for children's charities -- who flew with us.
A few TEDsters here.
We set up a whole ER.
We had four emergency room doctors and two nurses on board the airplane.
We were monitoring his PO2 of his blood, his heart rate, his blood pressure.
We had everything all set in case of an emergency; God knows, you don't want to hurt this world-renowned expert.
We took off from the shuttle landing facility, where the shuttle takes off and lands.
And my partner Byron Lichtenberg and I carefully suspended him into zero-g.
Once he was there, [we] let him go to experience what weightlessness was truly like.
And after that first parabola, you know, the doc said everything is great. He was smiling, and we said go.
So we did a second parabola.
(Laughter) (Applause) And a third.
(Applause) We actually floated an apple in homage to Sir Isaac Newton because Professor Hawking holds the same chair at Cambridge that Isaac Newton did.
And we did a fourth, and a fifth and a sixth.
(Laughter) And a seventh and an eighth.
And this man does not look like a 65-year-old wheelchair-bound man.
(Laughter) He was so happy.
We are living on a precious jewel, and it's during our lifetime that we're moving off this planet.
Please join us in this epic adventure.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
So what does it mean to be a woman?
We all have XX chromosomes, right?
Actually, that's not true.
Some women are mosaics.
They have a mix of chromosome types with X, with XY or with XXX.
If it's not just about our chromosomes, then what is being a woman about?
Being feminine?
Getting married?
Having kids?
You don't have to look far to find fantastic exceptions to these rules, but we all share something that makes us women.
Maybe that something is in our brains.
You might have heard theories from last century about how men are better at math than women because they have bigger brains.
These theories have been debunked.
The average man has a brain about three times smaller than the average elephant, but that doesn't mean the average man is three times dumber than an elephant ...
or does it?
(Laughter) There's a new wave of female neuroscientists that are finding important differences between female and male brains in neuron connectivity, in brain structure, in brain activity.
They're finding that the brain is like a patchwork mosaic -- a mixture.
Women have mostly female patches and a few male patches.
With all this new data, what does it mean to be a woman?
This is something that I've been thinking about almost my entire life.
When people learn that I'm a woman who happens to be transgender, they always ask, "How do you know you're a woman?"
As a scientist, I'm searching for a biological basis of gender.
I want to understand what makes me me.
New discoveries at the front edge of science are shedding light on the biomarkers that define gender.
My colleagues and I in genetics, neuroscience, physiology and psychology, we're trying to figure out exactly how gender works.
These vastly different fields share a common connection -- epigenetics.
In epigenetics, we're studying how DNA activity can actually radically and permanently change, even though the sequence stays the same.
DNA is the long, string-like molecule that winds up inside our cells.
There's so much DNA that it actually gets tangled into these knot-like things -- we'll just call them knots.
So external factors change how those DNA knots are formed.
You can think of it like this: inside our cells, there's different contraptions building things, connecting circuits, doing all the things they need to make life happen.
Here's one that's sort of reading the DNA and making RNA.
And then this one is carrying a huge sac of neurotransmitters from one end of the brain cell to the other.
Don't they get hazard pay for this kind of work?
(Laughter) This one is an entire molecular factory -- some say it's the secret to life.
It's call the ribosome.
I've been studying this since 2001.
One of the stunning things about our cells is that the components inside them are actually biodegradable.
They dissolve, and then they're rebuilt each day, kind of like a traveling carnival where the rides are taken down and then rebuilt every single day.
A big difference between our cells and the traveling carnival is that in the carnival, there are skilled craftsmen that rebuild the rides each day.
In our cells, there are no such skilled craftsmen, only dumb builder machines that build whatever's written in the plans, no matter what those plans say.
Those plans are the DNA.
The instructions for every nook and cranny inside our cells.
If everything in, say, our brain cells dissolves almost every day, then how can the brain remember anything past one day?
That's where DNA comes in.
DNA is one of the those things that does not dissolve.
But for DNA to remember that something happened, it has to change somehow.
We know the change can't be in the sequence; if it changed sequence all the time, then we might be growing like, a new ear or a new eyeball every single day.
(Laughter) So, instead it changes shape, and that's where those DNA knots come in.
You can think of them like DNA memory.
When something big in our life happens, like a traumatic childhood event, stress hormones flood our brain.
The stress hormones don't affect the sequence of DNA, but they do change the shape.
They affect that part of DNA with the instructions for molecular machines that reduce stress.
That piece of DNA gets wound up into a knot, and now the dumb builder machines can't read the plans they need to build the machines that reduce stress.
That's a mouthful, but it's what's happening on the microscale.
On the macroscale, you practically lose the ability to deal with stress, and that's bad.
And that's how DNA can remember what happens in the past.
This is what I think was happening to me when I first started my gender transition.
I knew I was a woman on the inside, and I wore women's clothes on the outside, but everyone saw me as a man in a dress.
I felt like no matter how many things I try, no one would ever really see me as a woman.
In science, your credibility is everything, and people were snickering in the hallways, giving me stares, looks of disgust -- afraid to be near me.
I remember my first big talk after transition.
It was in Italy.
I'd given prestigious talks before, but this one, I was terrified.
I looked out into the audience, and the whispers started -- the stares, the smirks, the chuckles.
To this day, I still have social anxiety around my experience eight years ago.
I lost hope.
Don't worry, I've had therapy so I'm OK -- I'm OK now.
(Laughter) (Cheers) (Applause) But I felt enough is enough: I'm a scientist, I have a doctorate in astrophysics, I've published in the top journals, in wave-particle interactions, space physics, nucleic acid biochemistry.
I've actually been trained to get to the bottom of things, so -- (Laughter) I went online -- (Applause) So I went online, and I found fascinating research papers.
I learned that these DNA knot things are not always bad.
Actually, the knotting and unknotting -- it's like a complicated computer language.
It programs our bodies with exquisite precision.
So when we get pregnant, our fertilized eggs grow into newborn babies.
This process requires thousands of DNA decisions to happen.
Should an embryo cell become a blood cell?
A heart cell? A brain cell?
And the decisions happen at different times during pregnancy.
Some in the first trimester, some in the second trimester and some in the third trimester.
To truly understand DNA decision-making, we need to see the process of knot formation in atomic detail.
Even the most powerful microscopes can't see this.
What if we tried to simulate these on a computer?
For that we'd need a million computers to do that.
That's exactly what we have at Los Alamos Labs -- a million computers connected in a giant warehouse.
So here we're showing the DNA making up an entire gene folded into very specific shapes of knots.
For the first time, my team has simulated an entire gene of DNA -- the largest biomolecular simulation performed to date.
For the first time, we're beginning to understand the unsolved problem of how hormones trigger the formation of these knots.
DNA knot formation can be seen beautifully in calico cats.
The decision between orange and black happens early on in the womb, so that orange-and-black patchy pattern, it's an exact readout of what happened when that cat was just a tiny little kitten embryo inside her mom's womb.
And the patchy pattern actually happens in our brains and in cancer.
It's directly related to intellectual disability and breast cancer.
These DNA decisions also happen in other parts of the body.
It turns out that the precursor genitals transform into either female or male during the first trimester of pregnancy.
The precursor brains, on the other hand, transform into female or male during the second trimester of pregnancy.
So the current working model is that a unique mix in my mom's womb caused the precursor genitals to transform one way, but the precursor brain to transform the other way.
Most of epigenetic research has really focused on stress, anxiety, depression -- kind of a downer, kind of bad things.
(Laughter) But nowadays -- the latest stuff -- people are looking at relaxation.
Can that have a positive effect on your DNA?
Right now we're missing key data from mice models.
We know that mice relax, but could they meditate like the Dalai Lama?
Achieve enlightenment?
Could they move stones with their mind like Jedi Master Yoda?
(Yoda voice): Hm, a Jedi mouse must feel the force flow, hm.
(Laughter) (Applause) I wonder if the support I've had since that talk back in Italy has tried to unwind my DNA.
Having a great circle of friends, supportive parents and being in a loving relationship has actually given me strength and hope to help others.
At work I wear a rainbow bracelet.
Sometimes it raises eyebrows, but it also raises awareness.
There's so many transgender people -- especially women of color -- that are just one demeaning comment away from taking their own lives.
Forty percent of us attempt suicide.
If you're listening and you feel like you have no other option, try to call a friend, go online or try to get in a support group.
If you're a woman who's not transgender but you know pain of isolation, of sexual assault -- reach out.
So what does it mean to be a woman?
The latest research is showing that female and male brains do develop differently in the womb, possibly giving us females this innate sense of being a woman.
On the other hand, maybe it's our shared sense of commonality that makes us women.
We come in so many different shapes and sizes that asking what it means to be a woman may not be the right question.
It's like asking a calico cat what it means to be a calico cat.
Maybe becoming a woman means accepting ourselves for who we really are and acknowledging the same in each other.
I see you.
And you've just seen me.
(Applause and cheers)
I love learning foreign languages.
In fact, I love it so much that I like to learn a new language every two years, currently working on my eighth one.
When people find that out about me, they always ask me, "How do you do that? What's your secret?"
And to be honest, for many years, my answer would be, "I don't know. I simply love learning languages."
But people were never happy with that answer.
They wanted to know why they are spending years trying to learn even one language, never achieving fluency, and here I come, learning one language after another.
They wanted to know the secret of polyglots, people who speak a lot of languages.
And that made me wonder, too, how do actually other polyglots do it?
What do we have in common?
And what is it that enables us to learn languages so much faster than other people?
I decided to meet other people like me and find that out.
The best place to meet a lot of polyglots is an event where hundreds of language lovers meet in one place to practice their languages.
There are several such polyglot events organized all around the world, and so I decided to go there and ask polyglots about the methods that they use.
And so I met Benny from Ireland, who told me that his method is to start speaking from day one.
He learns a few phrases from a travel phrasebook and goes to meet native speakers and starts having conversations with them right away.
He doesn't mind making even 200 mistakes a day, because that's how he learns, based on the feedback.
And the best thing is, he doesn't even need to travel a lot today, because you can easily have conversations with native speakers from the comfort of your living room, using websites.
I also met Lucas from Brazil who had a really interesting method to learn Russian.
He simply added a hundred random Russian speakers on Skype as friends, and then he opened a chat window with one of them and wrote "Hi" in Russian.
And the person replied, "Hi, how are you?"
Lucas copied this and put it into a text window with another person, and the person replied, "I'm fine, thank you, and how are you?"
Lucas copied this back to the first person, and in this way, he had two strangers have a conversation with each other without knowing about it.
(Laughter) And soon he would start typing himself, because he had so many of these conversations that he figured out how the Russian conversation usually starts.
What an ingenious method, right?
And then I met polyglots who always start by imitating sounds of the language, and others who always learn the 500 most frequent words of the language, and yet others who always start by reading about the grammar.
If I asked a hundred different polyglots, I heard a hundred different approaches to learning languages.
Everybody seems to have a unique way they learn a language, and yet we all come to the same result of speaking several languages fluently.
And as I was listening to these polyglots telling me about their methods, it suddenly dawned on me: the one thing we all have in common is that we simply found ways to enjoy the language-learning process.
All of these polyglots were talking about language learning as if it was great fun.
You should have seen their faces when they were showing me their colorful grammar charts and their carefully handmade flash cards, and their statistics about learning vocabulary using apps, or even how they love to cook based on recipes in a foreign language.
All of them use different methods, but they always make sure it's something that they personally enjoy.
I realized that this is actually how I learn languages myself.
When I was learning Spanish, I was bored with the text in the textbook.
I mean, who wants to read about Jose asking about the directions to the train station. Right?
I wanted to read "Harry Potter" instead, because that was my favorite book as a child, and I have read it many times.
So I got the Spanish translation of "Harry Potter" and started reading, and sure enough, I didn't understand almost anything at the beginning, but I kept on reading because I loved the book, and by the end of the book, I was able to follow it almost without any problems.
And the same thing happened when I was learning German.
I decided to watch "Friends," my favorite sitcom, in German, and again, at the beginning it was all just gibberish.
I didn't know where one word finished and another one started, but I kept on watching every day because it's "Friends."
I can watch it in any language. I love it so much.
And after the second or third season, seriously, the dialogue started to make sense.
I only realized this after meeting other polyglots.
We are no geniuses and we have no shortcut to learning languages.
We simply found ways how to enjoy the process, how to turn language learning from a boring school subject into a pleasant activity which you don't mind doing every day.
If you don't like writing words down on paper, you can always type them in an app.
If you don't like listening to boring textbook material, find interesting content on YouTube or in podcasts for any language.
If you're a more introverted person and you can't imagine speaking to native speakers right away, you can apply the method of self-talk.
You can talk to yourself in the comfort of your room, describing your plans for the weekend, how your day has been, or even take a random picture from your phone and describe the picture to your imaginary friend.
This is how polyglots learn languages, and the best news is, it's available to anyone who is willing to take the learning into their own hands.
So meeting other polyglots helped me realize that it is really crucial to find enjoyment in the process of learning languages, but also that joy in itself is not enough.
If you want to achieve fluency in a foreign language, you'll also need to apply three more principles.
First of all, you'll need effective methods.
If you try to memorize a list of words for a test tomorrow, the words will be stored in your short-term memory and you'll forget them after a few days.
If you, however, want to keep words long term, you need to revise them in the course of a few days repeatedly using the so-called space repetition.
You can use apps which are based on this system such as Anki or Memrise, or you can write lists of word in a notebook using the Goldlist method, which is also very popular with many polyglots.
If you're not sure which methods are effective and what is available out there, just check out polyglots' YouTube channels and websites and get inspiration from them.
If it works for them, it will most probably work for you too.
The third principle to follow is to create a system in your learning.
We're all very busy and no one really has time to learn a language today.
But we can create that time if we just plan a bit ahead.
Can you wake up 15 minutes earlier than you normally do?
That would be the perfect time to revise some vocabulary.
Can you listen to a podcast on your way to work while driving?
Well, that would be great to get some listening experience.
There are so many things we can do without even planning that extra time, such as listening to podcasts on our way to work or doing our household chores.
The important thing is to create a plan in the learning.
"I will practice speaking every Tuesday and Thursday with a friend for 20 minutes.
I will listen to a YouTube video while having breakfast."
If you create a system in your learning, you don't need to find that extra time, because it will become a part of your everyday life.
And finally, if you want to learn a language fluently, you need also a bit of patience.
It's not possible to learn a language within two months, but it's definitely possible to make a visible improvement in two months, if you learn in small chunks every day in a way that you enjoy.
And there is nothing that motivates us more than our own success.
I vividly remember the moment when I understood the first joke in German when watching "Friends."
I was so happy and motivated that I just kept on watching that day two more episodes, and as I kept watching, I had more and more of those moments of understanding, these little victories, and step by step, I got to a level where I could use the language freely and fluently to express anything.
This is a wonderful feeling.
I can't get enough of that feeling, and that's why I learn a language every two years.
So this is the whole polyglot secret.
Find effective methods which you can use systematically over the period of some time in a way which you enjoy, and this is how polyglots learn languages within months, not years.
Now, some of you may be thinking, "That's all very nice to enjoy language learning, but isn't the real secret that you polyglots are just super talented and most of us aren't?"
Well, there's one thing I haven't told you about Benny and Lucas.
Benny had 11 years of Irish Gaelic and five years of German at school.
He couldn't speak them at all when graduating.
Up to the age of 21, he thought he didn't have the language gene and he could not speak another language.
Then he started to look for his way of learning languages, which was speaking to native speakers and getting feedback from them, and today Benny can easily have a conversation in 10 languages.
Lucas tried to learn English at school for 10 years.
He was one of the worst students in class.
His friends even made fun of him and gave him a Russian textbook as a joke because they thought he would never learn that language, or any language.
And then Lucas started to experiment with methods, looking for his own way to learn, for example, by having Skype chat conversations with strangers.
And after just 10 years, Lucas is able to speak 11 languages fluently.
Does that sound like a miracle?
Well, I see such miracles every single day.
As a language mentor, I help people learn languages by themselves, and I see this every day.
People struggle with language learning for five, 10, even 20 years, and then they suddenly take their learning into their own hands, start using materials which they enjoy, more effective methods, or they start tracking their learning so that they can appreciate their own progress, and that's when suddenly they magically find the language talent that they were missing all their lives.
So if you've also tried to learn a language and you gave up, thinking it's too difficult or you don't have the language talent, give it another try.
Maybe you're also just one enjoyable method away from learning that language fluently.
Maybe you're just one method away from becoming a polyglot.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My search is always to find ways to chronicle, to share and to document stories about people, just everyday people.
Stories that offer transformation, that lean into transcendence, but that are never sentimental, that never look away from the darkest things about us.
Because I really believe that we're never more beautiful than when we're most ugly.
Because that's really the moment we really know what we're made of.
As Chris said, I grew up in Nigeria with a whole generation -- in the '80s -- of students who were protesting a military dictatorship, which has finally ended.
So it wasn't just me, there was a whole generation of us.
But what I've come to learn is that the world is never saved in grand messianic gestures, but in the simple accumulation of gentle, soft, almost invisible acts of compassion, everyday acts of compassion.
In South Africa, they have a phrase called Ubuntu.
Ubuntu comes out of a philosophy that says, the only way for me to be human is for you to reflect my humanity back at me.
But if you're like me, my humanity is more like a window.
I don't really see it, I don't pay attention to it until there's, you know, like a bug that's dead on the window.
Then suddenly I see it, and usually, it's never good.
It's usually when I'm cussing in traffic at someone who is trying to drive their car and drink coffee and send emails and make notes.
So what Ubuntu really says is that there is no way for us to be human without other people.
It's really very simple, but really very complicated.
So, I thought I should start with some stories.
I should tell you some stories about remarkable people, so I thought I'd start with my mother.
(Laughter) And she was dark, too.
My mother was English.
My parents met in Oxford in the '50s, and my mother moved to Nigeria and lived there.
She was five foot two, very feisty and very English.
This is how English my mother is -- or was, she just passed.
She came out to California, to Los Angeles, to visit me, and we went to Malibu, which she thought was very disappointing.
(Laughter) And then we went to a fish restaurant, and we had Chad, the surfer dude, serving us, and he came up and my mother said, "Do you have any specials, young man?"
And Chad says, "Sure, like, we have this, like, salmon, that's, like, rolled in this, like, wasabi, like, crust.
It's totally rad."
And my mother turned to me and said, "What language is he speaking?"
(Laughter) I said, "English, mum."
And she shook her head and said, "Oh, these Americans. We gave them a language, why don't they use it?"
(Laughter) So, this woman, who converted from the Church of England to Catholicism when she married my father -- and there's no one more rabid than a Catholic convert -- decided to teach in the rural areas in Nigeria, particularly among Igbo women, the Billings ovulation method, which was the only approved birth control by the Catholic Church.
But her Igbo wasn't too good.
So she took me along to translate.
I was seven.
(Laughter) So, here are these women, who never discuss their period with their husbands, and here I am telling them, "Well, how often do you get your period?"
(Laughter) And, "Do you notice any discharges?"
(Laughter) And, "How swollen is your vulva?"
(Laughter) She never would have thought of herself as a feminist, my mother, but she always used to say, "Anything a man can do, I can fix."
(Applause) And when my father complained about this situation, where she's taking a seven-year-old boy to teach this birth control, you know, he used to say, "Oh, you're turning him into -- you're teaching him how to be a woman."
My mother said, "Someone has to."
(Laughter) This woman -- during the Biafran war, we were caught in the war.
It was my mother with five little children.
It takes her one year, through refugee camp after refugee camp, to make her way to an airstrip where we can fly out of the country.
At every single refugee camp, she has to face off soldiers who want to take my elder brother Mark, who was nine, and make him a boy soldier.
Can you imagine this five-foot-two woman, standing up to men with guns who want to kill us?
All through that one year, my mother never cried one time, not once.
But when we were in Lisbon, in the airport, about to fly to England, this woman saw my mother wearing this dress, which had been washed so many times it was basically see through, with five really hungry-looking kids, came over and asked her what had happened.
And she told this woman.
And so this woman emptied out her suitcase and gave all of her clothes to my mother, and to us, and the toys of her kids, who didn't like that very much, but -- (Laughter) -- that was the only time she cried.
And I remember years later, I was writing about my mother, and I asked her, "Why did you cry then?"
And she said, "You know, you can steel your heart against any kind of trouble, any kind of horror.
But the simple act of kindness from a complete stranger will unstitch you."
The old women in my father's village, after this war had happened, memorized the names of every dead person, and they would sing these dirges, made up of these names.
Dirges so melancholic that they would scorch you.
And they would sing them only when they planted the rice, as though they were seeding the hearts of the dead into the rice.
But when it came for harvest time, they would sing these joyful songs, that were made up of the names of every child who had been born that year.
And then the next planting season, when they sang the dirge, they would remove as many names of the dead that equaled as many people that were born.
And in this way, these women enacted a lot of transformation, beautiful transformation.
Did you know, that before the genocide in Rwanda, the word for rape and the word for marriage was the same one?
But today, women are rebuilding Rwanda.
Did you also know that after apartheid, when the new government went into the parliament houses, there were no female toilets in the building?
Which would seem to suggest that apartheid was entirely the business of men.
All of this to say, that despite the horror, and despite the death, women are never really counted.
Their humanity never seems to matter very much to us.
When I was growing up in Nigeria -- and I shouldn't say Nigeria, because that's too general, but in Afikpo, the Igbo part of the country where I'm from -- there were always rites of passage for young men.
Men were taught to be men in the ways in which we are not women, that's essentially what it is.
And a lot of rituals involved killing, killing little animals, progressing along, so when I turned 13 -- and, I mean, it made sense, it was an agrarian community, somebody had to kill the animals, there was no Whole Foods you could go and get kangaroo steak at -- so when I turned 13, it was my turn now to kill a goat.
And I was this weird, sensitive kid, who couldn't really do it, but I had to do it.
And I was supposed to do this alone.
But a friend of mine, called Emmanuel, who was significantly older than me, who'd been a boy soldier during the Biafran war, decided to come with me.
Which sort of made me feel good, because he'd seen a lot of things.
Now, when I was growing up, he used to tell me stories about how he used to bayonet people, and their intestines would fall out, but they would keep running.
So, this guy comes with me.
And I don't know if you've ever heard a goat, or seen one -- they sound like human beings, that's why we call tragedies "a song of a goat."
My friend Brad Kessler says that we didn't become human until we started keeping goats.
Anyway, a goat's eyes are like a child's eyes.
So when I tried to kill this goat and I couldn't, Emmanuel bent down, he puts his hand over the mouth of the goat, covers its eyes, so I don't have to look into them, while I kill the goat.
It didn't seem like a lot, for this guy who'd seen so much, and to whom the killing of a goat must have seemed such a quotidian experience, still found it in himself to try to protect me.
I was a wimp.
I cried for a very long time.
And afterwards, he didn't say a word.
He just sat there watching me cry for an hour.
And then afterwards he said to me, "It will always be difficult, but if you cry like this every time, you will die of heartbreak.
Just know that it is enough sometimes to know that it is difficult."
Of course, talking about goats makes me think of sheep, and not in good ways.
(Laughter) So, I was born two days after Christmas.
So growing up, you know, I had a cake and everything, but I never got any presents, because, born two days after Christmas.
So, I was about nine, and my uncle had just come back from Germany, and we had the Catholic priest over, my mother was entertaining him with tea.
And my uncle suddenly says, "Where are Chris' presents?"
And my mother said, "Don't talk about that in front of guests."
But he was desperate to show that he'd just come back, so he summoned me up, and he said, "Go into the bedroom, my bedroom.
Take anything you want out of the suitcase.
It's your birthday present."
I'm sure he thought I'd take a book or a shirt, but I found an inflatable sheep.
(Laughter) So, I blew it up and ran into the living room, my finger where it shouldn't have been, I was waving this buzzing sheep around, and my mother looked like she was going to die of shock.
(Laughter) And Father McGetrick was completely unflustered, just stirred his tea and looked at my mother and said, "It's all right Daphne, I'm Scottish."
(Laughter) (Applause) My last days in prison, the last 18 months, my cellmate -- for the last year, the first year of the last 18 months -- my cellmate was 14 years old.
The name was John James, and in those days, if a family member committed a crime, the military would hold you as ransom till your family turned themselves in.
So, here was this 14-year-old kid on death row.
And not everybody on death row was a political prisoner.
There were some really bad people there.
And he had smuggled in two comics, two comic books -- "Spiderman" and "X-Men."
He was obsessed.
And when he got tired of reading them, he started to teach the men in death row how to read, with these comic books.
And so, I remember night after night, you'd hear all these men, these really hardened criminals, huddled around John James, reciting, "Take that, Spidey!"
(Laughter) It's incredible.
I was really worried.
He didn't know what death row meant.
I'd been there twice, and I was terribly afraid that I was going to die.
And he would always laugh, and say, "Come on, man, we'll make it out."
Then I'd say, "How do you know?"
And he said, "Oh, I heard it on the grapevine."
They killed him.
They handcuffed him to a chair, and they tacked his penis to a table with a six-inch nail, then left him there to bleed to death.
That's how I ended up in solitary, because I let my feelings be known.
All around us, everywhere, there are people like this.
The Igbo used to say that they built their own gods.
They would come together as a community, and they would express a wish.
And their wish would then be brought to a priest, who would find a ritual object, and the appropriate sacrifices would be made, and the shrine would be built for the god.
But if the god became unruly and began to ask for human sacrifice, the Igbos would destroy the god.
They would knock down the shrine, and they would stop saying the god's name.
This is how they came to reclaim their humanity.
Every day, all of us here, we're building gods that have gone rampant, and it's time we started knocking them down and forgetting their names.
It doesn't require a tremendous thing.
All it requires is to recognize among us, every day -- the few of us that can see -- are surrounded by people like the ones I've told you.
There are some of you in this room, amazing people, who offer all of us the mirror to our own humanity.
I want to end with a poem by an American poet called Lucille Clifton.
The poem is called "Libation," and it's for my friend Vusi who is in the audience here somewhere.
"Libation, North Carolina, 1999.
I offer to this ground, this gin.
I imagine an old man crying here, out of the sight of the overseer.
He pushes his tongue through a hole where his tooth would be, if he were whole.
It aches in that space where his tooth would be, where his land would be, his house, his wife, his son, his beautiful daughter.
He wipes sorrow from his face, and puts his thirsty finger to his thirsty tongue, and tastes the salt.
I call a name that could be his.
This is for you, old man.
This gin, this salty earth."
Thank you.
(Applause)
From space, our planet appears to be more ocean than Earth.
But despite the water covering 71% of the planet’s surface, more than half the world’s population endures extreme water scarcity for at least one month a year.
And current estimates predict that by 2040, up to 20 more countries could be experiencing water shortages.
Taken together, these bleak statistics raise a startling question: are we running out of clean water?
Well yes, and no.
At a planetary scale, Earth can’t run out of freshwater thanks to the water cycle, a system that continuously produces and recycles water, morphing it from vapour, to liquid, to ice as it circulates around the globe.
So this isn’t really a question of how much water there is, but of how much of it is accessible to us.
97% of earth’s liquid is saltwater, too loaded with minerals for humans to drink or use in agriculture.
Of the remaining 3% of potentially usable freshwater, more than two-thirds is frozen in ice caps and glaciers.
That leaves less than 1% available for sustaining all life on Earth, spread across our planet in rivers, lakes, underground aquifers, ground ice and permafrost.
It’s these sources of water that are being rapidly depleted by humans, but slowly replenished by rain and snowfall.
And this limited supply isn’t distributed evenly around the globe.
Diverse climates and geography provide some regions with more rainfall and natural water sources, while other areas have geographic features that make transporting water much more difficult.
And supplying the infrastructure and energy it would take to move water across these regions is extremely expensive.
In many of these water-poor areas, as well as some with greater access to water, humanity is guzzling up the local water supply faster than it can be replenished.
And when more quickly renewed sources can’t meet the demand, we start pumping it out of our finite underground reserves.
Of Earth’s 37 major underground reservoirs, 21 are on track to be irreversibly emptied.
So while it’s true that our planet isn’t actually losing water, we are depleting the water sources we rely on at an unsustainable pace.
This might seem surprising – after all, on average, people only drink about two liters of water a day.
But water plays a hidden role in our daily lives, and in that same 24 hours, most people will actually consume an estimated 3000 liters of water.
In fact, household water – which we use to drink, cook, and clean – accounts for only 3.6% of humanity’s water consumption.
Another 4.4% goes to the wide range of factories which make the products we buy each day.
But the remaining 92% of our water consumption is all spent on a single industry: agriculture.
Our farms drain the equivalent of 3.3 billion Olympic-sized swimming pools every year, all of it swallowed up by crops and livestock to feed Earth’s growing population.
Agriculture currently covers 37% of Earth’s land area, posing the biggest threat to our regional water supplies.
And yet, it’s also a necessity.
So how do we limit agriculture’s thirst while still feeding those who rely on it?
Farmers are already finding ingenious ways to reduce their impact, like using special irrigation techniques to grow “more crop per drop”, and breeding new crops that are less thirsty.
Other industries are following suit, adopting production processes that reuse and recycle water.
On a personal level, reducing food waste is the first step to reducing water use, since one-third of the food that leaves farms is currently wasted or thrown away.
You might also want to consider eating less water-intensive foods like shelled nuts and red meat.
Adopting a vegetarian lifestyle could reduce up to one third of your water footprint.
Our planet may never run out of water, but it doesn’t have to for individuals to go thirsty.
Solving this local problem requires a global solution, and small day-to-day decisions can affect reservoirs around the world.
Before empires and royalty, before pottery and writing, before metal tools and weapons – there was cheese.
As early as 8000 BCE, the earliest Neolithic farmers living in the Fertile Crescent began a legacy of cheesemaking almost as old as civilization itself.
The rise of agriculture led to domesticated sheep and goats, which ancient farmers harvested for milk.
But when left in warm conditions for several hours, that fresh milk began to sour.
Its lactic acids caused proteins to coagulate, binding into soft clumps.
Upon discovering this strange transformation, the farmers drained the remaining liquid – later named whey – and found the yellowish globs could be eaten fresh as a soft, spreadable meal.
These clumps, or curds, became the building blocks of cheese, which would eventually be aged, pressed, ripened, and whizzed into a diverse cornucopia of dairy delights.
The discovery of cheese gave Neolithic people an enormous survival advantage.
Milk was rich with essential proteins, fats, and minerals.
But it also contained high quantities of lactose – a sugar which is difficult to process for many ancient and modern stomachs.
Cheese, however, could provide all of milk’s advantages with much less lactose.
And since it could be preserved and stockpiled, these essential nutrients could be eaten throughout scarce famines and long winters.
Some 7th millennium BCE pottery fragments found in Turkey still contain telltale residues of the cheese and butter they held.
By the end of the Bronze Age, cheese was a standard commodity in maritime trade throughout the eastern Mediterranean.
In the densely populated city-states of Mesopotamia, cheese became a staple of culinary and religious life.
Some of the earliest known writing includes administrative records of cheese quotas, listing a variety of cheeses for different rituals and populations across Mesopotamia.
Records from nearby civilizations in Turkey also reference rennet.
This animal byproduct, produced in the stomachs of certain mammals, can accelerate and control coagulation.
Eventually this sophisticated cheesemaking tool spread around the globe, giving way to a wide variety of new, harder cheeses.
And though some conservative food cultures rejected the dairy delicacy, many more embraced cheese, and quickly added their own local flavors.
Nomadic Mongolians used yaks’ milk to create hard, sundried wedges of Byaslag.
Egyptians enjoyed goats’ milk cottage cheese, straining the whey with reed mats.
In South Asia, milk was coagulated with a variety of food acids, such as lemon juice, vinegar, or yogurt and then hung to dry into loafs of paneer.
This soft mild cheese could be added to curries and sauces, or simply fried as a quick vegetarian dish.
The Greeks produced bricks of salty brined feta cheese, alongside a harder variety similar to today’s pecorino romano.
This grating cheese was produced in Sicily and used in dishes all across the Mediterranean.
Under Roman rule, “dry cheese” or “caseus aridus,” became an essential ration for the nearly 500,000 soldiers guarding the vast borders of the Roman Empire.
And when the Western Roman Empire collapsed, cheesemaking continued to evolve in the manors that dotted the medieval European countryside.
In the hundreds of Benedictine monasteries scattered across Europe, medieval monks experimented endlessly with different types of milk, cheesemaking practices, and aging processes that led to many of today’s popular cheeses.
Parmesan, Roquefort, Munster and several Swiss types were all refined and perfected by these cheesemaking clergymen.
In the Alps, Swiss cheesemaking was particularly successful – producing a myriad of cow’s milk cheeses.
By the end of the 14th century, Alpine cheese from the Gruyere region of Switzerland had become so profitable that a neighboring state invaded the Gruyere highlands to take control of the growing cheese trade.
Cheese remained popular through the Renaissance, and the Industrial Revolution took production out of the monastery and into machinery.
Today, the world produces roughly 22 billion kilograms of cheese a year, shipped and consumed around the globe.
But 10,000 years after its invention, local farms are still following in the footsteps of their Neolithic ancestors, hand crafting one of humanity’s oldest and favorite foods.
OK, I want to take a moment to let each of you think to yourselves about the last time you sent or received a fax.
(Laughter) Well, for me, it was this morning, because one piece of my work is making sure that everyone in the US has the information that they need to make decisions about the candidates on their ballot.
And collecting that information from the local government offices responsible for maintaining it means sending and receiving a lot of faxes.
Voting is one of our most fundamental rights.
It's one of the most tangible ways that each and every one of us can shape our communities.
And as we enter this fourth industrial revolution, where technology is changing everything around us, you would think, with something as important as the right to vote, that we would have the most modern, secure, inclusive system that could exist ...
But we don't.
When we look at comparable democracies, the US has one of the lowest voter turnout rates in the world.
We have a system where even the most persistent voters come up against exhausting barriers.
A system where 20th-century technology -- like fax machines -- and outdated practices stand in the way of full, vibrant participation.
In US presidential elections, turnout hovers around 60 percent.
The numbers are even lower for local elections.
That means that nearly 40 percent of Americans aren't voters.
That's nearly 100 million people.
I believe in something very straightforward: that everyone should have the information that they need to become a voter, that the voting process should be seamless and secure and that every voter should have information they trust to make decisions about the candidates on their ballot.
Because when more people vote, together, we make better decisions for our communities.
So I've spent the last eight years on a mission to push our democracy into the 21st century.
Now, one of the most common approaches to election modernization is advocating for policy change, and that's an incredibly important piece of the strategy for building a system where millions of more people become voters.
But I've taken a different approach.
I focused on a critical yet largely untapped resource for election modernization: local election officials.
I work with thousands of local election officials across the country to build tools and skills that they can use immediately to transform the way that they're engaging today's voters.
Folks like Kat and Marie.
Kat and Marie have worked together for years in a windowless office in the basement of the Mercer County Courthouse in West Virginia.
Together, they have a tremendous responsibility.
They're local election officials serving Mercer County's 40,000 registered voters.
Local election officials are the public servants that do the day-to-day work that makes our election system function.
When you fill out a voter-registration form, they're the folks that process them and add you to the rolls.
They're the folks who buy the technology that we use to cast and count ballots.
They recruit and train the volunteers at your local polling place.
And they're the official nonpartisan source for informing people in their communities about how to vote.
And unlike other countries where there's some form of centralized election authority, in the US, there are 7,897 different county and municipal offices, like Kat and Marie's, that each have an independent role in administering elections.
Yes, that's nearly 8,000 slightly different ways that you might experience voting based on where you happen to live.
When I was talking with Kat and Marie, like so many election officials that I talk with in rural towns and in major cities alike, they were deeply proud of getting to help people in their communities, but they were also worried.
All of the new tools that people were using to get information -- the internet, social media -- they were difficult to figure out how to use effectively.
And they felt like they weren't fully meeting the needs of Mercer County voters.
One thing that they really wished that they had was a website so they could create a hub with information about how to register in upcoming elections, and a place to put election results.
See, at the time, when voters had questions, they had to either call or visit their office, which meant that Kat and Marie were inevitably answering the same questions over and over again, which is both a superinefficient use of their time, but also created totally unnecessary barriers for voters when that information could just live online.
And Mercer County wasn't alone.
At the time, they were one of 966 counties in the US that had no voting information online.
I'll let that sink in.
They were one of the nearly one-third of counties in the US that had no place online to find official information about how to vote.
To Kat and Marie, not having and election website was unacceptable, but they didn't have very many options.
They didn't have the budget to hire a web developer, they didn't have the expertise to build a site themselves, so they went without.
And 40,000 voters in Mercer County went without.
We're in a moment where we have an unprecedented opportunity to transform civic engagement.
Technology is revolutionizing science and industry.
It's already transformed how we connect with one another and understand the world around us, but our democratic institutions -- they're being left behind.
The US is one of the few major democracies in the world that puts the onus of voter registration on the individual voter, rather than the government.
The rules that govern how to vote vary from state to state, and sometimes even county to county.
And we have ballots that are pages and pages long.
This November, on my ballot, there are literally over 100 different people and referenda for me to make decisions about.
We have to be using the best tools we can bring to bear to help voters navigate this complexity, and right now, we're not.
One of the most common narratives I hear in my work is that people aren't civically engaged because they're apathetic -- because they don't care.
But as my brilliant friends at the Center for Civic Design say, if there is apathy, it comes from the system, not the voter.
We can change the system right now by connecting local election officials like Kat and Marie with 21st-century tools and the training that they need to use them to better serve voters.
Tools and training to do things like use social media for voter engagement, or use data to staff and equip polling places so that we don't see hours-long lines at the polls, or training on cybersecurity best practices so that we can ensure that our voting systems are secure.
When we invest in this approach, we see meaningful, lasting results.
Kat and Marie are online now.
Inspired by their experience, we built a website template using research-based best practices in civic design, and developed the training so that Kat and Marie are able to maintain their site themselves.
In less than a week, they went from having never seen the back end of a website to building a resource for Mercer County voters that they have been independently keeping up to date since 2014.
Today, the 40,000 voters in Mercer County and over 100,000 voters in counties across the country have everything that they need to become a voter directly from their local election official, on a mobile-friendly, easy-to-use, accessible website.
And we can even further scale the impact when local election officials are not only reaching out through their own channels, but they're extending their reach by working in partnership with others.
Efforts like the Ballot Information Project and the Voting Information Project work with election officials nationwide to create a centralized, standard database of key voting information, like what's on your ballot and where to vote.
That information powers tools built by companies like Google and Facebook to get information in the places where people already are, like their newsfeed and search.
In 2016, the Ballot Information Project connected the public with information about candidates and referenda over 200 millions times, helping between a third and a half of every single person who cast a ballot.
And that model has been replicated for elections around the world.
When we look at efforts in other areas of government, we can see the opportunity when we listen to the public's needs and we meet them with modern tools.
I think about my friends at mRelief, who have helped 260,000 families unlock 42 million dollars in food benefits by helping government agencies transition away from a 20-page, paper-based application for food stamps to a process that can happen in 10 questions over text message in fewer than three minutes.
That kind of transformation is possible in voting.
It's happening right now, but there's still so much work to do.
Now, if you have any technical bone in your body, I know what you're thinking.
This is all solvable.
The technology that we need exists.
We collectively have the expertise.
You might even be thinking about volunteering at your local election office.
I love how solutions-oriented you are, but to be clear, the work that is needed to modernize our election system isn't something that's going to happen using 20 percent time, or through a hackathon, or by doing a one-off technology project.
What we need is significant, sustained, long-term investment.
Investment in technology and investment in the skills of local election officials to run 21st-century elections, because if we don't invest in the long game, we risk finding ourselves perpetually behind.
So if you're ready to help millions, if you're ready to close the gap between the system that we have and the system that we deserve, we need you.
Organizations that are doing this work year-round need you.
Local election offices need you.
Come join us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It was the spring of 1988 when I had the aha moment.
I was at my first roundtable, and for those of you who don't know, the roundtable was a very commonly used phrase on Wall Street to describe the year-end evaluative process for analysts, associates, vice presidents, all the way up to managing directors.
That was the process where they were discussed behind closed doors around a table, i.e. the round table, and everyone was put into a category -- the top bucket, the middle bucket, the lower bucket -- and then that was translated into a bonus range that would be assigned to each professional.
This was my first time there, and as I observed, I saw that there was one person that was responsible for recording the outcome of a conversation.
There were other people in the room that had the responsibility of presenting the cases of all the candidates.
And there were other invited guests who were supposed to comment as a candidate's position was presented.
It was interesting to me that those other people were folks who were more senior than the folks that were being discussed and they theoretically had had some interaction with those candidates.
Now, I was really excited to be at this roundtable for the first time, because I knew that my own process would go through this same way, and that my bonus would be decided in the same way, so I wanted to know how it worked, but more importantly, I wanted to understand how this concept of a meritocracy that every company that I talked to walking out of business school was selling.
Every time I talked to a company, they would say, "Our culture, our process, is a meritocracy.
The way you get ahead in this organization is that you're smart, you put your head down and you work really hard, and you'll go right to the top.
So here was my opportunity to see exactly how that worked.
So as the process began, I heard the recorder call the first person's name.
"Joe Smith."
The person responsible for presenting Joe's case did just that.
Three quarters of the way through, someone interrupted and said, "This is a great candidate, outstanding, has great analytical and quantitative skills.
This is a superstar."
The recorder then said, "Sounds like Joe should go in the top bucket."
Second person, Mary Smith.
Halfway through that presentation, someone said, "Solid candidate.
Nothing really special, but a good pair of hands."
The recorder said, "Sounds like Mary should go in the middle bucket."
And then someone said, "Arnold Smith."
Before the person could present Arnold's case, somebody said, "Disaster. Disaster. This kid doesn't have a clue.
Can't do a model."
And before the case was presented, the recorder said, "Sounds like Arnold should go in the bottom bucket."
It was at that moment that I clutched my pearls -- (Laughter) and said, "Who is going to speak for me?"
Who is going to speak for me?
It was that moment that I realized that this idea of a meritocracy that every organizations sells is really just a myth.
You cannot have a 100 percent meritocratic environment when there is a human element involved in the evaluative equation, because by definition, that makes it subjective.
I knew at that moment that somebody would have to be behind closed doors arguing on my behalf, presenting content in such a way that other decision makers around that table would answer in my best favor.
That was a really interesting lesson, and then I said to myself, "Well, who is that person?
What do you call this person?"
And as I thought about the popular business terms at the time, I said, wow, this person can't be a mentor, because a mentor's job is to give you tailored advice, tailored specifically to you and to your career aspirations.
They're the ones who give you the good, the bad and the ugly in a no-holds-barred way.
OK. Person can't be a champion or an advocate, because you don't necessarily have to spend any currency to be someone's champion.
You don't necessarily get invited to the room behind closed doors if you're an advocate.
It was almost two years later when I realized what this person should be called.
I was speaking at the University of Michigan to the MBA candidates, talking about the lessons that I had learned after my three short years on Wall Street, and then it came to me.
I said, "Oh, this person that is carrying your interest, or as I like to say, carrying your paper into the room, this person who is spending their valuable political and social capital on you, this person who is going to pound the table on your behalf, this is a sponsor.
This is a sponsor."
And then I said to myself, "Well, how do you get a sponsor?
And frankly, why do you need one?"
Well, you need a sponsor, frankly, because as you can see, there's not one evaluative process that I can think of, whether it's in academia, health care, financial services, not one that does not have a human element.
So that means it has that measure of subjectivity.
There is a measure of subjectivity in who is presenting your case.
There is a measure of subjectivity in what they say and how they interpret any objective data that you might have.
There is a measure of subjectivity in how they say what they're going to say to influence the outcome.
So therefore, you need to make sure that that person who is speaking, that sponsor, has your best interests at heart and has the power to get it, whatever it is for you, to get it done behind closed doors.
Now, I'm asked all the time, "How do you get one?"
Well, frankly, nirvana is when someone sees you in an environment and decides, "I'm going to make it happen for you.
I'm going to make sure that you are successful."
But for many of us in this room, we know it doesn't really happen that way.
So let me introduce this concept of currency and talk to you about how it impacts your ability to get a sponsor.
There are two types of currency in any environment: performance currency and relationship currency.
And performance currency is the currency that is generated by your delivering that which was asked of you and a little bit extra.
Every time you deliver upon an assignment above people's expectations, you generate performance currency.
It works exactly like the stock market.
Any time a company says to the street that they will deliver 25 cents a share and that company delivers 40 cents a share, that stock goes up, and so will yours.
Performance currency is valuable for three reasons.
Number one, it will get you noticed.
It will create a reputation for you.
Number two, it will also get you paid and promoted very early on in your career and very early on in any environment.
And number three, it may attract a sponsor.
Why? Because strong performance currency raises your level of visibility in the environment, as I said earlier, such that a sponsor may be attracted to you.
Why? Because everybody loves a star.
But if you find yourself in a situation where you don't have a sponsor, here's the good news.
Remember that you can exercise your power and ask for one.
But here's where the other currency is now most important.
That is the relationship currency, and relationship currency is the currency that is generated by the investments that you make in the people in your environment, the investments that you make in the people in your environment.
You cannot ask someone to use their hard-earned personal influential currency on your behalf if you've never had any interaction with them.
It is not going to happen.
So it is important that you invest the time to connect, to engage and to get to know the people that are in your environment, and more importantly to give them the opportunity to know you.
Because once they know you, there's a higher probability that when you approach them to ask them to be your sponsor, they will in fact answer in the affirmative.
Now, if you're with me and you agree that you have to have a sponsor, let's talk about how you identify a sponsor.
Well, if you're looking for a sponsor, they need to have three primary characteristics.
Number one, they need to have a seat at the decision-making table, they need to have exposure to your work in order to have credibility behind closed doors, and they need to have some juice, or let me say it differently, they'd better have some power.
It's really important that they have those three things.
And then once you have identified the person, how do you ask for one?
The script goes like this.
"Jim, I'm really interested in getting promoted this year.
I've had an amazing year and I cannot show this organization anything else to prove my worthiness or my readiness for this promotion, but I am aware that somebody has to be behind closed doors arguing on my behalf and pounding the table.
You know me, you know my work and you are aware of the client feedback, and I hope that you will feel comfortable arguing on my behalf."
If Jim knows you and you have any kind of a relationship, there's a very high probability that he will answer yes, and if he says yes, he will endeavor to get it done for you.
But there's also a shot that Jim might say no, and if he says no, in my opinion, there's only three reasons that he would tell you no.
The first is he doesn't think that he has enough exposure to your work to have real credibility behind closed doors to be impactful and effective on your behalf.
The second reason he may tell you no is that you think he has the juice to get it done, but he knows that he does not have the power to do it and he is not going to admit that in that conversation with you.
(Laughter) And the third reason that he would tell you no, he doesn't like you.
He doesn't like you.
(Laughter) And that's something that could happen.
But even that will be valuable information for you that will help to inform your next conversation with a sponsor that might make it a little bit more impactful.
I cannot tell you how important it is to have a sponsor.
It is the critical relationship in your career.
A mentor, frankly, is a nice to have, but you can survive a long time in your career without a mentor, but you are not going to ascend in any organization without a sponsor.
It is so critical that you should ask yourself regularly, "Who's carrying my paper into the room?
And if you can't answer who is carrying your paper into the room, then I will tell you to divert some of your hardworking energies into investing in a sponsor relationship, because it will be critical to your success.
And as I close, let me give a word to the would-be sponsors that are in the room.
If you have been invited into the room, know that you have a seat at that table, and if you have a seat at the table, you have a responsibility to speak.
Don't waste your power worrying about what people are going to say and whether or not they think you might be supporting someone just because they look like you.
If somebody is worthy of your currency, spend it.
One thing I have learned after several decades on Wall Street is the way to grow your power is to give it away, and your voice is at the heart.
(Applause) And your voice is at the heart of your power.
Use it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
♫ Feminists don't have a sense of humor. ♫ ♫ Feminists just want to be alone -- boo hoo, hoo, hoo. ♫ ♫ Feminists spread vicious lies and rumors. ♫ ♫ They have a tumor on their funny bone. ♫ ♫ They say child molestation isn't funny -- ha, ha, ha, ha. ♫ ♫ Rape and degradation's just a crime -- lighten up, ladies. ♫ ♫ Rampant prostitution's sex for money -- what’s wrong with that? ♫ ♫ Can't these chicks do anything but whine? ♫ ♫ Dance break! Da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da. ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da. ♫ ♫ Woo-hoo! ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da -- ♫ ♫ yeah, take it off. ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, dum. ♫ ♫ They say cheap objectification isn’t witty -- it’s hot! ♫ ♫ Equal work and wages worth the fight -- ♫ ♫ sing us a new one. ♫ ♫ On-demand abortion every city -- OK, but no gun control. ♫ ♫ Won’t these women ever get a life? ♫ ♫ Feminists don’t have a sense of humor -- poor Hillary. ♫ ♫ Feminists and vegetarians -- make mine a Big Mac. ♫ ♫ Feminists spread vicious lies and rumors. ♫ ♫ They're far too sensitive to ever be a ham, ♫ ♫ that's why these feminists just need to find a man. ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da. ♫ I’m Dennis Kucinich and I approved this message.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
I asked my mother, you know, should I say anything in support of anyone?
And she said, "Oh no! Just dis everybody, except Ralph Nader."
(Laughter) ♫ I could show the world how to smile, ♫ ♫ I could be glad all of the while. ♫ ♫ I could turn the gray skies to blue, if I had you. ♫ ♫ I could leave the old days behind, ♫ ♫ leave all my pals, I’d never mind. ♫ ♫ I could start my life all anew, if I had you. ♫ ♫ I could climb the snow-capped mountains, ♫ ♫ sail the mighty ocean wide. ♫ ♫ I could cross the burning desert, if I had you by my side. ♫ ♫ I could be a king, dear, uncrowned, humble or poor, rich or renowned. ♫ ♫ There is nothing I couldn’t do, if I had you. ♫ Thank you. Well, thank you so much.
As the warrior slept, a snake coiled around his face.
Instead of a threat, his wife saw an omen– a fearsome power that would lead her husband to either glory or doom.
For now, however, he was only a slave – one of millions taken from the territories conquered by Rome to work the mines, till the fields, or fight for the crowd’s entertainment.
A nomadic Thracian from what is now Bulgaria, he had served in the Roman Army but was imprisoned for desertion.
His name was Spartacus.
Spartacus had been brought to Capua by Batiatus, a lanista, or trainer of gladiators.
And life at the ludus, or gladiator school, was unforgiving.
New recruits were forced to swear an oath “to be burned, to be bound, to be beaten, and to be killed by the sword,” and to obey their master’s will without question.
But even harsh discipline couldn’t break Spartacus’s spirit.
In 73 BCE, Spartacus led 73 other slaves to seize knives and skewers from the kitchen and fight their way out, hijacking a wagon of gladiator equipment along the way.
They were done fighting for others– now, they fought for their freedom.
When the news reached Rome, the Senate was too busy with wars in Spain and the Pontic Empire to worry about some unruly slaves.
Unconcerned, praetor Claudius Glaber took an army of three thousand men to the rebel’s refuge at Mount Vesuvius, and blocked off the only passage up the mountain.
All that remained was to wait and starve them out– or so he thought.
In the dead of night, the rebels lowered themselves down the cliffside on ropes made from vines, and flanked Glaber’s unguarded camp.
Thus began the legend of Rome’s defiant gladiator.
As news of the rebellion spread, its ranks swelled with escaped slaves, deserting soldiers, and hungry peasants.
Many were untrained, but Spartacus’s clever tactics transformed them into an effective guerrilla force.
A second Roman expedition led by praetor Varinius, was ambushed while the officer bathed.
To elude the remaining Roman forces, the rebels used their enemy’s corpses as decoy guards, stealing Varinius’s own horse to aid their escape.
Thanks to his inspiring victories and policy of distributing spoils equally, Spartacus continued attracting followers, and gained control of villages where new weapons could be forged.
The Romans soon realized they were no longer facing ragtag fugitives, and in the spring of 72 BCE, the Senate retaliated with the full force of two legions.
The rebels left victorious, but many lives were lost in the battle, including Spartacus’ lieutenant Crixus.
To honor him, Spartacus held funeral games, forcing his Roman prisoners to play the role his fellow rebels had once endured.
By the end of 72 BCE, Spartacus’ army was a massive force of roughly 120,000 members.
But those numbers proved difficult to manage.
With the path to the Alps clear, Spartacus wanted to march beyond Rome’s borders, where his followers would be free.
But his vast army had grown brash.
Many wanted to continue pillaging, while others dreamed of marching on Rome itself.
In the end, the rebel army turned south– forgoing what would be their last chance at freedom.
Meanwhile, Marcus Licinius Crassus had assumed control of the war.
As Rome’s wealthiest citizen, he pursued Spartacus with eight new legions, eventually trapping the rebels in the toe of Italy.
After failed attempts to build rafts, and a stinging betrayal by local pirates, the rebels made a desperate run to break through Crassus’s lines– but it was no use.
Roman reinforcements were returning from the Pontic wars, and the rebels’ ranks and spirits were broken.
In 71 BCE, they made their last stand.
Spartacus nearly managed to reach Crassus before being cut down by centurions.
His army was destroyed, and 6000 captives were crucified along the Appian Way– a haunting demonstration of Roman authority.
Crassus won the war, but it is not his legacy which echoes through the centuries.
Thousands of years later, the name of the slave who made the world’s mightiest empire tremble has become synonymous with freedom– and the courage to fight for it.
Some of you have heard the story before, but, in fact, there's somebody in the audience who's never heard this story in front of an audience before, so I'm a little more nervous than I normally am telling this story.
I used to be a photographer for many years.
In 1978, I was working for "TIME Magazine" and I was given a three-day assignment to photograph Amerasian children, children who had been fathered by American GIs all over Southeast Asia, and then abandoned -- 40,000 children all over Asia.
I had never heard the word Amerasian before.
I spent a few days photographing children in different countries, and like a lot of photographers and a lot of journalists, I always hoped that when my pictures are published, they might actually have an effect on a situation, instead of just documenting it.
So, I was so disturbed by what I saw and I was so unhappy with the article that ran afterwards, that I decided I would take six months off.
I was 28 years old.
I decided I would find six children in different countries, and actually go spend some time with the kids, and try to tell their story a little bit better than I thought I had done for Time magazine.
In the course of doing the story, I was looking for children who hadn't been photographed before, and the Pearl Buck Foundation told me that they worked with a lot of Americans who were donating money to help some of these kids.
And a man told me, who ran the Pearl Buck Foundation in Korea, that there was a young girl, who was 11 years old, being raised by her grandmother.
Every time any Westerners came to the village, she hid the girl.
Of course, I was immediately intrigued.
I saw photographs of her and I thought I wanted to go.
And the guy just told me, "This grandmother -- there's no way she's ever going to let you meet this girl that's she's raising."
I took a translator with me and went to this village, found the grandmother, sat down with her.
And to my astonishment, she agreed to let me photograph her granddaughter.
And I was paying for this myself, so I asked the translator if it would be OK if I stayed for the week.
I had a sleeping bag.
The family had a small shed on the side of the house, so I said, "Could I sleep in my sleeping bag in the evenings?"
And I just told the little girl, whose name was Eun-Sook Lee, that if I ever did anything to embarrass her -- she didn't speak a word of English, although she looked very American -- she could put up her hand and say, "Stop," and I would stop taking pictures.
Then my translator left. I couldn't speak a word of Korean.
This is the first night I met Eun-Sook.
She was not raising her, her grandmother was raising her.
And what struck me immediately was how in love the two of these people were.
The grandmother was incredibly fond, deeply in love with this little girl.
They slept on the floor at night.
The way they heat their homes in Korea is to put bricks under the floors, so the heat radiates from underneath the floor.
Eun-Sook was 11 years old.
I had photographed, as I said, a lot of these kids.
And almost universally, amongst all the kids, they were really psychologically damaged by having been made fun of, ridiculed, picked on and been rejected.
And Korea was probably the place I found to be the worst for these kids.
And what struck me immediately in meeting Eun-Sook was how confident she appeared to be, how happy she seemed to be in her own skin.
And remember this picture, because I'm going to show you another picture later.
She looks much like her grandmother, although she looks so Western.
I decided to follow her to school.
This is the first morning I stayed with her.
This is on the way to school.
And I noticed that she was clowning around.
When the teachers would ask questions, she'd be the first person to raise her hand.
Again, not at all shy or withdrawn, or anything like the other children that I'd photographed.
The first one to go to the blackboard to answer questions.
Getting in trouble for whispering into her best friend's ears.
And one of the other things I said to her through the translator -- again, this thing about saying stop -- was to not pay attention to me.
So she really just completely ignored me most of the time.
I noticed that at recess, she was the girl who picked the other girls to be on her team.
It was very obvious, from the beginning, that she was a leader.
This is on the way home. And that's North Korea up along the hill.
This is up along the DMZ.
They would actually cover the windows every night, so that light couldn't be seen, because the South Korean government has said for years that the North Koreans may invade at any time.
Very often at school, I'd be taking pictures, and she would whisper into her girlfriends' ears, and then look at me and say, "Stop."
And I would stand at attention, and all the girls would crack up, and it was sort of a little joke.
(Laughter) The end of the week came and my translator came back, because I'd asked her to come back, so I could formally thank the grandmother and Eun-Sook.
And in the course of the grandmother talking to the translator, the grandmother started crying.
And she spoke to the grandmother for a moment, and then she started getting tears in her eyes.
And I said, "What did I do? Why is everyone crying?"
And the translator said, "The grandmother says that she thinks she's dying, and she wants to know if you would take Eun-Sook to America with you."
And I said, "I'm 28 years old and I live in hotels, and I'm not married."
I mean, I had fallen in love with this girl, but you know, emotionally I was about 12 years old.
If you know of photographers, the joke is it's the finest form of delayed adolescence ever invented.
"Sorry, I have to go on an assignment, I'll be back" -- and then you never come back.
Can I get her to a hospital? Could I pay to get her a doctor?
And she refused any help at all.
So when I got outside, I gave the translator some money and said, "Go back and see if you can do something."
And I gave the grandmother my business card.
And I said, "If you're serious, I will try to find a family for her."
And I immediately wrote a letter to my best friends in Atlanta, Georgia, who had an 11-year-old son.
And my best friend had mistakenly one day said something about wishing he had another child.
So my friends Gene and Gayle had not heard from me in about a year, and suddenly I was calling, saying "I'm in Korea and I've met this extraordinary girl."
And I said, "The grandmother thinks she's sick, but I think maybe we would have to bring the grandmother over also."
And I said, "I'll pay for the ... " I mean, I had this whole sort of picture.
So anyway, I left.
And my friends actually said they were very interested in adopting her.
And I said, "Look, I think I'll scare the grandmother to death, if I tell her that you're willing to adopt her.
I want to go back and talk to her." But I was off on assignment.
I figured I'd come back in a couple of weeks and talk to the grandmother.
And on Christmas Day, I was in Bangkok with a group of photographers and got a telegram -- back in those days, you got telegrams -- from Time magazine saying someone in Korea had died and left their child in a will to me.
Did I know anything about this?
Because I hadn't told them what I was doing, because I was so upset with the story they'd run.
So, I went back to Korea, and I went back to Eun-Sook's village, and she was gone.
And the house that I had spent time in was empty.
It was incredibly cold.
No one in the village would tell me where Eun-Sook was, because the grandmother had always hidden her from Westerners.
And they had no idea about this request that she'd made of me.
So I finally found Myung Sung, her best friend that she used to play with after school every day.
And Myung Sung, under some pressure from me and the translator, gave us an address on the outside of Seoul.
And I went to that address and knocked on the door, and a man answered the door.
It was not a very nice area of Seoul, there were mud streets outside of it.
And I knocked on the door and Eun-Sook answered the door, and her eyes were bloodshot, and she seemed to be in shock.
She didn't recognize me -- there was no recognition whatsoever.
And this man came to the door and kind of barked something in Korean.
And she said, "He wants to know who you are."
And I said, "Tell him that I am a photographer."
And she said, "He says he knows who you are, what do you want?"
I said, "Well, tell him that I was asked by this little girl's grandmother to find a family for her."
And he said, "I'm her uncle, she's fine, you can leave now."
So I was -- The door was being slammed in my face, it's incredibly cold, and I'm trying to think, "What would the hero do in a movie, if I was writing this as a movie script?"
So I said, "It's really cold, I've come a very long way, do you mind if I come in for a minute? I'm freezing."
So the guy reluctantly let us in and we sat down on the floor.
And as we started talking, I saw him yell something, and Eun-Sook came and brought us some food.
And I had this whole mental picture of -- sort of like Cinderella.
I sort of had this picture of this incredibly wonderful, bright, happy little child, who now appeared to be very withdrawn, being enslaved by this family.
And I was really appalled, and I couldn't figure out what to do.
And the more I tried talking to him, the less friendly he was getting.
So finally I said "Look," -- this is all through the translator, because, you know, I don't speak a word of Korean -- and I said, "Look, I'm really glad that Eun-Sook has a family to live with.
I was very worried about her.
I made a promise to her grandmother, your mother, that I would find a family, and I'm so happy that you're going to take care of her.
But I bought an airline ticket and I'm stuck here for a week.
I'm staying in a hotel downtown.
Would you like to come and have lunch tomorrow?
And you can practice your English."
Because he told me -- I was trying to ask him questions about himself.
A girl whose mother had been a prostitute, and she was a prostitute, and a boy who'd been in and out of jail.
And I said to them, "Look, there's a little girl who has a tiny chance of getting out of here and going to America.
I don't know if it's the right decision or not, but I would like you to come to lunch tomorrow and tell the uncle what it's like to walk down the street, what people say to you, what you do for a living.
I want him to understand what happens if she stays here.
And I could be wrong, I don't know, but I wish you would come tomorrow."
So, these two came to lunch and we got thrown out of the restaurant.
They were yelling at him, it got to be really ugly.
We went outside, and he was just furious.
And I knew I had totally blown this thing.
Here I was again, trying to figure out what to do.
And he started yelling at me, and I said to the translator, "Tell him to calm down, what is he saying?"
And she said, "He's saying, 'Who the hell are you to walk into my house, some rich American with your cameras around your neck, accusing me of enslaving my niece?
This is my niece, I love her, she's my sister's daughter.
Who the hell are you to accuse me of something like this?'" And I said, you know, "Look, you're absolutely right.
I don't pretend to understand what's going on here.
All I know is, I've been photographing a lot of these children.
I'm in love with your niece, I think she's an incredibly special child."
And I said, "Look, I will fly my friends over here from the United States if you want to meet them, to see if you approve of them.
I just think that -- what little I know about the situation, she has very little chance here of having the kind of life that you probably would like her to have."
So, everyone told me afterwards that inviting the prospective parents over was, again, the stupidest thing I could have possibly done, because who's ever good enough for your relative?
But he invited me to come to a ceremony they were having that day for her grandmother.
And they actually take items of clothing and photographs, and they burn them as part of the ritual.
And you can see how different she looks just in three months.
This was now, I think, early February.
And the pictures before were taken in September.
Well, there was an American Maryknoll priest that I had met in the course of doing the story, who had 75 children living in his house.
He had three women helping him take care of these kids.
And so I suggested to the uncle that we go down and meet Father Keane to find out how the adoption process worked.
Because I wanted him to feel like this was all being done very much above board.
So, this is on the way down to the orphanage.
This is Father Keane. He's just a wonderful guy.
He had kids from all over Korea living there, and he would find families for these kids.
This is a social worker interviewing Eun-Sook.
Now, I had always thought she was completely untouched by all of this, because the grandmother, to me, appeared to be sort of the village wise woman -- throughout the day, I noticed people kept coming to visit her grandmother.
And I always had this mental picture that even though they may have been one of the poorer families in the village, they were one of the most respected.
And I always felt that the grandmother had kind of demanded, and insisted, that the villagers treat Eun-Sook with the same respect they treated her.
Eun-Sook stayed at Father Keane's, and her uncle agreed to let her stay there until the adoption went through.
He actually agreed to the adoption.
And I went off on assignment and came back a week later, and Father Keane said, "I've got to talk to you about Eun-Sook."
I said, "Oh God, now what?"
And he takes me into this room, closes the door and says, "I have 75 children here in the orphanage, and it's total bedlam."
Three adults and 75 kids -- you can imagine.
And he said, "The second day she was here she made up a list of all of the names of the older kids and the younger kids.
And she assigned one of the older kids to each of the younger kids.
And then she set up a work detail list of who cleaned the orphanage on what day."
And he said, "She's telling me that I'm messy and I have to clean up my room."
And he said, "I don't know who raised her, but she's running the orphanage, and she's been here three days."
(Laughter) This was movie day that she organized where all the kids went to the movies.
A lot of the kids who had been adopted wrote back to the other kids, telling them what their life was like with their new families.
So it was a really big deal when the letters showed up.
This is a woman who is now working at the orphanage, whose son had been adopted.
Gene and Gayle started studying Korean the moment they had gotten my first letter.
They really wanted to be able to welcome Eun-Sook into their family.
And one of the things Father Keane told me when I came back from one of these trips -- Eun-Sook had chosen the name Natasha, which I understood was from her watching a "Rocky and Bullwinkle" cartoon on the American Air Force station.
This may be one of those myth-buster things that we'll have to clear up here, in a minute.
So, my friend Gene flew over with his son, Tim.
Gayle couldn't come.
And they spent a lot of time huddled over a dictionary.
And this was Gene showing the uncle where Atlanta was on the map, where he lived.
This is the uncle signing the adoption papers.
Now, we went out to dinner that night to celebrate.
The uncle went back to his family and Natasha and Tim and Gene and I went out to dinner.
And Gene was showing Natasha how to use a knife and fork, and then Natasha was returning the utensil lessons.
We went back to our hotel room, and Gene was showing Natasha also where Atlanta was.
This is the third night we were in Korea.
I'd been staying in this room for about three months -- it was a little 15-story Korean hotel.
The second night, we didn't keep the kids' room, because we slept on the floor with all the kids at the orphanage.
And the third night, we came back -- we'd just gone out to dinner, where you saw the pictures -- and we got to the front desk, and the guy said, "There's no other free rooms on your floor tonight, you can put the kids five floors below you."
And Gene and I looked at each other and said, "We don't want two 11-year-olds five floors away."
And I said, "I have one too." So Tim and I slept on the floor, Natasha got one bed, Gene got the other -- kids pass out, it's been very exciting for three days.
We said, "That was so great, we saved this little girl's life."
We were just like, you know, just full of ourselves.
And we fall asleep -- and I've been in this room for a couple of months now.
And they always overheat the hotels in Korea terribly, so during the day I always left the window open.
And then about midnight, they turn the heat off in the hotel.
So at 1am, the whole room would be like 20 below zero, and I'd get up.
I'd been doing this every night I'd been there.
So, sure enough, it's one o'clock, room's freezing, I go to close the window and I hear people shouting outside, and I thought, "Oh, the bars must have just gotten out."
I don't speak Korean, but I'm hearing these voices, and I'm not hearing anger, I'm hearing terror.
So I open the window and I look out, and there's flames coming up the side of our hotel, and the hotel's on fire.
So I run over to Gene and I wake him up, and I say, "Don't freak out, I think the hotel's on fire."
And now there's smoke and flames coming by our windows -- we're on the 11th floor.
So the two of us were just like, "Oh my God, oh my God."
You know what kids are like when they've been asleep for like an hour, it's like they took five Valiums -- they're all over the place.
And we can't talk to her.
His son had the L.L.Bean bootlaces, and we're trying to do up his laces.
So we try to get to the door, we run to the door, we open the door, and it's like walking into a blast furnace.
There's people screaming, the sound of glass breaking, weird thumps.
And the whole room filled with smoke in about two seconds.
And Gene turns around and says, "We're not going to make it."
And he closes the door, and the whole room is now filled with smoke.
We're all choking, and there's smoke pouring through the vents, under the doors.
There's people screaming.
I remember sitting near the bed, and I had two overwhelming feelings.
One was absolute terror. "Oh, please God, I just want to wake up.
This has got to be a nightmare, this can't be happening.
Please, I just want to wake up."
And the other is unbelievable guilt.
Here I've been playing God with my friends' lives, my friends' son, with Natasha's life, and this what you get when you try playing God, is you hurt people.
I remember just being so frightened and terrified.
And Gene, who's lying on the floor, says, "We've got to soak towels." I said, "What?"
"We've got to soak towels. We're going to die from the smoke."
So got towels and put them over our faces and the kids' faces.
Then he said, "Do you have gaffer's tape?"
"What?" "Do you have gaffer's tape?"
I said, "Somewhere in my Halliburton."
He says, "We've got to stop the smoke. That's all we can do."
I mean, Gene -- thank God for Gene.
So we put the room service menus over the vents in the wall, we put blankets at the bottom of the door, we put the kids on the windowsill to try to get some air.
And there was a new building, going up, that was being built right across the street from our hotel.
And there, in the building, were photographers, waiting for people to jump.
Five people jumped and died, other people were killed by the smoke.
And there's this loud thumping on the door after about 45 minutes in all this, and people were shouting in Korean.
And I remember -- Natasha didn't want us opening the door -- sorry, I was trying not to open the door, because we'd spent so much time barricading the room.
I didn't know who it was, I didn't know what they wanted, and Natasha could tell they were firemen trying to get us out.
I remember a sort of a tussle at the door, trying to get the door open.
In any case, 12 hours later -- I mean, they put us in the lobby.
Gene ended up using his coat, and his fist in the coat, to break open a liquor cabinet.
It was one of just the most horrifying nights.
And then 12 hours later, we rented a car, as we had planned to, and drove back to Natasha's village.
And we kept saying, "Do you realize we were dying in a hotel fire, like eight hours ago?"
Natasha wanted to introduce her brother and father to all the villagers, and the day we showed up turned out to be a 60-year-old man's birthday.
This guy's 60 years old.
So it turned into a dual celebration, because Natasha was the first person from this village ever to go to the United States.
So, these are the greenhouse tents.
We drank a lot of rice wine.
We were both so drunk, I couldn't believe it.
This is the last picture before Gene and Tim headed back.
The adoption people told us it was going to take a year for the adoption to go through.
Like, what could you do for a year?
So I found out the name of every official on both the Korean and American side, and I photographed them, and told them how famous they were going to be when this book was done.
And four months later, the adoption papers came through.
This is saying goodbye to everybody at the orphanage.
This is Father Keane with Natasha at the bus stop.
Her great aunt at the airport.
I had a wonderful deal with Cathay Pacific airlines for many years, where they gave me free passes on all their airlines in return for photography.
It was like the ultimate perk.
And the pilot, I actually knew -- because they used to let me sit in the jump seat, to tell you how long ago this was.
And the pilot, Jeff Cowley, actually went back and adopted one of the other kids at the orphanage after meeting Natasha.
This is 28 hours later in Atlanta.
Just to make things even crazier, Gayle, Natasha's new mom, was three days away from giving birth to her own daughter.
You know, if you were writing this, you'd say, "No, we've got to write the script differently."
This is the first night showing Natasha her new cousins and uncles and aunts.
Gene and Gayle know everyone in Atlanta -- they're the most social couple imaginable.
So, at this point, Natasha doesn't speak a word of English, other than what little Father Keane taught her.
This is Kylie, her sister, who's now a doctor, on the right.
This is a deal I had with Natasha, which is that when we got to Atlanta she could cut off my beard.
She never liked it very much.
She learned English in three months.
She entered seventh grade at her own age level.
Pledge of Allegiance for the first time.
This is her cooking teacher.
Natasha told me a lot of the kids thought she was stuck up, because they would talk to her and she wouldn't answer, and they didn't realize she didn't speak English very well.
But what I noticed, again as an observer, was she was choosing who was going to be on her team, and seemed to be very popular very, very quickly.
Now, remember the picture, how much she looked like her grandmother, at the beginning?
People were always telling Natasha how much she looks like her mother, Gayle.
(Laughter) This is a tense moment in the first football game, I think.
And Kylie -- I mean, it was almost like Kylie was her own child.
She's being baptized.
Now, a lot of parents, when they adopt, actually want to erase their children's history.
And Gayle and Gene did the complete opposite.
Gene even did a little tile work in the kitchen, which was that, "Once upon a time, there was a beautiful girl that came from the hills of Korea to live happily ever after in Atlanta."
She hates this picture -- it was her first job.
She bought a bright red Karmann Ghia with the money she made working at Burger King.
The captain of the cheerleaders.
Beauty pageant.
Used to do their Christmas card every year.
Gene's been restoring this car for a million years.
Kodak hired Natasha to be a translator for them at the Olympics in Korea.
Her future husband, Jeff, was working for Canon cameras, and met Natasha at the Olympic Village.
This is her first trip back to Korea. So there's her uncle.
This is her half sister.
She went back to the village.
And I always thought that was a very Annie Hall kind of outfit.
(Laughter) It's just, you know, it was just so interesting, just to watch -- this is her mother in the background there.
This is Natasha's wedding day.
Gene is looking a little older.
This is Sydney, who's going to be three years old in a couple of days.
And there's Evan.
And Natasha, would you just come up, for a second, just maybe to say hello to everybody?
(Applause) Natasha's actually never heard me tell the story.
You know, we've looked at the pictures together.
Natasha: I've seen pictures millions of times, but today was the first time I'm actually seeing him give the whole presentation.
I started crying.
Rick Smolan: There's about 40 things she's going to tell me, "That wasn't what happened." Natasha: I'll tell you that later.
RS: Anyway, thank you, Mike and Richard, so much for letting us tell the story.
Thank you, all of you.
(Applause)
Some years ago, I was visiting Paris and walking along the Seine River during a beautiful summer afternoon.
I saw giant bubbles floating on the riverbank, like this one.
The next moment, it popped and was gone.
Making them were two street performers surrounded by a crowd.
They visibly make a living by asking for donations and by selling pairs of sticks tied with two strings.
When I was there, a man bought a pair of sticks for 10 euros, which surprised me.
I am a scientist who is passionate about bubbles.
I know the right trick to make the giant bubbles is the right soapy water mixture itself -- not the sticks, which may be needed, but you can easily make them at home.
Focusing on the sticks makes us not see that the real tool is the bubble itself.
Bubbles might seem like something just children make while playing, but sometimes it can be really stunning.
However, there are more fascinating science to bubbles, such as problem-solving tools.
So I would like to share with you a few stories about the science of creating bubbles and the science of eliminating the microscopic ones.
Since it's up on the screen, let's start with the soap bubble.
It is made from very common substances: air, water, soap, in the right mixture.
You can see soap bubbles constantly changing their colors.
This is due to the interaction with light at various directions and the changes of their thickness.
One of the common substances, water molecules, are formed by two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen -- H2O.
On most surfaces, water droplets tend to curve inwards, forming a semihemisphere shape.
This is because the water droplet's surface is like an elastic sheet.
The water molecule on the surface is constantly being pulled inwards by the molecule at the center.
And the quality of the elasticity is what we call "surface tension."
Now by adding soap, what happens is the soap molecule reduces the surface tension of water, making it more elastic and easier to form bubbles.
You can think of a bubble as a mathematical problem-solver.
You see it relentlessly trying to achieve geometry perfection.
For instance, a sphere is the shape with the least surface area for a given volume.
That's why a single bubble is always in the shape of a sphere.
Let me show you. Check it out.
This is a single bubble.
When two bubbles touch each other, they can save materials by sharing a common wall.
When more and more bubbles are added together, their geometry changes.
These four bubbles are added together.
They meet at one point at the center.
When six bubbles are added together, a magical cube appears at the center.
(Applause) That is surface tension at work, trying to find the most effective geometry arrangement.
Now, let me give you another example.
This is a very simple prop.
This is made from two layers of plastic with four pins connected to each other.
Imagine these four pins represent four cities that are equally apart, and we would like to make roads to connect these four cities.
My question is: What is the shortest length to connect these four cities?
Let's find out the answer by dipping it into the soapy water.
Remember, the soap bubble forms will always try to minimize their surface area with a perfect geometry arrangement.
So the solution might not be something you expected.
The shortest length to connect these four cities is 2.73 times the distance between these two cities.
(Applause) Now you've got the idea.
The soap bubble forms will always try to minimize their surface area with a perfect geometry arrangement.
Now, let us look at bubbles in another perspective.
My daughter, Zoe, loves visiting zoos.
Her favorite spot is Penguin Cove at Marwell Zoo in Southern England, where she could see penguins swim at speed under the water.
One day, she noticed that the body of penguins leaves a trail of bubbles when they swim and asked why.
Animals and birds like penguins that spend a lot of their time under the water have evolved an ingenious way of utilizing the capability of bubbles to reduce the density of water.
Emperor penguins are thought to be able to dive a few hundred meters below the sea surface.
They are thought to store the air under their feathers before they dive and then progressively release it as a cloud of bubbles.
This reduces the density of water surrounding them, making it easier to swim through and speed up their swimming speed at least 40 percent.
This feature has been noticed by the ship manufacturers.
I am talking about the big ships here, the ones that are used to transport thousands of containers across the ocean.
Recently, they developed a system called "air lubricating system," inspired by the penguins.
In this system, they produce a lot of air bubbles and redistribute them across the whole of the ship, like an air carpet that reduces the water resistance when a ship is moving.
This feature cuts off the energy consumption for the ship up to 15 percent.
Bubbles can also be used for medicines.
It can also play a role in medicines, for instance, as a method for noninvasive delivery systems for drugs and genes to a specific part of the body.
Imagine a microbubble filled with a mixture of drugs and magnetic agents being injected into our bloodstream.
The bubbles will move to the target areas.
But how do they know where to go?
Because we placed a magnet there.
For instance, this part of my hand.
When the microbubbles move to this part of my hand, we can pop it via ultrasound and release the drug exactly where it's needed.
Now, I mentioned about the science of creating bubbles.
But sometimes we also need to remove them.
That's actually part of my job.
My exact job title is "ink formulation scientist."
But I don't work on the ink that you use for your writing pens.
I'm working on some cool applications such as organic photovoltaics, OPVs, and organic light-emitting diodes, OLEDs.
Part of my job is to figure out how and why we want to remove the bubbles from the ink that my company produces.
During the formulation-mixing process, or preparation process, we mix active ingredients, solvents and additives in order to achieve the formulations with the properties we want when the ink is being used.
But just like you would make drinks or bake cakes, it is unavoidable that some air bubbles will be trapped inside that ink.
Here, we are talking about a different space from the bubbles I'd seen in Paris.
The bubbles that are trapped inside those inks vary between a few millimeters, a few microns or even a few nanometers in size.
And what we are concerned about is the oxygen and the moisture that is trapped inside.
At this size scale, removing them is not easy.
But it matters, for instance, for organic light-emitting diodes inks that we can use to produce display for your smartphone, for example.
It's supposed to last for many years, but if the ink that we use has been absorbed with oxygen and moisture [which] are not being removed, then we can quickly see dark spots appear in the pixels.
Now, one challenge we face in removing the microbubbles is that they are not very cooperative.
They like to sit there, bathing in the ink without moving much.
But how do we kick them out?
One technology we use is to force the ink going through a thin, long and tiny tube with a porous wall, and we place the tubes inside the vacuum chamber, so that the bubbles can be squeezed out from the ink and be removed.
Once we manage to remove the bubbles from the ink that we produce, it is time for celebration.
Let's open a bubbling champagne.
Ooh, this is going to be fun!
(Laughter) Woooo!
(Applause) You could see a lot of bubbles rushing out from the champagne bottle.
These are the bubbles filled with carbon dioxide, a gas that's been produced during the fermentation process of the wine.
Let me pour some out.
I can't miss the chance.
I guess it's enough.
(Laughter) Here, I can see a lot of microbubbles moving from the bottom of the glass to the top of the champagne.
Before it pops, it will jet tiny droplets of aroma molecules and intensify the flavor of champagne, making us enjoy much more the flavor of champagne.
As a scientist who is passionate about bubbles, I love to see them, I love to play with them, and I love to study them.
And also, I love to drink them.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A male firefly glows above a field on a summer’s night, emitting a series of enticing flashes.
He hopes a nearby female will respond with her own lightshow and mate with him.
Sadly for this male, it won’t turn out quite the way he plans.
A female from a different species mimics his pulsing patterns: by tricking the male with her promise of partnership, she lures him in– and turns him into an easy meal.
He’s been deceived.
Behavioral biologists have identified three defining hallmarks of deception by non-human animals: it must mislead the receiver, the deceiver must benefit, and it can’t simply be an accident.
In this case we know that the predatory firefly’s signal isn’t an accident because she flexibly adjusts her flash pattern to match males of different species.
Based on this definition, where is animal deception seen in nature?
Camouflage is a good starting point– and one of the most familiar examples of animal trickery.
The leaf-tailed gecko and the octopus fool viewers by blending into the surfaces on which they rest.
Other animals use mimicry to protect themselves.
Harmless scarlet kingsnakes have evolved red, yellow, and black patterns resembling those of the venomous eastern coral snake to benefit from the protective warnings these markings convey.
Even some plants use mimicry: there are orchids that look and smell like female wasps to attract hapless males, who end up pollinating the plant.
Some of these animals benefit by having fixed characteristics that are evolutionary suited to their environments.
But in other cases, the deceiver seems to anticipate the reactions of other animals and to adjust its behavior accordingly.
Sensing a threat, the octopus will rapidly change its colors to match its surroundings.
Dwarf chameleons color-match their environments more closely when they see a bird predator rather than a snake– birds, after all, have better color vision.
One of the more fascinating examples of animal deception comes from the fork-tailed drongo.
This bird sits atop tall trees in the Kalahari Desert, surveying the landscape for predators and calling when it senses a threat.
That sends meerkats, pied babblers, and others dashing for cover.
But the drongo will also sound a false alarm when those other species have captured prey.
As the meerkats and babblers flee, the drongo swoops down to steal their catches.
This tactic works about half the time– and it provides drongos with much of their food.
There are fewer solid cases of animals using signals to trick members of their own species, but that happens too.
Consider the mantis shrimp.
Like other crustaceans, it molts as it grows, which leaves its soft body vulnerable to attack.
But it’s still driven to protect its home against rivals.
So it has become a masterful bluffer.
Despite being fragile, a newly molted shrimp is actually more likely to threaten intruders, spreading the large limbs it usually uses to strike or stab its opponents.
And that works – bluffers are more likely to keep their homes than non-bluffers.
In its softened condition, a mantis shrimp couldn’t withstand a fight– which is why we can be confident that its behavior is a bluff.
Biologists have even noticed that its bluffs are tactical: newly molted mantis shrimp are more likely to bluff against smaller rivals, who are especially likely to be driven away.
It would seem that instead of just threatening reflexively, the mantis shrimp is swiftly gauging the situation and predicting others’ behavior, to get the best result.
So we know that animals can deceive, but do they do so with intent?
That’s a difficult question, and many scientists think we'll never be able to answer it.
We can't observe animals’ internal thoughts.
But we don’t need to know what an animal is thinking in order to detect deception.
By watching behavior and its outcomes, we learn that animals manipulate predators, prey, and rivals, and that their capacity for deception can be surprisingly complex.
For the past 24 years, I have been a firefighter in Huntington, West Virginia.
As firefighters, my team and I are tasked with saving lives and property from such disasters as car wrecks, house fires and also life-threatening medical emergencies.
I am a woman leading a department in a male-dominated profession.
And 10 years ago, I decided to increase my medical knowledge and I received a nursing degree.
That was because it became clear that the next big threat facing not only my city, but other cities around the country, was not the one-and-done disaster, where you can ride in like the cavalry, as a firefighter, put out the fire and leave, feeling like you have made a difference and everything is OK.
The next big disaster in my city was and is the long, debilitating and lethal disaster known as opioid addiction.
We now call this a health epidemic, and we have replaced the name "addiction" with "substance use disorder."
To give you some perspective of how significant this epidemic has become, in 2017, in my county of 95,000 people, we saw 1,831 overdoses [and] 183 deaths from overdose.
This is the job of my firefighters, as well as other agencies, to respond to that.
(Coughs) Excuse me.
So, watching this epidemic unfold for several years, I developed some insight.
For this disaster, we need to redefine our job as a first responder.
We need to be more than just the cavalry.
We need to do more than just save a life.
We need to find ways to rebuild that life.
And it's going to take a lot of people to do that.
And that is exactly what we are trying to do in Huntington, West Virginia.
Now, let me give you some insight as to what we do.
First, this is what happens when somebody overdoses.
Imagine you are somebody who is suffering from the brain disorder of addiction.
You are fragile.
You're embarrassed, you're ashamed.
And you overdose.
Maybe a friend or a family member calls 911.
And then all of a sudden, you are awakened by five or six total strangers in uniform.
And they're rubbing your sternum, and they're saying, "Wake up, wake up!
You overdosed, you could've died."
Now, would you not be defensive and angry?
Because I know I would be.
And on top of that, those strangers gave you a dose of naloxone, which has sent you into withdrawals, or what is better known as "dope sickness."
Dope sickness makes you feel absolutely horrible.
Some say it's like the flu, times ten.
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, body aches.
So not only did we, as strangers, wake you up, but we also made you feel really sick.
So in turn, you, the patient, are not going to be very kind to us.
And you're going to refuse further medical treatment.
OK, well, then that's going to frustrate the heck out of us, and we're going to be mad, because you're ungrateful that we just saved your life.
This is not a good dynamic here.
What we are dealing with is a brain disorder that changes your thinking.
It convinces you that you don't have a problem.
So, this might have been not only the first time you've overdosed, it might have been the third, fourth or fifth time that we, personally, have revived you.
This is not a good situation.
Second, first responders do not receive much education on what substance use disorder is.
Neither does the medical community.
We're not trained how to deal with those suffering from substance use disorder.
I am trained to put out many different types of fires.
I am trained to save a life in the moment.
But I am not trained to deal with the intricate interaction between first responders, the health care community, social services and the wider community that is necessary to save a life long-term.
Thirdly, and this hits home.
As a first responder, I consider myself the cavalry.
We're knights in shining armor.
We want to swoop in, do our job and leave feeling satisfied that we've made a difference in somebody's life.
But that just doesn't happen when we're dealing with somebody with substance use disorder.
We leave feeling frustrated and useless.
We deal with the same people over and over again, with no positive outcome.
And you know what?
At some point, I realized that it is up to us as first responders and as a community to solve this problem, to find better ways to deal with those that are suffering.
So what I did is I started observing more on overdoses.
I started talking and listening to my patients.
I wanted to know what led them to where they are.
What exactly are they experiencing?
What makes their situation worse?
What makes their situation better?
I began experimenting with my words and paying attention to my own actions and how it affected those of my patients.
The education that I have received and continue to receive on a street level in Huntington has been both eye-opening and life-changing for me.
So, in Huntington, West Virginia, we have come together as a community, and we are changing the way that we treat those that suffer from this horrible disease.
We have started many programs, and it's making a difference.
I'll tell you about just a few of those.
Last year, we started a Quick Response Team, QRT for short.
The team consists of a paramedic, a police officer, somebody in the recovery community and somebody in the faith community.
As a team, they go out and visit people who have overdosed within 72 hours of that resuscitation.
They talk.
They listen.
They build a rapport with that patient, and they offer them treatment options.
Right now, about 30 percent or up to 30 percent of those that the Quick Response Team have reached out to have accepted some form of help.
And the wonderful thing about this is the first responders who are involved in this team, they actually feel like they can make a difference.
Positive change where there wasn't any.
This year -- (Applause) This year, we opened a free-standing specialty clinic, called PROACT, for those suffering from substance use disorder.
It's a one-stop shop, if you will.
A patient comes in, they're immediately assessed by somebody who's an addiction specialist.
They work with them to provide treatment options based on their own needs, individual needs.
This does several things for us.
It gives first responders a place to either take or refer our patients who are no longer in a life-threatening situation, that have refused to go to the hospital.
And it also clears up the overwhelmed emergency rooms in hospitals that we have.
The third thing that I want to tell you about is very dear to me and very important to my team.
We recently started a first responders self-care program.
More and more ...
first responders are experiencing compassion fatigue and PTSD.
It is not uncommon for the average firefighter in Huntington to deal with or see up to five young deaths per month.
These are their friends, these are their classmates.
So this much-needed program will not only recognize their hard work, it's going to give them a voice.
It's going to provide them with training that will help deal with the stress that they are under.
And it will give them more mental-health options that they desperately need.
We now have yoga classes in fire stations.
(Laughter) (Applause) We've also provided on-duty massages, which is fabulous.
(Laughter) And we have some off-duty programs that we've started, like cooking classes for first responders and their significant other and pottery classes.
So a couple of months ago, I walked out on the apparatus floor, where I had some firefighters.
And half of them had had a massage, and the other half were getting ready to have a massage.
And I saw 10 firefighters who were bantering in a very positive, relaxed manner.
And I hadn't seen that in years.
And that relaxed state is trickling down to the community, to the citizens.
So a couple of weeks ago, I had a neighbor overdose.
Twenty-two years old.
So of course, I hurried down to help my firefighters and my neighbor.
And what I witnessed was my firefighters being supportive.
Talking in a non-judgmental way.
I watched as one of my firefighters showed the father and another family member how to provide rescue breaths, should this happen again.
And left him with a bag valve mask.
Positive change.
Positive change.
Did I happen to mention the two things that firefighters dislike the most?
The way things are and change.
(Laughter) You know, I recognize that there have been drug epidemics before.
And I've seen what crack can do to a community.
A lot of our critics think that this new compassionate response that we're doing in Huntington is because of race.
That because the overdoses are happening so much to the white community.
And I understand that criticism, because we as a country messed up.
And we treated black people poorly during the crack epidemic.
We can't forget that.
And we must do better.
But right now, what I know is people are dying.
And we in Huntington deal with people suffering from substance use disorder of every color and every background, on the streets, every day.
The job of a first responder: prevent unnecessary deaths.
Period.
So ...
Obviously, I'm a stubborn firefighter and nurse.
And I refuse to believe that there isn't a way around every barrier.
One of the barriers that we have dealing with the opioid epidemic is stigma.
So ...
We in Huntington, West Virginia, are showing the rest of the country that change can happen.
That there is hope dealing with this epidemic.
Our current overdoses are down 40 percent.
(Applause) Currently, our overdose deaths are down 50 percent.
(Applause) This epidemic is far from over.
But each and every one of us has a part to play in this epidemic.
Just by listening and being kind to somebody, you have the ability to make a difference in their lives.
Thank you and God bless.
(Applause)
♫ Picture yourself in a world where there's no one else, ♫ ♫ nobody anywhere. ♫ ♫ A moment ago, there were voices and faces to look upon, ♫ ♫ you can't see them anywhere. ♫ ♫ Nothing more to say ♫ ♫ and no one left to say it to, anyway. ♫ ♫ Oh, listen to what I say. ♫ ♫ Everybody can be somebody ♫ ♫ and everybody is free to make a difference. ♫ ♫ Everybody can be somebody. ♫ ♫ Everybody is free to make a difference in this world. ♫ ♫ Now picture a world where the people all feel their worth. ♫ ♫ Children are everywhere. ♫ ♫ Now there is a reason for everyone's time on Earth. ♫ ♫ Wondering why you should care, yeah. ♫ ♫ Nothing more to say ♫ ♫ and only love can see us through, anyway. ♫ ♫ Oh, listen what I say, yeah. ♫ ♫ Everybody can be somebody ♫ ♫ and everybody is free to make a difference. ♫ ♫ Everybody can be somebody. ♫ ♫ Everybody is free to make a difference. ♫ ♫ You don't have to be a big celebrity ♫ ♫ to feel the power, the power in your soul, no. ♫ ♫ You don't have to be a big star on MTV ♫ ♫ to realize that in your eyes is a view that only you can see. ♫ ♫ Everybody can be somebody. ♫ ♫ Everybody is free to make a difference in this world. ♫ ♫ You can make a little difference in this world. ♫ ♫ I can make a little difference in this world. ♫ ♫ She can make a little difference in this world. ♫ ♫ He can make a little difference in this world. ♫ ♫ You can, I can, she can, he can, ♫ ♫ we can make a little bit of difference in this world. ♫ ♫ Everybody gonna make a little ♫ ♫ little difference, yeah. ♫ ♫ Talking 'bout everybody gonna make a little difference. ♫ ♫ Everybody gonna make a little difference in this world, ♫ ♫ oh yeah. ♫ (Applause) Thank you so much.
(Applause) This is a song that came about because I think it's difficult to be in the world and not be aware of what's going on, and the wars and so forth.
This song kind of came out of all of that.
And I wrote a lot of happy songs on my first record, which I still stand by, but this has got something else in it.
It's called "Peace on Earth."
♫ There is no hope. ♫ ♫ There is no future. ♫ ♫ No faith in God to save the day. ♫ ♫ There is no reason, no understanding ♫ ♫ no sacred place to hide away. ♫ ♫ There is no earnest conversation. ♫ ♫ No words of wisdom from the wise. ♫ ♫ There is no reconciliation ♫ ♫ and no collective compromise. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth, ♫ ♫ that's what we want. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth, ♫ ♫ that's what we all say. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth. ♫ ♫ Yet, there in the hallway ♫ ♫ lurks the ghost of war. ♫ ♫ He wants more, and more, and more, and more, ♫ ♫ and more, and more, and more, and more. ♫ ♫ There is no darkness, no sunshine. ♫ ♫ There is no great society. ♫ ♫ There is no freedom without conviction. ♫ ♫ There is no freedom to be free. ♫ ♫ There is no heaven, no fire and brimstone. ♫ ♫ There is no brotherhood of man. ♫ ♫ There is no country, no one religion. ♫ ♫ There is no universal plan. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth, ♫ ♫ that's what we want. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth, ♫ ♫ that's what we all say. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth. ♫ ♫ Yet, there in the hallway ♫ ♫ lurks the ghost of war. ♫ ♫ He wants more, and more, and more, and more, ♫ ♫ and more, and more, and more, and more, and more. ♫ ♫ The answer is ♫ ♫ mutual-assured destruction, ♫ ♫ a balance of power, ♫ ♫ a weapon for everyone. ♫ ♫ Mutual-assured destruction ♫ ♫ bringing peace to everyone. ♫ (Trumpet sounds) (Trumpet sounds) ♫ Peace on Earth, ♫ ♫ that's what we want. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth, ♫ ♫ that's what we all say. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth. ♫ ♫ There in the hallway, ♫ ♫ peace on Earth. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth. ♫ ♫ Peace on Earth. ♫ (Applause)
I don't speak English.
I start speaking English, learning English, about a year ago.
I speak French and I grew up with French, so my English is Franglais.
I'm born in the Western Congo, in an area around here, and then went to university in Kisangani.
And after I finished, I went to this area, the Ituri Forest.
But what I've been doing -- when I was about 14, I grew in my uncle's house.
And my father was a soldier, and my uncle was a fisherman and also a poacher.
What I've been doing from 14 to 17 was, I was assisting them collecting ivory tusk, meat and whatever they were killing, poaching, hunting in the forest, bring it in the main city to get access to the market.
But finally, I got myself involved.
Around 17 to 20 years, I became, myself, a poacher.
And I wanted to do it, because -- I believed -- to continue my studies.
I wanted to go to university, but my father was poor, my uncle even.
So, I did it.
And for three to four years, I went to university.
For three times, I applied to biomedical science, to be a doctor.
I didn't succeed.
I was having my inscriptions, my admission to biology.
And I said, "No way, I'm not doing it.
My family's poor, my area don't have better health care.
I want to be a doctor to serve them."
Three times, that means three years, and I start getting old.
I say, "Oh, no, I continue."
So, I did tropical ecology and plant botany.
When I finished, I went to the Ituri Forest for my internship.
It's where I really getting passion with what I'm doing right up to now -- I'm standing in front of you -- doing botany and wildlife conservation.
That time the Ituri Forest was created as a forest reserve with some animals and also plants.
And the training center there was built around the scientific Congolese staff and some American scientists also.
So, the Okapi Faunal Reserve protects number -- I think that is the largest number of elephants we have right now in protected areas in Congo.
It has also chimpanzees.
And it has been named Okapi Faunal Reserve because of this beautiful creature.
That is a forest giraffe.
I think you guys know it quite well.
Here we have savanna giraffes, but through evolution we have this forest giraffe that lives only in Congo.
It has also some beautiful primates.
Thirteen species -- highest diversity we can find in one single area in Africa.
And it has the Ituri Forest itself -- about 1,300 species of plants, so far known.
I joined the Wildlife Conservation Society, working there, in 1995, but I started working with them as a student in 1991.
I was appointed as a teaching assistant at my university because I accomplished with honor.
But I didn't like the way -- the instruction I got was very poor.
And I wanted to be formed to a training center and a research center.
With the end of the dictatorship regime of Mobutu Sese Seko, that most of you know, life became very, very difficult.
And the work we have been doing was completely difficult to do and to achieve it.
When Kabila started his movement to liberate Congo, so Mobutu soldiers started moving and retreated.
So they started fleeing from the east to the west.
And the Okapi Faunal Reserve is there, so there was a road from Goma, somewhere here, and coming like this.
So they might go through, pass through the Okapi Faunal Reserve.
Congo has five of the world's richest sites of protected area, and the Okapi Faunal Reserve is one of them.
So soldier was fleeing in the Okapi Faunal Reserve.
On their way, they looted everything.
Torture, wars -- oh, my God, you can't believe.
Every person was looking his way -- where to go, we don't know.
And it was for us, the young, the first time really we hear the language of war, of guns.
And even people who faced the rebellion of 1963, after our independence, they didn't believe what was happening.
They were killing people. They were doing whatever they want because they have power.
Who have been doing that?
Young children. Child soldiers.
You can't ask him how old he is because he has guns.
But I was from the west, working in the east.
I even [at] that time was not speaking Swahili.
And when they came, they looted everything.
You can't speak Lingala because Lingala was from Mobutu, and everyone speaking Lingala is soldier.
And I was from the same area to him.
All my friends said, we are leaving because we are a target.
But I'm not going to the east, because I don't know Swahili.
I stay. If I go, I will be killed.
I can't go back to my area -- it's more than 1,000 kilometers [away].
I stayed after they looted everything.
We have been doing research on botany, and we have a small herbarium of 4,500 sheets of plants.
We cut, we dry and we packed them, we mounted them on a folder.
Purpose: so that we start them for agriculture, for medicine, for whatever, and for science, for the study of the flora and the change of the forest.
That is people moving around, that's even Pygmies.
And this is a bright guy, hard-working person, and Pygmy.
I've been working with him about 10 years.
And with soldiers, they went to the forest for poaching elephants.
Because he's Pygmy, he knows how to track elephants in the forest.
He has been attacked by a leopard and they abandon him in the forest.
They came to told me, I have to save him.
And what I did, I gave him just antibiotics that we care for tuberculosis.
And fortunately, I saved his life.
And that was the language of the war.
Everywhere there has been constant extraction of mineral, killing animals, the logging timbers and so on.
And what of important things -- I think all of you here have a cell phone.
That mineral has killed a lot: five millions of Congolese have gone because of this Colombo-Tantalite -- they call it Coltan -- that they use it to make cell phones and it has been in that area, all over in Congo. Extraction, and good, big business of the war.
And what I did for the first war, after we have lost everything, I have to save something, even myself, my life and life of the staff.
I buried some of our new vehicle engines, I buried it to save it.
And some of equipment went with them, on the top of the canopy, to save it.
He's not collecting plants, he's going to save our equipment on the canopy.
And with the material that's left -- because they wanted to destroy it, to burn it, they didn't understand it, they didn't go to school -- I packed it.
And that is me, going to, hurrying to Uganda, to try to save that 4,000 material, with people carrying them on the bikes, bicycles.
And after that, we succeeded.
I housed that 4,000 material at the herbarium of Makerere University.
And after the war, I have been able to bring it back home, so that we continue our studies.
The second war came while we didn't expect it.
With friends, we had been sitting and watching match football, and having some good music with WorldSpace radio, when it started, I think.
So, it was so bad.
We heard that now from the east again the war started, and it's going fast.
This time I think Kabila will go in place of, as he did with Mobutu.
And the reserve was a target to the rebels.
Three different movements and two militia acting in the same area and competing for natural resources.
And there was no way to work.
They destroy everything.
Poaching -- oh, no way.
And that's the powerful men. We have to meet and to talk to them.
What's the regulation of the reserve and what is the regulation of the parks?
And they can't do what they are doing.
So we went to meet them.
That is Coltan extraction, gold mining.
So, we started talking with them, convincing them that we are in a protected area.
There are regulations that it's prohibited to do logging, mining and poaching, specifically.
But they said, "You guys, you think that soldiers who are dying are not important, and your animals you are protecting are most important.
We don't think so.
We have to do it, because to let our movement advance."
I say, "No way, you are not going to do it here."
We started talking with them and I was negotiating.
Tried to protect our equipment, tried to protect our staff and the villages of about 1,500 people.
And we continued.
But I was doing that, negotiating with them.
Sometimes we are having meeting and they are talking with Jean-Pierre Bemba, with Mbusa Nyamwisi, with Kabila, and I'm there.
Sometimes, they talk to my own language, that is, Lingala.
I hear it and what strategy they are doing, what they are planning.
Sometimes, they are having a helicopter to supply them with ammunition and so on.
They used me to carry that, and I was doing counting, what comes from where, and where, and where.
I had only this equipment -- my satellite phone, my computer and a plastic solar panel -- that I hide it in the forest.
And every time, daily, after we have meeting, what compromise we have, whatever, I go, I write a short email, send it.
I don't know how many people I had on my address.
I sent the message: what is going about the progress of the war and what they are planning to do.
They started suspecting that what we do on the morning, and the afternoon, it's on the news, BBC, RFI.
(Laughter) Something might be going on.
And one day, we went for a meeting.
(Applause) Sorry.
One day, we went to meet the Chief Commander.
He had the same iridium cell phone like me.
And he asked me, "Do you know how to use this?"
I said, "I have never seen it.
(Laughter) I don't know."
And I had mine on my pocket.
So, it was a chance that they trusted me a lot.
They didn't -- they was not looking on me.
So I was scared.
And when we finished the meeting, I went to return it in the forest.
And I was sending news, doing whatever, reporting daily to the U.N., to UNESCO, to our institution in New York, what have been going.
And for that, they have been having big pressure to leave, to free the area.
Because there was no way -- whatever they do, it's known the same time.
During the first two rebellions, they killed all animals in the zoo.
We have a zoo of 14 Okapis, and one of them was pregnant.
And during the war, after a week of heavy war, fighting in the area, we succeeded: we had the first Okapi.
This is the only trouser and shirt remind me of this.
This is not local population, this is rebels.
They are now happy sending the news that they have protected the Okapi with the war, because we sent the news that they are killing and poaching everywhere.
After a week, we celebrated the birthday of that Okapi, they killed an elephant, just 50 meters to the area where the zoo, where Okapi was born.
And I was mad.
I oppose it -- that they are now going to dissect it, until I do my report and then I see the Chief Commander.
And I succeeded.
The elephant just decayed and they just got the tusks.
What we are doing after that -- that was the situation of the war -- we have to rebuild.
I had some money. I was paid 150 dollars.
I devoted half of it to rebuild the herbarium, because we didn't have good infrastructure to start plants.
Wildlife Conservation Society more dealing with plants.
I started this with 70 dollars, and start fundraising money to where I've been going.
I had opportunity to go all over, where herbarium for my African material is.
And they supported me a bit, and I built this.
Now, it's doing work to train young Congolese.
And also, what one of the speciality we are doing, my design is tracking the global warming effect on biodiversity, and what the impacts of the Ituri Forest is playing to uptake carbon.
This is one of the studies we are doing on a 40-hectare plot, where we have tagged trees and lianas from one centimeters, and we are tracking them.
We have now data of about 15 years, to see how that forest is contributing to the carbon reductions.
And that is -- I think it's difficult for me.
This is a very embarrassing talk, I know.
I don't know where to start, where to finish it.
When I was thinking to come here, what best title I wanted to say to my talk, I didn't find this.
But now I think that I would have titled it, "The Language of Guns."
Where are you people?
Now we are talking about reconstitution, rebuild Africa.
But is gun industries a tool to rebuild, or is it a game?
I think we see the war like a game -- like soccer, football.
Everybody is happy, but see what it's doing, see what is going in Darfur.
Now we say, oh, my God.
See what the wars in Rwanda.
That's because of the language of guns.
I don't think that someone may blame Google, because it's doing the right things, even if people like Al-Qaeda are using Google to connect between them.
But it's serving millions for the best.
But what is doing with gun industries?
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you, thank you.
Just wait over there.
It's an amazing story.
I suspect a lot of people here have the same question I have.
How can we help you?
Corneille Ewango: That's really embarrassing questions.
I think that now I feel nervous.
And I think, helping us, people are acting sometimes by ignorance.
I did it myself.
If I know when I was young, that [by] killing an elephant, I'm destroying biodiversity, I would not have done it.
Many, many of you have seen the talents of Africans, but there are few who are going to school.
Many are dying because of all those kind of pandemics, HIV, malaria, poverty, not going to school.
What you can assist us, it's by building capacities.
How many have got opportunity like me to go to U.S., do a master's?
And go -- now, I'm in the Netherlands to do a Ph.D.
But many of them are just here, because they don't have money.
And they can't go even to university.
They can't even attain the bachelor's degree.
Building capacities for the young generation is going to make a better generation and a better future tomorrow for Africa.
CA: Thank you, thank you.
(Applause)
In 1982, a young nurse was suffering from severe, unrelenting depression.
She couldn’t work, socialize, or even concentrate well enough to read the newspaper.
One treatment changed everything.
After two courses of electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, her symptoms lifted.
She went back to work, then on to graduate school, where she earned high grades.
At first, she talked openly about her life changing treatment.
But as she realized many people had an extremely negative impression of ECT, she stopped sharing her experience.
ECT carried a deep stigma, leftover from a history that bears little resemblance to the modern procedure.
The therapy was first used in medicine in 1938.
In its early years, doctors administered a strong electrical current to the brain, causing a whole-body seizure during which patients might bite their tongues or even break bones.
Modern ECT is very different.
While a patient is under general anesthesia, electrodes deliver a series of mild electrical pulses to the brain.
This causes huge numbers of neurons to fire in unison: a brief, controlled seizure.
A muscle relaxant keeps spasms from spreading to the rest of his body.
The only physical indication of the electricity flooding the brain is a twitching foot.
The treatment lasts for about a minute, and most patients are able to resume normal activities about an hour after each session.
ECT is commonly used to treat severe cases of major depression or bipolar disorder in patients who haven’t responded to other therapies, or who have had adverse reactions to medication.
Half or more of those who undergo treatment experience an improvement in their symptoms.
Most patients treated with ECT have two or three sessions per week for several weeks.
Some begin to notice an improvement in their symptoms after just one session, while others take longer to respond.
Patients often continue less frequent treatments for several months to a year, and some need occasional maintenance sessions for the rest of their lives.
Modern ECT is much safer than it used to be, but patients can still experience side effects.
They may feel achy, fatigued, or nauseated right after treatment.
Some have trouble remembering what happened right before a session— for example, what they had for dinner the previous evening.
Rarely, they might have trouble remembering up to weeks and months before.
For most patients, this memory loss does improve over time.
What's fascinating is that despite its proven track record, we still don't know exactly why ECT works.
Neurons in the brain communicate via electrical signals, which influence our brain chemistry, contributing to mood and behavior.
The flood of electrical activity sparked by ECT alters that chemistry.
For example, ECT triggers the release of certain neurotransmitters, molecules that help carry signals between neurons and influence mental health.
ECT also stimulates the flow of hormones that may help reduce symptoms of depression.
Interestingly, ECT maintenance works better when paired with medication, even in patients who were resistant to medication before.
As we come to a better understanding of the brain, we’ll likely be able to make ECT even more effective.
In 1995, more than a decade after her first course of ECT, the nurse decided to publish an account of her experience.
Because of the stigma surrounding the treatment, she worried that doing so might negatively impact her personal and professional life, but she knew ECT could make a difference for patients when all else failed.
Though misperceptions about ECT persist, accounts like hers have helped make doctors and patients alike aware of the treatment’s life changing potential.
A public, Dewey long ago observed, is constituted through discussion and debate.
If we are to call the tyranny of assumptions into question, and avoid doxa, the realm of the unquestioned, then we must be willing to subject our own assumptions to debate and discussion.
It is in this spirit that I join into a discussion of one of the critical issues of our time, namely, how to mobilize different forms of capital for the project of state building.
To put the assumptions very clearly: capitalism, after 150 years, has become acceptable, and so has democracy.
If we looked in the world of 1945 and looked at the map of capitalist economies and democratic polities, they were the rare exception, not the norm.
The question now, however, is both about which form of capitalism and which type of democratic participation.
But we must acknowledge that this moment has brought about a rare consensus of assumptions.
And that provides the ground for a type of action, because consensus of each moment allows us to act.
And it is necessary, no matter how fragile or how provisional our consensus, to be able to move forward.
But the majority of the world neither benefits from capitalism nor from democratic systems.
Most of the globe experiences the state as repressive, as an organization that is concerned about denial of rights, about denial of justice, rather than provision of it.
And in terms of experience of capitalism, there are two aspects that the rest of the globe experiences.
First, extractive industry.
Blood diamonds, smuggled emeralds, timber, that is cut right from under the poorest.
Second is technical assistance.
And technical assistance might shock you, but it's the worst form of -- today -- of the ugly face of the developed world to the developing countries.
Tens of billions of dollars are supposedly spent on building capacity with people who are paid up to 1,500 dollars a day, who are incapable of thinking creatively, or organically.
Next assumption -- and of course the events of July 7, I express my deep sympathy, and before that, September 11 -- have reminded us we do not live in three different worlds.
We live in one world.
But that's easily said.
But we are not dealing with the implications of the one world that we are living in.
And that is that if we want to have one world, this one world cannot be based on huge pockets of exclusion, and then inclusion for some.
We must now finally come to think about the premises of a truly global world, in relationship to the regime of rights and responsibilities and accountabilities that are truly global in scope.
Otherwise we will be missing this open moment in history, where we have a consensus on both the form of politics and the form of economics.
What is one of these organizations to pick?
We have three critical terms: economy, civil society and the state.
I will not deal with those first two, except to say that uncritical transfer of assumptions, from one context to another, can only make for disaster.
Economics taught in most of the elite universities are practically useless in my context.
My country is dominated by drug economy and a mafia.
Textbook economics does not work in my context, and I have very few recommendations from anybody as to how to put together a legal economy.
The poverty of our knowledge must become the first basis of moving forward, and not imposition of the framework that works on the basis of mathematical modeling, for which I have enormous respect.
My colleagues at Johns Hopkins were among the best.
Second, instead of debating endlessly about what is the structure of the state, why don't we simplify and say, what are a series of functions that the state in the 21st century must perform?
Clare Lockhart and I are writing a book on this; we hope to share that much widely with -- and third is that we could actually construct an index to measure comparatively how well these functions that we would agree on are being performed in different places.
So what are these functions?
We propose 10.
And it's legitimate monopoly of means of violence, administrative control, management of public finances, investment in human capital, provision of citizenship rights, provision of infrastructure, management of the tangible and intangible assets of the state through regulation, creation of the market, international agreements, including public borrowing, and then, most importantly, rule of law.
I won't elaborate.
I hope the questions will give me an opportunity.
This is a feasible goal, basically because, contrary to widespread assumption, I would argue that we know how to do this.
Who would have imagined that Germany would be either united or democratic today, if you looked at it from the perspective of Oxford of 1943?
But people at Oxford prepared for a democratic Germany and engaged in planning.
And there are lots of other examples.
Now in order to do this -- and this brings this group -- we have to rethink the notion of capital.
The least important form of capital, in this project, is financial capital -- money.
Money is not capital in most of the developing countries.
It's just cash.
Because it lacks the institutional, organizational, managerial forms to turn it into capital.
And what is required is a combination of physical capital, institutional capital, human capital -- and security, of course, is critical, but so is information.
Now, the issue that should concern us here -- and that's the challenge that I would like to pose to this group -- is again, it takes 16 years in your countries to produce somebody with a B.S. degree.
It takes 20 years to produce somebody with a Ph.D.
The first challenge is to rethink, fundamentally, the issue of the time.
Do we need to repeat the modalities that we have inherited?
Our educational systems are inherited from the 19th century.
What is it that we need to do fundamentally to re-engage in a project, that capital formation is rapid?
The absolute majority of the world's population are below 20, and they are growing larger and faster.
They need different ways of being approached, different ways of being enfranchised, different ways of being skilled.
And that's the first thing.
Second is, you're problem solvers, but you're not engaging your global responsibility.
You've stayed away from the problems of corruption.
You only want clean environments in which to function.
But if you don't think through the problems of corruption, who will?
You stay away from design for development.
You're great designers, but your designs are selfish.
It's for your own immediate use.
The world in which I operate operates with designs regarding roads, or dams, or provision of electricity that have not been revisited in 60 years.
This is not right. It requires thinking.
But, particularly, what we need more than anything else from this group is your imagination to be brought to bear on problems the way a meme is supposed to work.
As the work on paradigms, long time ago showed -- Thomas Kuhn's work -- it's in the intersection of ideas that new developments -- true breakthroughs -- occur.
And I hope that this group would be able to deal with the issue of state and development and the empowerment of the majority of the world's poor, through this means.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So, Ashraf, until recently, you were the finance minister of Afghanistan, a country right at the middle of much of the world's agenda.
Is the country gonna make it?
Will democracy flourish? What scares you most?
Ashraf Ghani: What scares me most is -- is you, lack of your engagement.
(Laughter) You asked me. You know I always give the unconventional answer.
No. But seriously, the issue of Afghanistan first has to be seen as, at least, a 10- to 20-year perspective.
Today the world of globalization is on speed.
Time has been compressed.
And space does not exist for most people.
But in my world -- you know, when I went back to Afghanistan after 23 years, space had expanded.
Every conceivable form of infrastructure had broken down.
I rode -- traveled -- travel between two cities that used to take three hours now took 12.
So the first is when the scale is that, we need to recognize that just the simple things that are infrastructure -- it takes six years to deliver infrastructure.
In our world.
Any meaningful sort of thing.
But the modality of attention, or what is happening today, what's happening tomorrow.
Second is, when a country has been subjected to one of the most immense, brutal forms of exercise of power -- we had the Red Army for 10 continuous years, 110,000 strong, literally terrorizing.
The sky: every Afghan sees the sky as a source of fear.
We were bombed practically out of existence.
Then, tens of thousands of people were trained in terrorism -- from all sides.
The United States, Great Britain, joined for instance, Egyptian intelligence service to train thousands of people in resistance and urban terrorism.
How to turn a bicycle into an instrument of terror.
How to turn a donkey, a carthorse, anything.
And the Russians, equally.
So, when violence erupts in a country like Afghanistan, it's because of that legacy.
But we have to understand that we've been incredibly lucky.
I mean, I really can't believe how lucky I am here, standing in front of you, speaking.
When I joined as finance minister, I thought that the chances of my living more than three years would not be more than five percent.
Those were the risks. They were worth it.
I think we can make it, and the reason we can make it is because of the people.
You see, because, I mean -- I give you one statistic.
91 percent of the men in Afghanistan, 86 percent of the women, listen to at least three radio stations a day.
In terms of their discourse, in terms of their sophistication of knowledge of the world, I think that I would dare say, they're much more sophisticated than rural Americans with college degrees and the bulk of Europeans -- because the world matters to them.
And what is their predominant concern?
Abandonment.
Afghans have become deeply internationalist.
You know, when I went back in December of 2001, I had absolutely no desire to work with the Afghan government because I'd lived as a nationalist.
And I told them -- my people, with the Americans here -- separate.
Yes, I have an advisory position with the U.N.
I went through 10 Afghan provinces very rapidly.
And everybody was telling me it was a different world.
You know, they engage.
They see engagement, global engagement, as absolutely necessary to the future of the ordinary people.
And the thing that the ordinary Afghan is most concerned with is -- Clare Lockhart is here, so I'll recite a discussion she had with an illiterate woman in Northern Afghanistan.
And that woman said she didn't care whether she had food on her table.
What she worried about was whether there was a plan for the future, where her children could really have a different life.
That gives me hope.
CA: How is Afghanistan going to provide alternative income to the many people who are making their living off the drugs trade?
AG: Certainly. Well, the first is, instead of sending a billion dollars on drug eradication and paying it to a couple of security companies, they should give this hundred billion dollars to 50 of the most critically innovative companies in the world to ask them to create one million jobs.
The key to the drug eradication is jobs.
Look, there's a very little known fact: countries that have a legal average income per capita of 1,000 dollars don't produce drugs.
Second, textile.
Trade is the key, not aid.
The U.S. and Europe should give us a zero percent tariff.
The textile industry is incredibly mobile.
If you want us to be able to compete with China and to attract investment, we could probably attract four to six billion dollars quite easily in the textile sector, if there was zero tariffs -- would create the type of job.
Cotton does not compete with opium; a t-shirt does.
And we need to understand, it's the value chain.
Look, the ordinary Afghan is sick and tired of hearing about microcredit.
It is important, but what the ordinary women and men who engage in micro-production want is global access.
They don't want to sell to the charity bazaars that are only for foreigners -- and the same bloody shirt embroidered time and again.
What we want is a partnership with the Italian design firms.
Yeah, we have the best embroiderers in the world!
Why can't we do what was done with northern Italy?
With the Put Out system?
So I think economically, the critical issue really is to now think through.
And what I will say here is that aid doesn't work.
You know, the aid system is broken.
The aid system does not have the knowledge, the vision, the ability.
I'm all for it; after all, I raised a lot of it.
Yeah, to be exact, you know, I managed to persuade the world that they had to give my country 27.5 billion.
They didn't want to give us the money.
CA: And it still didn't work?
AG: No. It's not that it didn't work.
It's that a dollar of private investment, in my judgment, is equal at least to 20 dollars of aid, in terms of the dynamic that it generates.
Second is that one dollar of aid could be 10 cents; it could be 20 cents; or it could be four dollars.
It depends on what form it comes, what degrees of conditionalities are attached to it.
You know, the aid system, at first, was designed to benefit entrepreneurs of the developed countries, not to generate growth in the poor countries.
And this is, again, one of those assumptions -- the way car seats are an assumption that we've inherited in governments, and doors.
You would think that the US government would not think that American firms needed subsidizing to function in developing countries, provide advice, but they do.
There's an entire weight of history vis-a-vis aid that now needs to be reexamined.
If the goal is to build states that can credibly take care of themselves -- and I'm putting that proposition equally; you know I'm very harsh on my counterparts -- aid must end in each country in a definable period.
And every year there must be progress on mobilization of domestic revenue and generation of the economy.
Unless that kind of compact is entered into, you will not be able to sustain the consensus.
Once upon a time, there was a dread disease that afflicted children.
And in fact, among all the diseases that existed in this land, it was the worst. It killed the most children.
And along came a brilliant inventor, a scientist, who came up with a partial cure for that disease.
And it wasn't perfect. Many children still died, but it was certainly better than what they had before.
And one of the good things about this cure was that it was free, virtually free, and was very easy to use.
But the worst thing about it was that you couldn't use it on the youngest children, on infants, and on one-year-olds.
And so, as a consequence, a few years later, another scientist -- perhaps maybe this scientist not quite as brilliant as the one who had preceded him, but building on the invention of the first one -- came up with a second cure.
And the beauty of the second cure for this disease was that it could be used on infants and one-year-olds.
And the problem with this cure was it was very expensive, and it was very complicated to use.
And although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly, almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end.
But what they did, of course, since it was so complicated and expensive, they only used it on the zero-year-olds and the one-year-olds.
And they kept on using the existing cure that they had on the two-year-olds and up.
And this went on for quite some time. People were happy.
They had their two cures. Until a particular mother, whose child had just turned two, died of this disease.
And she thought to herself, "My child just turned two, and until the child turned two, I had always used this complicated, expensive cure, you know, this treatment.
And then the child turned two, and I started using the cheap and easy treatment, and I wonder" -- and she wondered, like all parents who lose children wonder -- "if there isn't something that I could have done, like keep on using that complicated, expensive cure."
And she told all the other people, and she said, "How could it possibly be that something that's cheap and simple works as well as something that's complicated and expensive?"
And the people thought, "You know, you're right.
It probably is the wrong thing to do to switch and use the cheap and simple solution."
And the government, they heard her story and the other people, and they said, "Yeah, you're right, we should make a law.
We should outlaw this cheap and simple treatment and not let anybody use this on their children."
And the people were happy. They were satisfied.
For many years this went along, and everything was fine.
But then along came a lowly economist, who had children himself, and he used the expensive and complicated treatment.
But he knew about the cheap and simple one.
And he thought about it, and the expensive one didn't seem that great to him. So he thought, "I don't know anything about science, but I do know something about data, so maybe I should go and look at the data and see whether this expensive and complicated treatment actually works any better than the cheap and simple one."
And lo and behold, when he went through the data, he found that it didn't look like the expensive, complicated solution was any better than the cheap one, at least for the children who were two and older -- the cheap one still didn't work on the kids who were younger.
And so, he went forth to the people and he said, "I've made this wonderful finding: it looks as if we could just use the cheap and simple solution, and by doing so we could save ourselves 300 million dollars a year, and we could spend that on our children in other ways."
And the parents were very unhappy, and they said, "This is a terrible thing, because how can the cheap and easy thing be as good as the hard thing?" And the government was very upset.
And in particular, the people who made this expensive solution were very upset because they thought, "How can we hope to compete with something that's essentially free?
We would lose all of our market."
And people were very angry, and they called him horrible names.
And he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days, and seek out some more intelligent, open-minded people in a place called Oxford, and come and try and tell the story at that place.
And so, anyway, here I am. It's not a fairy tale.
It's a true story about the United States today, and the disease I'm referring to is actually motor vehicle accidents for children.
And the free cure is adult seatbelts, and the expensive cure -- the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure -- is child car seats.
And what I'd like to talk to you about today is some of the evidence why I believe this to be true: that for children two years old and up, there really is no real benefit -- proven benefit -- of car seats, in spite of the incredible energy that has been devoted toward expanding the laws and making it socially unacceptable to put your children into seatbelts. And then talk about why -- what is it that makes that true?
And then, finally talk a little bit about a third way, about another technology, which is probably better than anything we have, but which -- there hasn't been any enthusiasm for adoption precisely because people are so enamored with the current car seat solution. OK.
So, many times when you try to do research on data, it records complicated stories -- it's hard to find in the data.
It doesn't turn out to be the case when you look at seatbelts versus car seats.
So the United States keeps a data set of every fatal accident that's happened since 1975.
So in every car crash in which at least one person dies, they have information on all of the people.
So if you look at that data -- it's right up on the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration's website -- you can just look at the raw data, and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence that's in favor of car seats for children aged two and up.
So, here is the data. Here I have, among two- to six-year-olds -- anyone above six, basically no one uses car seats, so you can't compare -- 29.3 percent of the children who are unrestrained in a crash in which at least one person dies, themselves die.
If you put a child in a car seat, 18.2 percent of the children die.
If they're wearing a lap-and-shoulder belt, in this raw data, 19.4 percent die. And interestingly, wearing a lap-only seatbelt, 16.7 percent die. And actually, the theory tells you that the lap-only seatbelt's got to be worse than the lap-and-shoulder belt. And that just reminds you that when you deal with raw data, there are hundreds of confounding variables that may be getting in the way.
So what we do in the study is -- and this is just presenting the same information, but turned into a figure to make it easier.
So the yellow bar represents car seats, the orange bar lap-and-shoulder, and the red bar lap-only seatbelts.
And this is all relative to unrestrained -- the bigger the bar, the better. Okay.
So, this is the data I just showed, OK?
So the highest bar is what you're striving to beat.
So you can control for the basic things, like how hard the crash was, what seat the child was sitting in, etc., the age of the child.
And that's that middle set of bars.
And so, you can see that the lap-only seatbelts start to look worse once you do that.
And then finally, the last set of bars, which are really controlling for everything you could possibly imagine about the crash, 50, 75, 100 different characteristics of the crash.
And what you find is that the car seats and the lap-and-shoulder belts, when it comes to saving lives, fatalities look exactly identical.
And the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well.
And it's not just overall. It's very robust to anything you want to look at.
One thing that's interesting: if you look at frontal-impact crashes -- when the car crashes, the front hits into something -- indeed, what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better.
And I think this isn't just chance.
In order to have the car seat approved, you need to pass certain federal standards, all of which involve slamming your car into a direct frontal crash.
But when you look at other types of crashes, like rear-impact crashes, indeed, the car seats don't perform as well.
And I think that's because they've been optimized to pass, as we always expect people to do, to optimize relative to bright-line rules about how affected the car will be.
And the other thing you might argue is, "Well, car seats have got a lot better over time.
And so if we look at recent crashes -- the whole data set is almost 30 years' worth of data -- you won't see it in the recent crashes. The new car seats are far, far better."
But indeed, in recent crashes the lap-and-shoulder seatbelts, actually, are doing even better than the car seats.
They say, "Well, that's impossible, that can't be."
And the line of argument, if you ask parents, is, "But car seats are so expensive and complicated, and they have this big tangle of latches, how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts because they are so expensive and complicated?"
It's kind of an interesting logic, I think, that people use. And the other logic, they say, "Well, the government wouldn't have told us [to] use them if they weren't much better."
But what's interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much.
It really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents whose children died after they turned two, which has led to the passage of all these laws -- not very much on data.
So you can only get so far, I think, in telling your story by using these abstract statistics.
And so I had some friends over to dinner, and I was asking -- we had a cookout -- I was asking them what advice they might have for me about proving my point. They said, "Why don't you run some crash tests?"
And I said, "That's a great idea."
So we actually tried to commission some crash tests.
And it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country, none of them wanted to do our crash test because they said, some explicitly, some not so explicitly, "All of our business comes from car seat manufacturers.
We can't risk alienating them by testing seatbelts relative to car seats."
Now, eventually, one did. Under the conditions of anonymity, they said they would be happy to do this test for us -- so anonymity, and 1,500 dollars per seat that we crashed.
And so, we went to Buffalo, New York, and here is the precursor to it.
These are the crash test dummies, waiting for their chance to take the center stage.
And then, here's how the crash test works.
Here, they don't actually crash the entire car, you know -- it's not worth ruining a whole car to do it.
So they just have these bench seats, and they strap the car seat and the seatbelt onto it.
So I just wanted you to look at this.
And I think this gives you a good idea of why parents think car seats are so great. Look at the kid in the car seat.
Does he not look content, ready to go, like he could survive anything? And then, if you look at the kid in back, it looks like he's already choking before the crash even happens.
It's hard to believe, when you look at this, that that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash.
So this is going to be a crash where they're going to slam this thing forward into a wall at 30 miles an hour, and see what happens. OK?
So, let me show you what happens.
These are three-year-old dummies, by the way.
So here -- this is the car seat. Now watch two things: watch how the head goes forward, and basically hits the knees -- and this is in the car seat -- and watch how the car seat flies around, in the rebound, up in the air.
The car seat's moving all over the place.
Bear in mind there are two things about this.
This is a car seat that was installed by someone who has installed 1,000 car seats, who knew exactly how to do it.
And also it turned out these bench seats are the very best way to install car seats.
Having a flat back makes it much easier to install them.
And so this is a test that's very much rigged in favor of the car seat, OK? So, that kid in this crash fared very well.
The federal standards are that you have to score below a 1,000 to be an approved car seat on this crash, in some metric of units which are not important.
And this crash would have been about a 450.
So this car seat was actually an above-average car seat from Consumer Reports, and did quite well.
So the next one. Now, this is the kid, same crash, who is in the seatbelt. He hardly moves at all, actually, relative to the other child. The funny thing is, the cam work is terrible because they've only set it up to do the car seats, and so, they actually don't even have a way to move the camera so you can see the kid that's on the rebound.
Anyway, it turns out that those two crashes, that actually the three-year-old did slightly worse. So, he gets about a 500 out of -- you know, on this range -- relative to a 400 and something.
But still, if you just took that data from that crash to the federal government, and said, "I have invented a new car seat.
I would like you to approve it for selling," then they would say, "This is a fantastic new car seat, it works great.
It only got a 500, it could have gotten as high up as a 1,000."
And this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat.
So, in some sense, what this is suggesting is that it's not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong, which is putting children at risk. It's just that, fundamentally, the car seats aren't doing much.
So here's the crash. So these are timed at the same time, so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat -- at rebound, it takes a lot longer -- but there's just a lot less movement for child who's in the seatbelt.
So, I'll show you the six-year-old crashes as well.
The six-year-old is in a car seat, and it turns out that looks terrible, but that's great. That's like a 400, OK?
So that kid would do fine in the crash.
Nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all.
And then here's the six-year-old in the seatbelt, and in fact, they get exactly within, you know, within one or two points of the same. So really, for the six-year-old, the car seat did absolutely nothing whatsoever.
That's some more evidence, so in some sense -- I was criticized by a scientist, who said, "You could never publish a study with an n of 4," meaning those four crashes.
So I wrote him back and I said, "What about an n of 45,004?"
Because I had the other 45,000 other real-world crashes.
And I just think that it's interesting that the idea of using real-world crashes, which is very much something that economists think would be the right thing to do, is something that scientists don't actually, usually think -- they would rather use a laboratory, a very imperfect science of looking at the dummies, than actually 30 years of data of what we've seen with children and with car seats.
And so I think the answer to this puzzle is that there's a much better solution out there, that's gotten nobody excited because everyone is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working.
And if you think from a design perspective, about going back to square one, and say, "I just want to protect kids in the back seat."
I don't there's anyone in this room who'd say, "Well, the right way to start would be, let's make a great seat belt for adults.
And then, let's make this really big contraption that you have to rig up to it in this daisy chain."
I mean, why not start -- who's sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids?
But essentially, do something like this, which I don't know exactly how much it would cost to do, but there's no reason I could see why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat.
It's just actually -- you see, this is folding up -- it's behind the seat.
You've got a regular seat for adults, and then you fold it down, and the kid sits on top, and it's integrated.
It seems to me that this can't be a very expensive solution, and it's got to work better than what we already have.
So the question is, is there any hope for adoption of something like this, which would presumably save a lot of lives?
And I think the answer, perhaps, lies in a story.
The answer both to why has a car seat been so successful, and why this may someday be adopted or not, lies in a story that my dad told me, relating to when he was a doctor in the U.S. Air Force in England. And this is a long time ago: you were allowed to do things then you can't do today.
So, my father would have patients come in who he thought were not really sick.
And he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them, and he'd say, "Come back in a week, if you still feel lousy."
OK, and most of them would not come back, but some of them would come back.
And when they came back, he, still convinced they were not sick, had another jar of pills. In this jar were huge horse pills.
They were almost impossible to swallow.
And these, to me, are the analogy for the car seats.
People would look at these and say, "Man, this thing is so big and so hard to swallow. If this doesn't make me feel better, you know, what possibly could?"
And it turned out that most people wouldn't come back, because it worked. But every once in a while, there was still a patient convinced that he was sick, and he'd come back. And my dad had a third jar of pills.
And the jar of pills he had, he said, were the tiniest little pills he could find, so small you could barely see them.
And he would say, listen, I know I gave you that huge pill, that complicated, hard-to-swallow pill before, but now I've got one that's so potent, that is really tiny and small and almost invisible.
It's almost like this thing here, which you can't even see."
And it turned out that never, in all the times my dad gave out this pill, the really tiny pill, did anyone ever come back still complaining of sickness.
So, my dad always took that as evidence that this little, teeny, powerful pill had the ultimate placebo effect. And in some sense, if that's the right story, I think integrated car seats you will see, very quickly, becoming something that everyone has. The other possible conclusion is, well, maybe after coming to my father three times, getting sent home with placebos, he still felt sick, he went and found another doctor.
And that's completely possible. And if that's the case, then I think we're stuck with conventional car seats for a long time to come.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) (Audience: I just wanted to ask you, when we wear seatbelts we don't necessarily wear them just to prevent loss of life, it's also to prevent lots of serious injury.
Your data looks at fatalities. It doesn't look at serious injury.
Is there any data to show that child seats are actually less effective, or just as effective as seatbelts for serious injury? Because that would prove your case.) Steven Levitt: Yeah, that's a great question. In my data, and in another data set I've looked at for New Jersey crashes, I find very small differences in injury.
So in this data, it's statistically insignificant differences in injury between car seats and lap-and-shoulder belts.
In the New Jersey data, which is different, because it's not just fatal crashes, but all crashes in New Jersey that are reported, it turns out that there is a 10 percent difference in injuries, but generally they're the minor injuries.
Now, what's interesting, I should say this as a disclaimer, there is medical literature that is very difficult to resolve with this other data, which suggests that car seats are dramatically better.
And they use a completely different methodology that involves -- after the crash occurs, they get from the insurance companies the names of the people who were in the crash, and they call them on the phone, and they asked them what happened.
And I really can't resolve, yet, and I'd like to work with these medical researchers to try to understand how there can be these differences, which are completely at odds with one another.
But it's obviously a critical question.
The question is even if -- are there enough serious injuries to make these cost-effective? It's kind of tricky.
Even if they're right, it's not so clear that they're so cost-effective.
I'm going to talk about a technology that we're developing at Oxford now, that we think is going to change the way that computer games and Hollywood movies are being made.
That technology is simulating humans.
It's simulated humans with a simulated body and a simulated nervous system to control that body.
Now, before I talk more about that technology, let's have a quick look at what human characters look like at the moment in computer games.
This is a clip from a game called "Grand Theft Auto 3."
We already saw that briefly yesterday.
And what you can see is -- it is actually a very good game.
It's one of the most successful games of all time.
But what you'll see is that all the animations in this game are very repetitive.
They pretty much look the same.
I've made him run into a wall here, over and over again.
And you can see he looks always the same.
The reason for that is that these characters are actually not real characters.
They are a graphical visualization of a character.
To produce these animations, an animator at a studio has to anticipate what's going to happen in the actual game, and then has to animate that particular sequence.
So, he or she sits down, animates it, and tries to anticipate what's going to happen, and then these particular animations are just played back at appropriate times in the computer game.
Now, the result of that is that you can't have real interactivity.
All you have is animations that are played back at more or less the appropriate times.
It also means that games aren't really going to be as surprising as they could be, because you only get out of it, at least in terms of the character, what you actually put into it.
There's no real emergence there.
And thirdly, as I said, most of the animations are very repetitive because of that.
Now, the only way to get around that is to actually simulate the human body and to simulate that bit of the nervous system of the brain that controls that body.
And maybe, if I could have you for a quick demonstration to show what the difference is -- because, I mean, it's very, very trivial.
If I push Chris a bit, like this, for example, he'll react to it.
If I push him from a different angle, he'll react to it differently, and that's because he has a physical body, and because he has the motor skills to control that body.
It's a very trivial thing.
It's not something you get in computer games at the moment, at all.
Thank you very much. Chris Anderson: That's it?
Torsten Reil: That's it, yes.
So, that's what we're trying to simulate -- not Chris specifically, I should say, but humans in general.
Now, we started working on this a while ago at Oxford University, and we tried to start very simply.
What we tried to do was teach a stick figure how to walk.
That stick figure is physically stimulated. You can see it here on the screen.
So, it's subject to gravity, has joints, etc.
If you just run the simulation, it will just collapse, like this.
The tricky bit is now to put an AI controller in it that actually makes it work.
And for that, we use the neural network, which we based on that part of the nervous system that we have in our spine that controls walking in humans.
It's called the central pattern generator.
So, we simulated that as well, and then the really tricky bit is to teach that network how to walk.
For that we used artificial evolution -- genetic algorithms.
We heard about those already yesterday, and I suppose that most of you are familiar with that already.
But, just briefly, the concept is that you create a large number of different individuals -- neural networks, in this case -- all of which are random at the beginning.
You hook these up -- in this case, to the virtual muscles of that two-legged creature here -- and hope that it does something interesting.
At the beginning, they're all going to be very boring.
Most of them won't move at all, but some of them might make a tiny step.
Those are then selected by the algorithm, reproduced with mutation and recombinations to introduce sex as well.
And you repeat that process over and over again, until you have something that walks -- in this case, in a straight line, like this.
So that was the idea behind this.
When we started this, I set up the simulation one evening.
It took about three to four hours to run the simulation.
I got up the next morning, went to the computer and looked at the results, and was hoping for something that walked in a straight line, like I've just demonstrated, and this is what I got instead.
(Laughter) So, it was back to the drawing board for us.
We did get it to work eventually, after tweaking a bit here and there.
And this is an example of a successful evolutionary run.
So, what you'll see in a moment is a very simple biped that's learning how to walk using artificial evolution.
At the beginning, it can't walk at all, but it will get better and better over time.
So, this is the one that can't walk at all.
(Laughter) Now, after five generations of applying evolutionary process, the genetic algorithm is getting a tiny bit better.
(Laughter) Generation 10 and it'll take a few steps more -- still not quite there.
But now, after generation 20, it actually walks in a straight line without falling over.
That was the real breakthrough for us.
It was, academically, quite a challenging project, and once we had reached that stage, we were quite confident that we could try and do other things as well with this approach -- actually simulating the body and simulating that part of the nervous system that controls it.
Now, at this stage, it also became clear that this could be very exciting for things like computer games or online worlds.
What you see here is the character standing there, and there's an obstacle that we put in its way.
And what you see is, it's going to fall over the obstacle.
Now, the interesting bit is, if I move the obstacle a tiny bit to the right, which is what I'm doing now, here, it will fall over it in a completely different way.
And again, if you move the obstacle a tiny bit, it'll again fall differently.
(Laughter) Now, what you see, by the way, at the top there, are some of the neural activations being fed into the virtual muscles.
Okay. That's the video. Thanks.
Now, this might look kind of trivial, but it's actually very important because this is not something you get at the moment in any interactive or any virtual worlds.
Now, at this stage, we decided to start a company and move this further, because obviously this was just a very simple, blocky biped.
What we really wanted was a full human body.
So we started the company.
We hired a team of physicists, software engineers and biologists to work on this, and the first thing we had to work on was to create the human body, basically.
It's got to be relatively fast, so you can run it on a normal machine, but it's got to be accurate enough, so it looks good enough, basically.
So we put quite a bit of biomechanical knowledge into this thing, and tried to make it as realistic as possible.
What you see here on the screen right now is a very simple visualization of that body.
I should add that it's very simple to add things like hair, clothes, etc., but what we've done here is use a very simple visualization, so you can concentrate on the movement.
Now, what I'm going to do right now, in a moment, is just push this character a tiny bit and we'll see what happens.
Nothing really interesting, basically.
It falls over, but it falls over like a rag doll, basically.
The reason for that is that there's no intelligence in it.
It becomes interesting when you put artificial intelligence into it.
So, this character now has motor skills in the upper body -- nothing in the legs yet, in this particular one.
But what it will do -- I'm going to push it again.
It will realize autonomously that it's being pushed.
It's going to stick out its hands.
It's going to turn around into the fall, and try and catch the fall.
So that's what you see here.
Now, it gets really interesting if you then add the AI for the lower part of the body as well.
So here, we've got the same character.
I'm going to push it a bit harder now, harder than I just pushed Chris.
But what you'll see is -- it's going to receive a push now from the left.
What you see is it takes steps backwards, it tries to counter-balance, it tries to look at the place where it thinks it's going to land.
I'll show you this again.
And then, finally hits the floor.
Now, this becomes really exciting when you push that character in different directions, again, just as I've done.
That's something that you cannot do right now.
At the moment, you only have empty computer graphics in games.
What this is now is a real simulation. That's what I want to show you now.
So, here's the same character with the same behavior I've just shown you, but now I'm just going to push it from different directions.
First, starting with a push from the right.
This is all slow motion, by the way, so we can see what's going on.
Now, the angle will have changed a tiny bit, so you can see that the reaction is different.
Again, a push, now this time from the front.
And you see it falls differently.
And now from the left -- and it falls differently.
That was really exciting for us to see that.
That was the first time we've seen that.
This is the first time the public sees this as well, because we have been in stealth mode.
I haven't shown this to anybody yet.
Now, just a fun thing: what happens if you put that character -- this is now a wooden version of it, but it's got the same AI in it -- but if you put that character on a slippery surface, like ice.
We just did that for a laugh, just to see what happens.
(Laughter) And this is what happens.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's nothing we had to do about this.
We just took this character that I just talked about, put it on a slippery surface, and this is what you get out of it.
And that's a really fascinating thing about this approach.
Now, when we went to film studios and games developers and showed them that technology, we got a very good response.
And what they said was, the first thing they need immediately is virtual stuntmen.
Because stunts are obviously very dangerous, they're very expensive, and there are a lot of stunt scenes that you cannot do, obviously, because you can't really allow the stuntman to be seriously hurt.
So, they wanted to have a digital version of a stuntman and that's what we've been working on for the past few months.
And that's our first product that we're going to release in a couple of weeks.
So, here are just a few very simple scenes of the guy just being kicked.
That's what people want. That's what we're giving them.
(Laughter) You can see, it's always reacting.
This is not a dead body. This is a body who basically, in this particular case, feels the force and tries to protect its head.
Only, I think it's quite a big blow again.
You feel kind of sorry for that thing, and we've seen it so many times now that we don't really care any more.
(Laughter) There are much worse videos than this, by the way, which I have taken out, but ...
Now, here's another one.
What people wanted as a behavior was to have an explosion, a strong force applied to the character, and have the character react to it in midair.
So that you don't have a character that looks limp, but actually a character that you can use in an action film straight away, that looks kind of alive in midair as well.
So this character is going to be hit by a force, it's going to realize it's in the air, and it's going to try and, well, stick out its arm in the direction where it's landing.
That's one angle; here's another angle.
We now think that the realism we're achieving with this is good enough to be used in films.
And let's just have a look at a slightly different visualization.
This is something I just got last night from an animation studio in London, who are using our software and experimenting with it right now.
So this is exactly the same behavior that you saw, but in a slightly better rendered version.
So if you look at the character carefully, you see there are lots of body movements going on, none of which you have to animate like in the old days.
Animators had to actually animate them.
This is all happening automatically in the simulation.
This is a slightly different angle, and again a slow motion version of this.
This is incredibly quick. This is happening in real time.
You can run this simulation in real time, in front of your eyes, change it, if you want to, and you get the animation straight out of it.
At the moment, doing something like this by hand would take you probably a couple of days.
This is another behavior they requested.
I'm not quite sure why, but we've done it anyway.
It's a very simple behavior that shows you the power of this approach.
In this case, the character's hands are fixed to a particular point in space, and all we've told the character to do is to struggle.
And it looks organic. It looks realistic.
You feel kind of sorry for the guy.
It's even worse -- and that is another video I just got last night -- if you render that a bit more realistically.
Now, I'm showing this to you just to show you how organic it actually can feel, how realistic it can look.
And this is all a physical simulation of the body, using AI to drive virtual muscles in that body.
Now, one thing which we did for a laugh was to create a slightly more complex stunt scene, and one of the most famous stunts is the one where James Bond jumps off a dam in Switzerland and then is caught by a bungee.
Got a very short clip here.
Yes, you can just about see it here.
In this case, they were using a real stunt man. It was a very dangerous stunt.
It was just voted, I think in the Sunday Times, as one of the most impressive stunts.
Now, we've just tried and -- looked at our character and asked ourselves, "Can we do that ourselves as well?"
Can we use the physical simulation of the character, use artificial intelligence, put that artificial intelligence into the character, drive virtual muscles, simulate the way he jumps off the dam, and then skydive afterwards, and have him caught by a bungee afterwards?
We did that. It took about altogether just two hours, pretty much, to create the simulation.
And that's what it looks like, here.
Now, this could do with a bit more work. It's still very early stages, and we pretty much just did this for a laugh, just to see what we'd get out of it.
But what we found over the past few months is that this approach -- that we're pretty much standard upon -- is incredibly powerful.
We are ourselves surprised what you actually get out of the simulations.
There's very often very surprising behavior that you didn't predict before.
There's so many things we can do with this right now.
The first thing, as I said, is going to be virtual stuntmen.
Several studios are using this software now to produce virtual stuntmen, and they're going to hit the screen quite soon, actually, for some major productions.
The second thing is video games.
With this technology, video games will look different and they will feel very different.
For the first time, you'll have actors that really feel very interactive, that have real bodies that really react.
I think that's going to be incredibly exciting.
Probably starting with sports games, which are going to become much more interactive.
But I particularly am really excited about using this technology in online worlds, like there, for example, that Tom Melcher has shown us.
The degree of interactivity you're going to get is totally different, I think, from what you're getting right now.
A third thing we are looking at and very interested in is simulation.
We've been approached by several simulation companies, but one project we're particularly excited about, which we're starting next month, is to use our technology -- and in particular, the walking technology -- to help aid surgeons who work on children with cerebral palsy, to predict the outcome of operations on these children.
As you probably know, it's very difficult to predict what the outcome of an operation is if you try and correct the gait.
The classic quote is, I think, it's unpredictable at best, is what people think right now, is the outcome.
Now, what we want to do with our software is allow our surgeons to have a tool.
We're going to simulate the gait of a particular child and the surgeon can then work on that simulation and try out different ways to improve that gait, before he actually commits to an actual surgery.
That's one project we're particularly excited about, and that's going to start next month.
Just finally, this is only just the beginning.
We can only do several behaviors right now.
The AI isn't good enough to simulate a full human body.
The body yes, but not all the motor skills that we have.
And, I think, we're only there if we can have something like ballet dancing.
Right now, we don't have that but I'm very sure that we will be able to do that at some stage.
We do have one unintentional dancer actually, the last thing I'm going to show you.
This was an AI contour that was produced and evolved -- half-evolved, I should say -- to produce balance, basically.
So, you kick the guy and the guy's supposed to counter-balance.
That's what we thought was going to come out of this.
But this is what emerged out of it, in the end.
(Music) Bizarrely, this thing doesn't have a head. I'm not quite sure why.
So, this was not something we actually put in there.
He just started to create that dance himself.
He's actually a better dancer than I am, I have to say.
And what you see after a while -- I think he even goes into a climax right at the end.
And I think -- there you go.
(Laughter) So, that all happened automatically. We didn't put that in there.
That's just the simulation creating this itself, basically.
So it's just -- (Applause) Thanks.
Not quite John Travolta yet, but we're working on that as well, so thanks very much for your time.
Thanks.
(Applause) CA: Incredible. That was really incredible.
TR: Thanks.
I thought I'd tell you a little about what I like to write.
And I like to immerse myself in my topics.
I just like to dive right in and become sort of a human guinea pig.
And I see my life as a series of experiments.
So, I work for Esquire magazine, and a couple of years ago, I wrote an article called "My Outsourced Life," where I hired a team of people in Bangalore, India, to live my life for me.
So, they answered my emails.
They answered my phone.
They argued with my wife for me, and they read my son bedtime stories.
It was the best month of my life, because I just sat back and I read books and watched movies.
It was a wonderful experience.
More recently, I wrote an article for Esquire called -- about radical honesty.
And this is a movement where -- this is started by a psychologist in Virginia, who says that you should never, ever lie, except maybe during poker and golf, his only exceptions.
And, more than that, whatever is on your brain should come out of your mouth.
So, I decided I would try this for a month.
This was the worst month of my life.
(Laughter) I do not recommend this at all.
To give you a sense of the experience, the article was called, "I Think You're Fat."
(Laughter) So, that was hard.
My most recent book -- my previous book was called "The Know-It-All," and it was about the year I spent reading the Encyclopedia Britannica from A to Z in my quest to learn everything in the world, or more precisely from Aak, which is a type of East Asian music, all the way to Zwyiec, which is -- well, I don't want to ruin the ending.
(Laughter) It's a very exciting twist ending, like an O. Henry novel, so I won't ruin it.
But I love that one, because that was an experiment about how much information one human brain could absorb.
Although, listening to Kevin Kelly, you don't have to remember anything.
You can just Google it.
So, I wasted some time there.
I love those experiments, but I think that the most profound and life-changing experiment that I've done is my most recent experiment, where I spent a year trying to follow all of the rules of the Bible, "The Year of Living Biblically."
And I undertook this for two reasons.
The first was that I grew up with no religion at all.
As I say in my book, I'm Jewish in the same way the Olive Garden is Italian.
(Laughter) So, not very.
But I've become increasingly interested in religion.
I do think it's the defining issue of our time, or one of the main ones.
And I have a son. I want to know what to teach him.
So, I decided to dive in head first, and try to live the Bible.
The second reason I undertook this is because I'm concerned about the rise of fundamentalism, religious fundamentalism, and people who say they take the Bible literally, which is, according to some polls, as high as 45 or 50 percent of America.
So I decided, what if you really did take the Bible literally?
I decided to take it to its logical conclusion and take everything in the Bible literally, without picking and choosing.
The first thing I did was I got a stack of bibles.
I had Christian bibles.
I had Jewish bibles.
A friend of mine sent me something called a hip-hop bible, where the twenty-third Psalm is rendered as, "The Lord is all that," as opposed to what I knew it as, "The Lord is my shepherd."
Then I went down and I read several versions, and I wrote down every single law that I could find.
And this was a very long list -- over 700 rules.
And they range from the famous ones that I had heard of -- The Ten Commandments, love your neighbor, be fruitful and multiply.
So I wanted to follow those.
And actually, I take my projects very seriously, because I had twins during my year, so I definitely take my projects seriously.
But I also wanted to follow the hundreds of arcane and obscure laws that are in the Bible.
There is the law in Leviticus, "You cannot shave the corners of your beard."
I didn't know where my corners were, so I decided to let the whole thing grow, and this is what I looked like by the end.
As you can imagine, I spent a lot of time at airport security.
(Laughter) My wife wouldn't kiss me for the last two months.
So, certainly the challenge was there.
The Bible says you cannot wear clothes made of mixed fibers, so I thought, "Sounds strange, but I'll try it."
You only know if you try it.
I got rid of all my poly-cotton T-shirts.
The Bible says that if two men are in a fight, and the wife of one of those men grabs the testicles of the other man, then her hand shall be cut off.
So, I wanted to follow that rule.
(Laughter) That one I followed by default, by not getting in a fight with a man whose wife was standing nearby, looking like she had a strong grip.
(Laughter) So -- oh, there's another shot of my beard.
I will say it was an amazing year because it really was life changing, and incredibly challenging.
And there were two types of laws that were particularly challenging.
The first was avoiding the little sins that we all commit every day.
You know, I could spend a year not killing, but spending a year not gossiping, not coveting, not lying -- you know, I live in New York, and I work as a journalist, so this was 75, 80 percent of my day I had to do it.
But it was really interesting, because I was able to make some progress, because I couldn't believe how much my behavior changed my thoughts.
This was one of the huge lessons of the year, is that I almost pretended to be a better person, and I became a little bit of a better person.
So I had always thought, you know, "You change your mind, and you change your behavior," but it's often the other way around.
You change your behavior, and you change your mind.
So, you know, if you want to become more compassionate, you visit sick people in the hospital, and you will become more compassionate.
You donate money to a cause, and you become emotionally involved in that cause.
So, it really was cognitive psychology -- you know, cognitive dissonance -- that I was experiencing.
The Bible actually talks about cognitive psychology, very primitive cognitive psychology.
In the Proverbs, it says that if you smile, you will become happier, which, as we know, is actually true.
The second type of rule that was difficult to obey was the rules that will get you into a little trouble in twenty-first-century America.
And perhaps the clearest example of this is stoning adulterers.
(Laughter) But it's a big part of the Bible, so I figured I had to address it.
So, I was able to stone one adulterer.
It happened -- I was in the park, and I was dressed in my biblical clothing, so sandals and sort of a white robe, you know, because again, the outer affects the inner.
I wanted to see how dressing biblically affected my mind.
And this man came up to me and he said, "Why are you dressed like that?"
And I explained my project, and he said, "Well, I am an adulterer, are you going to stone me?"
And I said, "Well, that would be great!"
(Laughter) And I actually took out a handful of stones from my pocket that I had been carrying around for weeks, hoping for just this interaction -- and, you know, they were pebbles -- but he grabbed them out of my hand.
He was actually an elderly man, mid-70s, just so you know.
But he's still an adulterer, and still quite angry.
He grabbed them out of my hand and threw them at my face, and I felt that I could -- eye for an eye -- I could retaliate, and throw one back at him.
So that was my experience stoning, and it did allow me to talk about, in a more serious way, these big issues.
How can the Bible be so barbaric in some places, and yet so incredibly wise in others?
How should we view the Bible?
Should we view it, you know, as original intent, like a sort of a Scalia version of the Bible?
How was the Bible written?
And actually, since this is a tech crowd, I talk in the book about how the Bible actually reminds me of the Wikipedia, because it has all of these authors and editors over hundreds of years.
And it's sort of evolved.
It's not a book that was written and came down from on high.
So I thought I would end by telling you just a couple of the take-aways, the bigger lessons that I learned from my year.
The first is, thou shalt not take the Bible literally.
This became very, very clear, early on.
Because if you do, then you end up acting like a crazy person, and stoning adulterers, or -- here's another example.
Well, that's another. I did spend some time shepherding.
(Laughter) It's a very relaxing vocation. I recommend it.
But this one is -- the Bible says that you cannot touch women during certain times of the month, and more than that, you cannot sit on a seat where a menstruating woman has sat.
And my wife thought this was very offensive, so she sat in every seat in our apartment, and I had to spend much of the year standing until I bought my own seat and carried it around.
So, you know, I met with creationists.
I went to the creationists' museum.
And these are the ultimate literalists.
And it was fascinating, because they were not stupid people at all.
I would wager that their IQ is exactly the same as the average evolutionist.
It's just that their faith is so strong in this literal interpretation of the Bible that they distort all the data to fit their model.
And they go through these amazing mental gymnastics to accomplish this.
And I will say, though, the museum is gorgeous.
They really did a fantastic job.
If you're ever in Kentucky, there's, you can see a movie of the flood, and they have sprinklers in the ceiling that will sprinkle on you during the flood scenes.
So, whatever you think of creationism -- and I think it's crazy -- they did a great job.
(Laughter) Another lesson is that thou shalt give thanks.
And this one was a big lesson because I was praying, giving these prayers of thanksgiving, which was odd for an agnostic.
But I was saying thanks all the time, every day, and I started to change my perspective.
And I started to realize the hundreds of little things that go right every day, that I didn't even notice, that I took for granted, as opposed to focusing on the three or four that went wrong.
So, this is actually a key to happiness for me, is to just remember when I came over here, the car didn't flip over, and I didn't trip coming up the stairs.
It's a remarkable thing.
Third, that thou shall have reverence.
This one was unexpected because I started the year as an agnostic, and by the end of the year, I became what a friend of mine calls a reverent agnostic, which I love.
And I'm trying to start it as a movement.
So, if anyone wants to join, the basic idea is, whether or not there is a God, there's something important and beautiful about the idea of sacredness, and that our rituals can be sacred.
The Sabbath can be sacred.
This was one of the great things about my year, doing the Sabbath, because I am a workaholic, so having this one day where you cannot work, it really, that changed my life.
So, this idea of sacredness, whether or not there is a God.
Thou shall not stereotype.
This one happened because I spent a lot of time with various religious communities throughout America because I wanted it to be more than about my journey.
I wanted it to be about religion in America.
So, I spent time with evangelical Christians, and Hasidic Jews, and the Amish.
I'm very proud because I think I'm the only person in America to out Bible-talk a Jehovah's Witness.
(Laughter) After three and a half hours, he looked at his watch, he's like, "I gotta go."
(Laughter) Oh, thank you very much.
Thank you. Bless you, bless you.
But it was interesting because I had some very preconceived notions about, for instance, evangelical Christianity, and I found that it's such a wide and varied movement that it is difficult to make generalizations about it.
There's a group I met with called the Red Letter Christians, and they focus on the red words in the Bible, which are the ones that Jesus spoke.
That's how they printed them in the old Bibles.
And their argument is that Jesus never talked about homosexuality.
They have a pamphlet that says, "Here's what Jesus said about homosexuality," and you open it up, and there's nothing in it.
So, they say Jesus did talk a lot about helping the outcasts, helping poor people.
So, this was very inspiring to me.
I recommend Jim Wallis and Tony Campolo.
They're very inspiring leaders, even though I disagree with much of what they say.
Also, thou shalt not disregard the irrational.
This one was very unexpected because, you know, I grew up with the scientific worldview, and I was shocked learning how much of my life is governed by irrational forces.
And the thing is, if they're not harmful, they're not to be completely dismissed.
Because I learned that -- I was thinking, I was doing all these rituals, these biblical rituals, separating my wool and linen, and I would ask these religious people "Why would the Bible possibly tell us to do this? Why would God care?"
And they said, "We don't know, but it's just rituals that give us meaning."
And I would say, "But that's crazy."
And they would say, "Well, what about you?
You blow out candles on top of a birthday cake.
If a guy from Mars came down and saw, here's one guy blowing out the fire on top of a cake versus another guy not wearing clothes of mixed fabrics, would the Martians say, 'Well, that guy, he makes sense, but that guy's crazy?'" So no, I think that rituals are, by nature, irrational.
So the key is to choose the right rituals, the ones that are not harmful -- but rituals by themselves are not to be dismissed.
And finally I learned that thou shall pick and choose.
And this one I learned because I tried to follow everything in the Bible.
And I failed miserably.
Because you can't.
You have to pick and choose. And anyone who follows the Bible is going to be picking and choosing.
The key is to pick and choose the right parts.
There's the phrase called cafeteria religion, and the fundamentalists will use it in a denigrating way, and they'll say, "Oh, it's just cafeteria religion.
You're just picking and choosing."
But my argument is, "What's wrong with cafeterias?"
I've had some great meals at cafeterias.
I've also had some meals that make me want to dry heave.
So, it's about choosing the parts of the Bible about compassion, about tolerance, about loving your neighbor, as opposed to the parts about homosexuality is a sin, or intolerance, or violence, which are very much in the Bible as well.
So if we are to find any meaning in this book, then we have to really engage it, and wrestle with it.
And I thought I'd end with just a couple more.
There's me reading the Bible.
That's how I hailed taxicabs.
(Laughter) Seriously, and it worked. And yes, that was actually a rented sheep, so I had to return that in the morning, but it served well for a day.
So, anyway, thank you so much for letting me speak.
I really love color.
I notice it everywhere and in everything.
My family makes fun of me because I like to use colors with elusive-sounding names, like celadon ...
(Laughter) ecru ...
carmine.
Now, if you haven't noticed, I am black, thank you -- (Laughter) and when you grow up in a segregated city as I have, like Chicago, you're conditioned to believe that color and race can never be separate.
There's hardly a day that goes by that somebody is not reminding you of your color.
Racism is my city's vivid hue.
Now, we can all agree that race is a socially constructed phenomenon, but it's often hard to see it in our everyday existence.
Its pervasiveness is everywhere.
The neighborhoods I grew up in were filled with a kind of culturally coded beauty.
Major commercial corridors were lined with brightly painted storefronts that competed for black consumer dollars.
The visual mash-ups of corner stores and beauty supply houses, currency exchanges, are where I actually, inadvertently learned the foundational principles of something I would later come to know is called color theory.
I can remember being pretty intimidated by this term in college -- color theory.
All these stuffy old white guys with their treatises and obscure terminologies.
I'd mastered each one of their color palettes and associated principles.
Color theory essentially boils down to the art and science of using color to form compositions and spaces.
It's not so complicated.
This was my bible in college.
Josef Albers posited a theory about the color red, and it always has stuck with me.
He argues that the iconic color of a cola can is red, and that in fact all of us can agree that it's red but the kinds of reds that we imagine are as varied as the number of people in this room.
So imagine that.
This color that we've all been taught since kindergarten is primary -- red, yellow, blue -- in fact is not primary, is not irreducible, is not objective but quite subjective.
What?
(Laughter) Albers called this "relational."
Relational.
And so it was the first time that I was able to see my own neighborhood as a relational context.
Each color is affected by its neighbor.
Each other is affected by its neighbor.
In the 1930s, the United States government created the Federal Housing Administration, which in turn created a series of maps which were using a color-coding system to determine which neighborhoods should and should not receive federal housing loans.
Their residential security map was its own kind of color palette, and in fact was more influential than all of those color palettes that I had been studying in college combined.
Banks would not lend to people who lived in neighborhoods like mine.
That's me in D86.
Their cartographers were literally coloring in these maps and labeling that color "hazardous."
Red was the new black, and black neighborhoods were colored.
The problem persists today, and we've seen it most recently in the foreclosure crisis.
In Chicago, this is best symbolized by these Xs that are emblazoned on the fronts of vacated houses on the South and West Side.
The reality is that someone else's color palettes were determining my physical and artistic existence.
Ridiculous.
I decided that I'd create my own color palette and speak to the people who live where I do and alter the way that color had been defined for us.
It was a palette that I didn't have to search far for and look for in a treatise, because I already knew it.
What kind of painter emerges from this reality?
What color is urban?
What color is ghetto?
What color is privilege?
What color is gang-related?
What color is gentrification?
What color is Freddie Gray?
What color is Mike Brown?
Finally, I'd found a way to connect my racialized understanding of color with my theoretical understanding of color.
And I gave birth to my third baby: "Color(ed) Theory."
(Laughter) "Color(ed) Theory" was a two-year artistic project in which I applied my own color palette to my own neighborhoods in my own way.
Now, if I walked down 79th Street right now and I asked 50 people for the name of the slightly greener shade of cyan, they would look at me sideways.
(Laughter) But if I say, "What color is Ultra Sheen?" -- oh, a smile emerges, stories about their grandmother's bathroom ensue.
I mean, who needs turquoise when you have Ultra Sheen?
Who needs teal when you have Ultra Sheen?
Who needs ultramarine when you have ...
(Audience) Ultra Sheen.
(Laughter) This is exactly how I derived my palette.
I would ask friends and family and people with backgrounds that were similar to mine for those stories and memories.
The stories weren't always happy but the colors always resonated more than the product itself.
I took those theories to the street.
"Ultra Sheen."
"Pink Oil Moisturizer."
If you're from Chicago, "Harold's Chicken Shack."
(Laughter) "Currency Exchange + Safe Passage."
"Flamin' Red Hots."
"Loose Squares" ...
and "Crown Royal Bag."
I painted soon-to-be-demolished homes in a much-maligned area called Englewood.
We'd gather up as much paint as I could fit in my trunk, I'd call my most trusted art homies, my amazing husband always by my side, and we'd paint every inch of the exteriors in monochromatic fashion.
I wanted to understand scale in a way that I hadn't before.
I wanted to apply the colors to the biggest canvas I could imagine ...
So I'd obsessively drive up and down familiar streets that I'd grown up on, I'd cross-reference these houses with the city's data portal to make sure that they'd been tagged for demolition -- unsalvageable, left for dead.
I really wanted to understand what it meant to just let color rule, to trust my instincts, to stop asking for permission.
No meetings with city officials, no community buy-in, just let color rule in my desire to paint different pictures about the South Side.
These houses sit in stark contrast to their fully lined counterparts.
We'd paint to make them stand out like Monopoly pieces in these environments.
And we'd go on these early Sunday mornings and keep going until we ran out of that paint or until someone complained.
"Hey, did you paint that?"
a driver asked as I was taking this image one day.
Me, nervously: "Yes?"
His face changed.
"Aw, I thought Prince was coming."
(Laughter) He had grown up on this block, and so you could imagine when he drove past and saw one of its last remaining houses mysteriously change colors overnight, it was clearly not a Crown Royal bag involved, it was a secret beacon from Prince.
(Laughter) And though that block was almost all but erased, it was the idea that Prince could pop up in unexpected places and give free concerts in areas that the music industry and society had deemed were not valuable anymore.
For him, the idea that just the image of this house was enough to bring Prince there meant that it was possible.
In that moment, that little patch of Eggleston had become synonymous with royalty.
And for however briefly, Eric Bennett's neighborhood had regained its value.
So we traded stories despite being strangers about which high school we'd gone to and where we'd grown up, and Mrs. So-and-so's candy store -- of being kids on the South Side.
And once I revealed that in fact this project had absolutely nothing to do with Prince, Eric nodded in seeming agreement, and as we parted ways and he drove off, he said, "But he could still come!"
(Laughter) He had assumed full ownership of this project and was not willing to relinquish it, even to me, its author.
That, for me, was success.
I wish I could tell you that this project transformed the neighborhood and all the indices that we like to rely on: increased jobs, reduced crime, no alcoholism -- but in fact it's more gray than that.
"Color(ed) Theory" catalyzed new conversations about the value of blackness.
"Color(ed) Theory" made unmistakably visible the uncomfortable questions that institutions and governments have to ask themselves about why they do what they do.
They ask equally difficult questions of myself and my neighborhood counterparts about our value systems and what our path to collective agency needs to be.
Color gave me freedom in a way that didn't wait for permission or affirmation or inclusion.
Color was something that I could rule now.
One of the neighborhood members and paint crew members said it best when he said, "This didn't change the neighborhood, it changed people's perceptions about what's possible for their neighborhood," in big and small ways.
Passersby would ask me, "Why are you painting that house when you know the city's just going to come and tear it down?"
At the time, I had no idea, I just knew that I had to do something.
I would give anything to better understand color as both a medium and as an inescapable way that I am identified in society.
If I have any hope of making the world better, I have to love and leverage both of these ways that I'm understood, and therein lies the value and the hue.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
Chris Anderson: Christiane, great to have you here.
So you've had this amazing viewpoint, and perhaps it's fair to say that in the last few years, there have been some alarming developments that you're seeing.
What's alarmed you most?
Christiane Amanpour: Well, just listening to the earlier speakers, I can frame it in what they've been saying: climate change, for instance -- cities, the threat to our environment and our lives.
It basically also boils down to understanding the truth and to be able to get to the truth of what we're talking about in order to really be able to solve it.
So if 99.9 percent of the science on climate is empirical, scientific evidence, but it's competing almost equally with a handful of deniers, that is not the truth; that is the epitome of fake news.
And so for me, the last few years -- certainly this last year -- has crystallized the notion of fake news in a way that's truly alarming and not just some slogan to be thrown around.
Because when you can't distinguish between the truth and fake news, you have a very much more difficult time trying to solve some of the great issues that we face.
CA: Well, you've been involved in this question of, what is balance, what is truth, what is impartiality, for a long time.
You were on the front lines reporting the Balkan Wars 25 years ago.
And back then, you famously said, by calling out human right abuses, you said, "Look, there are some situations one simply cannot be neutral about, because when you're neutral, you are an accomplice."
So, do you feel that today's journalists aren't heeding that advice about balance?
CA: Well, look, I think for journalists, objectivity is the golden rule.
But I think sometimes we don't understand what objectivity means.
And I actually learned this very, very young in my career, which was during the Balkan Wars.
I was young then.
It was about 25 years ago.
And what we faced was the wholesale violation, not just of human rights, but all the way to ethnic cleansing and genocide, and that has been adjudicated in the highest war crimes court in the world.
So, we know what we were seeing.
Trying to tell the world what we were seeing brought us accusations of bias, of siding with one side, of not seeing the whole side, and just, you know, trying to tell one story.
I particularly and personally was accused of siding with, for instance, the citizens of Sarajevo -- "siding with the Muslims," because they were the minority who were being attacked by Christians on the Serb side in this area.
And it worried me.
It worried me that I was being accused of this.
I thought maybe I was wrong, maybe I'd forgotten what objectivity was.
But then I started to understand that what people wanted was actually not to do anything -- not to step in, not to change the situation, not to find a solution.
And so, their fake news at that time, their lie at that time -- including our government's, our democratically elected government's, with values and principles of human rights -- their lie was to say that all sides are equally guilty, that this has been centuries of ethnic hatred, whereas we knew that wasn't true, that one side had decided to kill, slaughter and ethnically cleanse another side.
So that is where, for me, I understood that objectivity means giving all sides an equal hearing and talking to all sides, but not treating all sides equally, not creating a forced moral equivalence or a factual equivalence.
And when you come up against that crisis point in situations of grave violations of international and humanitarian law, if you don't understand what you're seeing, if you don't understand the truth and if you get trapped in the fake news paradigm, then you are an accomplice.
And I refuse to be an accomplice to genocide.
(Applause) CH: So there have always been these propaganda battles, and you were courageous in taking the stand you took back then.
Today, there's a whole new way, though, in which news seems to be becoming fake.
How would you characterize that?
CA: Well, look -- I am really alarmed.
And everywhere I look, you know, we're buffeted by it.
Obviously, when the leader of the free world, when the most powerful person in the entire world, which is the president of the United States -- this is the most important, most powerful country in the whole world, economically, militarily, politically in every which way -- and it seeks to, obviously, promote its values and power around the world.
So we journalists, who only seek the truth -- I mean, that is our mission -- we go around the world looking for the truth in order to be everybody's eyes and ears, people who can't go out in various parts of the world to figure out what's going on about things that are vitally important to everybody's health and security.
So when you have a major world leader accusing you of fake news, it has an exponential ripple effect.
And what it does is, it starts to chip away at not just our credibility, but at people's minds -- people who look at us, and maybe they're thinking, "Well, if the president of the United States says that, maybe somewhere there's a truth in there."
CH: Presidents have always been critical of the media -- CA: Not in this way.
CH: So, to what extent -- (Laughter) (Applause) CH: I mean, someone a couple years ago looking at the avalanche of information pouring through Twitter and Facebook and so forth, might have said, "Look, our democracies are healthier than they've ever been.
There's more news than ever.
Of course presidents will say what they'll say, but everyone else can say what they will say.
What's not to like? How is there an extra danger?"
CA: So, I wish that was true.
I wish that the proliferation of platforms upon which we get our information meant that there was a proliferation of truth and transparency and depth and accuracy.
But I think the opposite has happened.
You know, I'm a little bit of a Luddite, I will confess.
Even when we started to talk about the information superhighway, which was a long time ago, before social media, Twitter and all the rest of it, I was actually really afraid that that would put people into certain lanes and tunnels and have them just focusing on areas of their own interest instead of seeing the broad picture.
And I'm afraid to say that with algorithms, with logarithms, with whatever the "-ithms" are that direct us into all these particular channels of information, that seems to be happening right now.
I mean, people have written about this phenomenon.
People have said that yes, the internet came, its promise was to exponentially explode our access to more democracy, more information, less bias, more varied information.
And, in fact, the opposite has happened.
And so that, for me, is incredibly dangerous.
And again, when you are the president of this country and you say things, it also gives leaders in other undemocratic countries the cover to affront us even worse, and to really whack us -- and their own journalists -- with this bludgeon of fake news.
CH: To what extent is what happened, though, in part, just an unintended consequence, that the traditional media that you worked in had this curation-mediation role, where certain norms were observed, certain stories would be rejected because they weren't credible, but now that the standard for publication and for amplification is just interest, attention, excitement, click, "Did it get clicked on?"
"Send it out there!"
and that's what's -- is that part of what's caused the problem?
CA: I think it's a big problem, and we saw this in the election of 2016, where the idea of "clickbait" was very sexy and very attractive, and so all these fake news sites and fake news items were not just haphazardly and by happenstance being put out there, there's been a whole industry in the creation of fake news in parts of Eastern Europe, wherever, and you know, it's planted in real space and in cyberspace.
So I think that, also, the ability of our technology to proliferate this stuff at the speed of sound or light, just about -- we've never faced that before.
And we've never faced such a massive amount of information which is not curated by those whose profession leads them to abide by the truth, to fact-check and to maintain a code of conduct and a code of professional ethics.
CH: Many people here may know people who work at Facebook or Twitter and Google and so on.
They all seem like great people with good intention -- let's assume that.
If you could speak with the leaders of those companies, what would you say to them?
CA: Well, you know what -- I'm sure they are incredibly well-intentioned, and they certainly developed an unbelievable, game-changing system, where everybody's connected on this thing called Facebook.
And they've created a massive economy for themselves and an amazing amount of income.
I would just say, "Guys, you know, it's time to wake up and smell the coffee and look at what's happening to us right now."
Mark Zuckerberg wants to create a global community.
I want to know: What is that global community going to look like?
I want to know where the codes of conduct actually are.
Mark Zuckerberg said -- and I don't blame him, he probably believed this -- that it was crazy to think that the Russians or anybody else could be tinkering and messing around with this avenue.
And what have we just learned in the last few weeks?
That, actually, there has been a major problem in that regard, and now they're having to investigate it and figure it out.
Yes, they're trying to do what they can now to prevent the rise of fake news, but, you know, it went pretty unrestricted for a long, long time.
So I guess I would say, you know, you guys are brilliant at technology; let's figure out another algorithm.
Can we not?
CH: An algorithm that includes journalistic investigation -- CA: I don't really know how they do it, but somehow, you know -- filter out the crap!
(Laughter) And not just the unintentional -- (Applause) but the deliberate lies that are planted by people who've been doing this as a matter of warfare for decades.
The Soviets, the Russians -- they are the masters of war by other means, of hybrid warfare.
And this is a -- this is what they've decided to do.
It worked in the United States, it didn't work in France, it hasn't worked in Germany.
During the elections there, where they've tried to interfere, the president of France right now, Emmanuel Macron, took a very tough stand and confronted it head on, as did Angela Merkel.
CH: There's some hope to be had from some of this, isn't there?
That the world learns.
We get fooled once, maybe we get fooled again, but maybe not the third time.
Is that true?
CA: I mean, let's hope.
But I think in this regard that so much of it is also about technology, that the technology has to also be given some kind of moral compass.
I know I'm talking nonsense, but you know what I mean.
CH: We need a filter-the-crap algorithm with a moral compass -- CA: There you go.
CH: I think that's good.
CA: No -- "moral technology."
We all have moral compasses -- moral technology.
CH: I think that's a great challenge. CA: You know what I mean.
CH: Talk just a minute about leadership.
You've had a chance to speak with so many people across the world.
I think for some of us -- I speak for myself, I don't know if others feel this -- there's kind of been a disappointment of: Where are the leaders?
So many of us have been disappointed -- Aung San Suu Kyi, what's happened recently, it's like, "No! Another one bites the dust."
You know, it's heartbreaking.
(Laughter) Who have you met who you have been impressed by, inspired by?
CA: Well, you talk about the world in crisis, which is absolutely true, and those of us who spend our whole lives immersed in this crisis -- I mean, we're all on the verge of a nervous breakdown.
So it's pretty stressful right now.
And you're right -- there is this perceived and actual vacuum of leadership, and it's not me saying it, I ask all these -- whoever I'm talking to, I ask about leadership.
I was speaking to the outgoing president of Liberia today, [Ellen Johnson Sirleaf,] who -- (Applause) in three weeks' time, will be one of the very rare heads of an African country who actually abides by the constitution and gives up power after her prescribed term.
She has said she wants to do that as a lesson.
But when I asked her about leadership, and I gave a quick-fire round of certain names, I presented her with the name of the new French president, Emmanuel Macron.
And she said -- I said, "So what do you think when I say his name?"
And she said, "Shaping up potentially to be a leader to fill our current leadership vacuum."
I thought that was really interesting.
Yesterday, I happened to have an interview with him.
I'm very proud to say, I got his first international interview. It was great. It was yesterday.
And I was really impressed.
I don't know whether I should be saying that in an open forum, but I was really impressed.
(Laughter) And it could be just because it was his first interview, but -- I asked questions, and you know what?
He answered them!
(Laughter) (Applause) There was no spin, there was no wiggle and waggle, there was no spend-five-minutes- to-come-back-to-the-point.
I didn't have to keep interrupting, which I've become rather renowned for doing, because I want people to answer the question.
And he answered me, and it was pretty interesting.
And he said -- CH: Tell me what he said.
CA: No, no, you go ahead.
CH: You're the interrupter, I'm the listener.
CA: No, no, go ahead.
CH: What'd he say?
CA: OK. You've talked about nationalism and tribalism here today.
I asked him, "How did you have the guts to confront the prevailing winds of anti-globalization, nationalism, populism when you can see what happened in Brexit, when you could see what happened in the United States and what might have happened in many European elections at the beginning of 2017?"
And he said, "For me, nationalism means war.
We have seen it before, we have lived through it before on my continent, and I am very clear about that."
So he was not going to, just for political expediency, embrace the, kind of, lowest common denominator that had been embraced in other political elections.
And he stood against Marine Le Pen, who is a very dangerous woman.
CH: Last question for you, Christiane.
TED is about ideas worth spreading.
If you could plant one idea into the minds of everyone here, what would that be?
CA: I would say really be careful where you get your information from; really take responsibility for what you read, listen to and watch; make sure that you go to the trusted brands to get your main information, no matter whether you have a wide, eclectic intake, really stick with the brand names that you know, because in this world right now, at this moment right now, our crises, our challenges, our problems are so severe, that unless we are all engaged as global citizens who appreciate the truth, who understand science, empirical evidence and facts, then we are just simply going to be wandering along to a potential catastrophe.
So I would say, the truth, and then I would come back to Emmanuel Macron and talk about love.
I would say that there's not enough love going around.
And I asked him to tell me about love.
I said, "You know, your marriage is the subject of global obsession."
(Laughter) "Can you tell me about love?
What does it mean to you?"
I've never asked a president or an elected leader about love.
I thought I'd try it.
And he said -- you know, he actually answered it.
And he said, "I love my wife, she is part of me, we've been together for decades."
But here's where it really counted, what really stuck with me.
He said, "It is so important for me to have somebody at home who tells me the truth."
So you see, I brought it home. It's all about the truth.
(Laughter) CH: So there you go. Truth and love. Ideas worth spreading.
Christiane Amanpour, thank you so much. That was great.
(Applause) CA: Thank you. CH: That was really lovely.
(Applause) CA: Thank you.
Loki the mischief-maker, was writhing uncomfortably in Thor’s iron grip.
The previous night, while the rest of the gods slept, he’d snuck up on Thor’s wife Sif and shorn off her beautiful hair.
It’d seemed like a funny prank at the time, but now Thor was about to break every bone in his body.
Loki had to think of some way to fix what he’d done.
Yet who could replace Sif’s matchless hair, golden like a field of summer wheat?
The dwarves! – their legendary smiths could make anything.
So Loki rushed to their realm, deep within the mountains of the earth.
Even before he arrived, the wily Loki was already scheming how he would get the dwarves to do his bidding.
He decided that his best bet was to pit two families against each other.
He first visited the masterful sons of Ivaldi.
He told them that their rivals, a pair of brothers named Brokk and Eitri, had claimed that they were the best craftsmen in the world and were determined to prove it in a competition.
The rules were that each family had to create three gifts for the gods, including, for the Ivaldis, golden hair.
Then Loki visited Brokk and Eitri, and told them the same thing, only now claiming that the sons of Ivaldi had issued the challenge.
But Brokk and Eitri couldn’t be fooled so easily, and only agreed to participate if Loki put his own head on the line.
Literally—if Brokk and Eitri won, Loki would forfeit his head to them.
Loki had no choice but to agree, and to save himself had to find a way to make sure the sons of Ivaldi emerged victorious.
Both sets of dwarves got to work.
Eitri set Brokk to man the bellows and told him not to stop for any reason, or the treasures would be ruined.
Soon a strange black fly flew into the room.
As a piece of pigskin was placed in the forge, the fly stung Brokk’s hand, but he didn’t flinch.
Next, while Eitri worked a block of gold, the fly bit Brokk on the neck.
The dwarf carried on.
Finally, Eitri placed a piece of iron in the furnace.
This time the fly landed right on Brokk’s eyelid and bit as hard as it could.
And for just a split second, Brokk’s hand left the bellows.
That’s all it took; their final treasure hadn’t stayed in the fire long enough.
Loki now reappeared in his normal form, overjoyed by their failure, and accompanied the dwarves to present their treasures to the gods.
First, Loki presented the treasures from the sons of Ivaldi.
Their golden hair bound to Sif’s head and continued to grow, leaving her even more radiant than before.
Next, for Odin the all-father, a magnificent spear that could pierce through anything.
And finally a small cloth that unfolded into a mighty ship built for Freyr, god of the harvest.
Then Brokk presented the treasures made by him and his brother.
For Freyr they’d forged a golden-bristled boar who’d pull Freyr’s chariot across the sky faster than any mount.
For Odin, a golden arm ring which would make eight more identical rings on every ninth night.
And for Thor, a hammer called Mjolnir.
Its handle was too short, and Loki smirked at the obvious defect.
But then Brokk revealed its abilities.
Mjolnir would never shatter, never miss its mark and always return to Thor’s hand when thrown.
Despite the short handle, the gods all agreed this was the finest gift of all.
Remembering what was at stake, Loki tried to flee, but Thor reached him first.
But before the dwarves could have their due, clever Loki pointed out that they had won the rights to his head, but not his neck, and thus had no right to cut it.
All begrudgingly admitted the truth in that, but Brokk would have the last laugh.
Taking his brother’s awl, he pierced it through Loki’s lips and sewed his mouth shut, so the trickster god could no longer spread his malicious deceit.
Yet the irony was not lost on the gods.
For it was Loki’s deceit that had brought them these fine treasures and given Thor the hammer for which he’s still known today.
You’ve discovered a doorway to another realm, and now you and your brother are off exploring the wonderful world of Paradoxica.
Fantastically paradoxical creatures crawl, run, and fly around you.
And then you see the troll.
It’s catching all the creatures in an enormous net.
You bravely step forward and demand it let them go.
The troll laughs.
“If you’re such a fan of paradoxes,” it says, “then I’ll make you an offer.
If you say something true, I’ll release all these creatures."
You’re about to say, “You are a troll,” but before you can, the troll grabs your brother.
“If you say something false,” he continues, “then I’ll release your brother."
Your statement can only be a single sentence.
And as you can see, I hate paradoxes more than anything.
If you try to cheat by saying something paradoxical, like, ‘this statement is false,’ then I'll eat your brother and the creatures."
What true/false statement can you say to force the troll to free your brother and the paradoxical creatures?
[Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself!] Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 This seems like an impossible situation, but incredibly, you can say something that will force the troll to release all its prisoners.
This is an example of coercive logic, invented by the great logician and puzzle creator Raymond Smullyan.
The trick Smullyan came up with involves saying a statement whose truth or falseness depends on what you want the troll to do.
Your statement still has to be carefully crafted.
For example, if you were to say, “You are going to free the creatures and my brother,” the troll could respond, “that’s false… I’m only going to free your brother.” Similarly, if you said, “You will free the paradoxes,” the troll could say, “That’s true,” and free the paradoxes.
But watch what happens if you say, “You will free my brother.” The statement can’t be false, because if it were, the troll, by its own rules, would have to free your brother.
That would make the statement paradoxically true and false.
But the troll hates paradoxes and would never willingly create one.
So his only option is for the statement to be true.
If “you will free my brother” is true, then the troll has to release your brother.
And by its own rules, the troll has to free the creatures as well, since you said a true statement.
By wielding just 5 words like a logical scalpel, you’ve forced the troll to free all its prisoners.
As the troll stomps off in anger, the paradoxes cheer you for winning them their freedom, and promise to lead you to the treasure at the top of the stairs.
If you can reach it.
It's 4am, you've been awake for forty hours, when you unlock a puzzle containing this video of some kind of dance-off between a chicken and a roller-skating beaver.
(Laughter) The confusion and delight you're experiencing is a typical moment at the MIT Mystery Hunt, which is basically the Olympics meets Burning Man for a specific type of nerd.
(Laughter) Today, I'm going to take you inside this strange, intellectually masochistic and incredibly joyful world.
But first, I have to explain what I mean when I say "puzzle."
A puzzle-hunt-style puzzle is a data set.
It can be a grid of letters, a sudoku, a video, an audio -- it can be anything that contains hidden information that can eventually resolve into an answer that is a word or a phrase.
So, to give you an example, this is a puzzle called "Master Pieces."
It consists of 10 images of LEGO people looking at piles of LEGOs.
And to save us some time, I'm going to explain what's going on here.
Each of the piles of LEGOs is a deconstructed work of art in the style of a famous artist.
So, does anybody recognize the artist on the left?
They used a lot of red.
I heard "Rothko," yeah.
The second one?
(Audience) Mondrian.
Alex Rosenthal: Yeah, well done.
And the third one? This is the hardest one -- Yeah, Klimt, I heard it.
Well done, the color is the biggest clue there.
So the puzzle has various clues that tell you what matters here are the artists, not the specific works of art.
And what you need to do is then look at what you haven't used yet, which is the number of LEGO people in each painting.
And you can count them and then count into the artists' last names by the same number of letters.
So there's three people in front of the Rothko on the left, so you take the third letter, which is a T.
There's only one in front of the Mondrian, so you take the first letter, M.
And there's three again in front of Klimt, so you take the third letter, I.
You do that for all 10 of the original artists and put them in the order, and you get the answer, which is "illuminate."
(Laughter) Puzzles like this are about communicating an idea.
But where I'm trying to be as clear as possible for you now, puzzles have to navigate the line between abstraction and clarity.
They have to be obtuse enough to make you work for it, but elegant enough so you can get to the aha moment, where everything clicks into place.
Puzzle solvers are junkies for this aha moment -- it feels like a brief high and an instant of pristine clarity.
And there's also a deeper fulfillment at play here, which is that humans are innate problem-solvers.
That's why we love crosswords and escape rooms and figuring out how to explore the bottom of the ocean.
Solving deviously difficult puzzles expands our minds in new directions, and it also helps us come at problems from diverse perspectives.
These puzzles come in various puzzle hunts, which come in various shapes and sizes.
There's one-hour ones designed for novices, 24-hour road rallies, and the puzzle hunt of puzzle hunts, the MIT Mystery Hunt.
This is an event that takes place once a year and has around 2,000 people descending on MIT's campus and solving puzzles in teams that range from a single person to over 100.
My team has 60 people on it -- that includes a national crossword puzzle tournament champion, a particle physicist, a composer, an actual deep-sea explorer, and me, feeling like "Mr. Bean goes to Bletchley Park."
(Laughter) That's actually an apt comparison, because one year involved a puzzle where you had to construct a working Enigma machine out of pieces of cardboard.
(Laughter) Each Mystery Hunt has a theme.
Past ones have included "The Matrix" and "Alice in Wonderland."
It's often pop culture- and literary-based themes.
And the goal is to find the coin that's been hidden somewhere on MIT's campus.
And in order to get there, you have to solve around 150 puzzles and do various events and challenges.
I had done this for about 10 years without ever dreaming of winning, until January of 2016, where 53 hours into a hunt whose theme is the movie "Inception," we haven't slept in days, so everything is hilarious ...
(Laughter) The tables are covered in piles of papers, of our notes and completed puzzles.
The whiteboards are an unintelligible mess of three days' worth of insights.
And we're stuck on two puzzles.
If we could crack them, we would get into the endgame, and after hours of work, in a magical moment, they both fall within 10 seconds of each other, and soon, we're on the final runaround, a series of clues that will lead us to the coin, and we're racing through the halls of MIT, trying not to knock over or terrify tour groups, when we realize we're not alone, there's another team on the runaround as well, and we don't know who's ahead.
So, we're a mess of anxiety, anticipation, exhilaration and sleep deprivation, when we arrive at the Alchemist, a sculpture in which we find ...
this coin.
(Cheers) Yeah.
(Applause) And in claiming it, we win the MIT Mystery Hunt by a tiny margin of five minutes.
What I didn't mention before is that the prize for winning is that you get to construct the whole hunt for the following year.
(Laughter) The punishment for winning is that you have to construct the whole hunt for the following year.
At the beginning of 2016, I had never constructed a puzzle before -- I had solved plenty of puzzles, but constructing and solving are entirely different beasts.
But once again, I was lucky to be on a team full of brilliant mentors and collaborators.
So, from a constructor's point of view, a puzzle is where I have an idea, and instead of telling you what it is, I'm going to leave a trail of breadcrumbs so you can figure it out for yourself, and have the joy and experience of the aha moment.
This is another way of looking at the aha moment.
And what's incredible to me is that this experience, which is very emotional and kind of almost physical, is something that can be carefully designed.
So, to show you what I mean, this is a puzzle I co-constructed with my friend Matt Gruskin.
It's a text adventure, which is the old-school adventure game format, where you're exploring, going north, east, south and west, picking up items and using them.
And you could get to the end of the game part, but you won't have solved the puzzle.
In order to do so, you have to recognize a hidden layer of information, and the easiest way of seeing it is by mapping the game out.
That looks something like this.
Does anybody recognize what this is?
Yeah, exactly.
This text adventure takes place within "Settlers of Catan."
Who here knows what "Settlers" is?
Nerds.
(Laughter) If you don't know, "Settlers" is a board game where you're competing against other people to collect resources and use them to build structures.
And within the text adventure, we hid information in various ways, with which you could reconstruct an entire game.
You could figure out the roads, the cities, the towns, the resources, the numbers on the tiles, even the dice rolls.
You put all that information together and you could extract an answer in a way that's too complicated to explain right now.
(Laughter) But find me afterwards if you really want to know.
(Laughter) But what this puzzle emphasized for me is the value of perspective shifts in inspiring an aha.
So, in this puzzle, you go from experiencing the world on the ground, as a character, to looking down on it from above as if you're playing a board game, and in that shift, you completely reframe all the information you've been given.
The hardest part of construction for me is coming up with a great idea for an aha.
Fortunately, the world is a torrent of ideas and information.
I've seen fantastic puzzles constructed out of the waggle dances of bees, and the remarkable coincidence that the 88 keys of a piano can be perfectly mapped to the 88 constellations in the sky.
Once you find that out, you can't not construct the puzzle, and it's going to be about having the solvers make that connection in their own minds.
Whether you give them stars on a keyboard or play the celestial music of the cosmos, you're getting them there, one way or another.
Before long, you find yourself staring at a turtle, and asking yourself, "Is this a puzzle?"
(Laughter) And also, staring at a turtle and saying, "I never appreciated what multitudes this contains in its shell alone."
This might be a familiar experience to you, if you've ever been watching a TED Talk and asked yourself, "Is this a puzzle?"
(Laughter) I'm not telling.
But what I will say is that puzzles can be found in the most unexpected of places.
That brings us back to one of my favorite puzzles of all time, which was constructed by Trip Payne.
And this time, I'm going to play it for you with the sound on, so get ready to name that tune.
(Slowed-down mock clucking) (Slowed-down mock clucking) (Slowed-down mock clucking) (Laughter) Who knows what that is?
Yeah, "You Make Me Feel Like a Natural Woman."
(Laughter) So you can identify that and seven other songs and clips, and then look at the videos themselves for clues, where the way that they are filmed and edited together plus things like the cutaways to the panel of five people sitting at a table, which is reminiscent of a panel of judges, all of this can suggest "reality competition show."
And either through internet research, or from just recognizing this, you can get to the aha, which is that these clips are shot-for-shot recreations of lip-synch battles from "RuPaul's Drag Race."
(Laughter) So, why do we do this?
(Laughter) (Applause) You tell me, I don't know.
So, first of all, it's really fun.
But I think it also improves our lives in various ways.
Being able to solve puzzles, when I'm confronted with a challenge, has allowed me to explore it from multiple perspectives before I lock in an approach.
Also, the process of solving is great training for working with a team, knowing when to listen, when to share, and how to recognize and celebrate insight and being able to construct ahas is a very powerful tool.
Think of how powerful and exciting and convincing an idea is that comes from your own mind, where you make all the connections yourself.
So in January of 2017, after tens of thousands of hours of work, we finally run our Mystery Hunt.
And it's a different sort of satisfaction than the quick high of an aha moment.
Instead, it's the slow burn of saying something through perplexing abstraction, yet being understood.
And when it was all over, in our exhaustion, we turned to each other and the world, and we said, "We're never doing this again. It's too much work.
It's really fun, but no more winning."
One year later, in January of 2018, we won the MIT Mystery Hunt again.
(Laughter) So, we're currently I don't know how many tens of thousands of hours of work in, and we're two months out from the 2019 Hunt.
So, thank you for listening, I have to go write a puzzle.
(Laughter) (Applause)
Let's play a game.
Imagine that you are in Las Vegas, in a casino, and you decide to play a game on one of the casino's computers, just like you might play solitaire or chess.
The computer can make moves in the game, just like a human player.
This is a coin game.
It starts with a coin showing heads, and the computer will play first.
It can choose to flip the coin or not, but you don't get to see the outcome.
Next, it's your turn.
You can also choose to flip the coin or not, and your move will not be revealed to your opponent, the computer.
Finally, the computer plays again, and can flip the coin or not, and after these three rounds, the coin is revealed, and if it is heads, the computer wins, if it's tails, you win.
So it's a pretty simple game, and if everybody plays honestly, and the coin is fair, then you have a 50 percent chance of winning this game.
And to confirm that, I asked my students to play this game on our computers, and after many, many tries, their winning rate ended up being 50 percent, or close to 50 percent, as expected.
Sounds like a boring game, right?
But what if you could play this game on a quantum computer?
Now, Las Vegas casinos do not have quantum computers, as far as I know, but IBM has built a working quantum computer.
Here it is.
But what is a quantum computer?
Well, quantum physics describes the behavior of atoms and fundamental particles, like electrons and photons.
So a quantum computer operates by controlling the behavior of these particles, but in a way that is completely different from our regular computers.
So a quantum computer is not just a more powerful version of our current computers, just like a light bulb is not a more powerful candle.
You cannot build a light bulb by building better and better candles.
A light bulb is a different technology, based on deeper scientific understanding.
Similarly, a quantum computer is a new kind of device, based on the science of quantum physics, and just like a light bulb transformed society, quantum computers have the potential to impact so many aspects of our lives, including our security needs, our health care and even the internet.
So companies all around the world are working to build these devices, and to see what the excitement is all about, let's play our game on a quantum computer.
So I can log into IBM's quantum computer from right here, which means I can play the game remotely, and so can you.
To make this happen, you may remember getting an email ahead of time, from TED, asking you whether you would choose to flip the coin or not, if you played the game.
Well, actually, we asked you to choose between a circle or a square.
You didn't know it, but your choice of circle meant "flip the coin," and your choice of square was "don't flip."
We received 372 responses.
Thank you.
That means we can play 372 games against the quantum computer using your choices.
And it's a pretty fast game to play, so I can show you the results right here.
Unfortunately, you didn't do very well.
(Laughter) The quantum computer won almost every game.
It lost a few only because of operational errors in the computer.
(Laughter) So how did it achieve this amazing winning streak?
It seems like magic or cheating, but actually, it's just quantum physics in action.
Here's how it works.
A regular computer simulates heads or tails of a coin as a bit, a zero or a one, or a current flipping on and off inside your computer chip.
A quantum computer is completely different.
A quantum bit has a more fluid, nonbinary identity.
It can exist in a superposition, or a combination of zero and one, with some probability of being zero and some probability of being one.
In other words, its identity is on a spectrum.
For example, it could have a 70 percent chance of being zero and a 30 percent chance of being one or 80-20 or 60-40.
The possibilities are endless.
The key idea here is that we have to give up on precise values of zero and one and allow for some uncertainty.
So during the game, the quantum computer creates this fluid combination of heads and tails, zero and one, so that no matter what the player does, flip or no flip, the superposition remains intact.
It's kind of like stirring a mixture of two fluids.
Whether or not you stir, the fluids remain in a mixture, but in its final move, the quantum computer can unmix the zero and one, perfectly recovering heads so that you lose every time.
(Laughter) If you think this is all a bit weird, you are absolutely right.
Regular coins do not exist in combinations of heads and tails.
We do not experience this fluid quantum reality in our everyday lives.
So if you are confused by quantum, don't worry, you're getting it.
(Laughter) But even though we don't experience quantum strangeness, we can see its very real effects in action.
You've seen the data for yourself.
The quantum computer won because it harnessed superposition and uncertainty, and these quantum properties are powerful, not just to win coin games, but also to build future quantum technologies.
So let me give you three examples of potential applications that could change our lives.
First of all, quantum uncertainty could be used to create private keys for encrypting messages sent from one location to another so that hackers could not secretly copy the key perfectly, because of quantum uncertainty.
They would have to break the laws of quantum physics to hack the key.
So this kind of unbreakable encryption is already being tested by banks and other institutions worldwide.
Today, we use more than 17 billion connected devices globally.
Just imagine the impact quantum encryption could have in the future.
Secondly, quantum technologies could also transform health care and medicine.
For example, the design and analysis of molecules for drug development is a challenging problem today, and that's because exactly describing and calculating all of the quantum properties of all the atoms in the molecule is a computationally difficult task, even for our supercomputers.
But a quantum computer could do better, because it operates using the same quantum properties as the molecule it's trying to simulate.
So future large-scale quantum simulations for drug development could perhaps lead to treatments for diseases like Alzheimer's, which affects thousands of lives.
And thirdly, my favorite quantum application is teleportation of information from one location to another without physically transmitting the information.
Sounds like sci-fi, but it is possible, because these fluid identities of the quantum particles can get entangled across space and time in such a way that when you change something about one particle, it can impact the other, and that creates a channel for teleportation.
It's already been demonstrated in research labs and could be part of a future quantum internet.
We don't have such a network as yet, but my team is working on these possibilities, by simulating a quantum network on a quantum computer.
So we have designed and implemented some interesting new protocols such as teleportation among different users in the network and efficient data transmission and even secure voting.
So it's a lot of fun for me, being a quantum physicist.
I highly recommend it.
(Laughter) We get to be explorers in a quantum wonderland.
Who knows what applications we will discover next.
We must tread carefully and responsibly as we build our quantum future.
And for me, personally, I don't see quantum physics as a tool just to build quantum computers.
I see quantum computers as a way for us to probe the mysteries of nature and reveal more about this hidden world outside of our experiences.
How amazing that we humans, with our relatively limited access to the universe, can still see far beyond our horizons just using our imagination and our ingenuity.
And the universe rewards us by showing us how incredibly interesting and surprising it is.
The future is fundamentally uncertain, and to me, that is certainly exciting.
Thank you.
(Applause)
From the smallest single-celled organism to the largest creatures on earth, every living thing is defined by its genes.
The DNA contained in our genes acts like an instruction manual for our cells.
Four building blocks called bases are strung together in precise sequences, which tell the cell how to behave and form the basis for our every trait.
But with recent advancements in gene editing tools, scientists can change an organism’s fundamental features in record time.
They can engineer drought-resistant crops and create apples that don’t brown.
They might even prevent the spread of infectious outbreaks and develop cures for genetic diseases.
CRISPR is the fastest, easiest, and cheapest of the gene editing tools responsible for this new wave of science.
But where did this medical marvel come from?
How does it work?
And what can it do?
Surprisingly, CRISPR is actually a natural process that’s long functioned as a bacterial immune system.
Originally found defending single-celled bacteria and archaea against invading viruses, naturally occurring CRISPR uses two main components.
The first are short snippets of repetitive DNA sequences called “clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats,” or simply, CRISPRs.
The second are Cas, or “CRISPR-associated” proteins which chop up DNA like molecular scissors.
When a virus invades a bacterium, Cas proteins cut out a segment of the viral DNA to stitch into the bacterium’s CRISPR region, capturing a chemical snapshot of the infection.
Those viral codes are then copied into short pieces of RNA.
This molecule plays many roles in our cells, but in the case of CRISPR, RNA binds to a special protein called Cas9.
The resulting complexes act like scouts, latching onto free-floating genetic material and searching for a match to the virus.
If the virus invades again, the scout complex recognizes it immediately, and Cas9 swiftly destroys the viral DNA.
Lots of bacteria have this type of defense mechanism.
But in 2012, scientists figured out how to hijack CRISPR to target not just viral DNA, but any DNA in almost any organism.
With the right tools, this viral immune system becomes a precise gene-editing tool, which can alter DNA and change specific genes almost as easily as fixing a typo.
Here’s how it works in the lab: scientists design a “guide” RNA to match the gene they want to edit, and attach it to Cas9.
Like the viral RNA in the CRISPR immune system, the guide RNA directs Cas9 to the target gene, and the protein’s molecular scissors snip the DNA.
This is the key to CRISPR’s power: just by injecting Cas9 bound to a short piece of custom guide RNA scientists can edit practically any gene in the genome.
Once the DNA is cut, the cell will try to repair it.
Typically, proteins called nucleases trim the broken ends and join them back together.
But this type of repair process, called nonhomologous end joining, is prone to mistakes and can lead to extra or missing bases.
The resulting gene is often unusable and turned off.
However, if scientists add a separate sequence of template DNA to their CRISPR cocktail, cellular proteins can perform a different DNA repair process, called homology directed repair.
This template DNA is used as a blueprint to guide the rebuilding process, repairing a defective gene or even inserting a completely new one.
The ability to fix DNA errors means that CRISPR could potentially create new treatments for diseases linked to specific genetic errors, like cystic fibrosis or sickle cell anemia.
And since it’s not limited to humans, the applications are almost endless.
CRISPR could create plants that yield larger fruit, mosquitoes that can’t transmit malaria, or even reprogram drug-resistant cancer cells.
It’s also a powerful tool for studying the genome, allowing scientists to watch what happens when genes are turned off or changed within an organism.
CRISPR isn’t perfect yet.
It doesn’t always make just the intended changes, and since it’s difficult to predict the long-term implications of a CRISPR edit, this technology raises big ethical questions.
It’s up to us to decide the best course forward as CRISPR leaves single-celled organisms behind and heads into labs, farms, hospitals, and organisms around the world.
On May 27th, 1941, the German battleship Bismarck sank in a fierce firefight, leaving only 118 of her 2,200 crew members alive.
But when a British destroyer came to collect the prisoners, they found an unexpected survivor - a black and white cat clinging to a floating plank.
For the next several months this cat hunted rats and raised British morale - until a sudden torpedo strike shattered the hull and sank the ship.
But, miraculously, not the cat.
Nicknamed Unsinkable Sam, he rode to Gibraltar with the rescued crew and served as a ship cat on three more vessels – one of which also sank - before retiring to the Belfast Home for Sailors.
Many may not think of cats as serviceable sailors, or cooperative companions of any kind.
But cats have been working alongside humans for thousands of years - helping us just as often as we help them.
So how did these solitary creatures go from wild predator to naval officer to sofa sidekick?
The domestication of the modern house cat can be traced back to more than 10,000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent, at the start of the Neolithic era.
People were learning to bend nature to their will, producing much more food than farmers could eat at one time.
These Neolithic farmers stored their excess grain in large pits and short, clay silos.
But these stores of food attracted hordes of rodents, as well as their predator, Felis silvestris lybica - the wildcat found across North Africa and Southwest Asia.
These wildcats were fast, fierce, carnivorous hunters.
And they were remarkably similar in size and appearance to today’s domestic cats.
The main differences being that ancient wildcats were more muscular, had striped coats, and were less social towards other cats and humans.
The abundance of prey in rodent-infested granaries drew in these typically solitary animals.
And as the wildcats learned to tolerate the presence of humans and other cats during mealtime, we think that farmers likewise tolerated the cats in exchange for free pest control.
The relationship was so beneficial that the cats migrated with Neolithic farmers from Anatolia into Europe and the Mediterranean.
Vermin were a major scourge of the seven seas.
They ate provisions and gnawed at lines of rope, so cats had long since become essential sailing companions.
Around the same time these Anatolian globe trotting cats set sail, the Egyptians domesticated their own local cats.
Revered for their ability to dispatch venomous snakes, catch birds, and kill rats, domestic cats became important to Egyptian religious culture.
They gained immortality in frescos, hieroglyphs, statues, and even tombs, mummified alongside their owners.
Egyptian ship cats cruised the Nile, holding poisonous river snakes at bay.
And after graduating to larger vessels, they too began to migrate from port to port.
During the time of the Roman Empire, ships traveling between India and Egypt carried the lineage of the central Asian wildcat F. s. ornata.
Centuries later, in the Middle Ages, Egyptian cats voyaged up to the Baltic Sea on the ships of Viking seafarers.
And both the Near Eastern and North African wildcats – probably tamed at this point -- continued to travel across Europe, eventually setting sail for Australia and the Americas.
Today, most house cats have descended from either the Near Eastern or the Egyptian lineage of F.s.lybica.
But close analysis of the genomes and coat patterns of modern cats tells us that unlike dogs, which have undergone centuries of selective breeding, modern cats are genetically very similar to ancient cats.
And apart from making them more social and docile, we’ve done little to alter their natural behaviors.
In other words, cats today are more or less as they’ve always been: Wild animals.
Fierce hunters. Creatures that don’t see us as their keepers.
And given our long history together, they might not be wrong.
Paula Stone Williams: So, I was the CEO of a large, religious nonprofit, spoke at some of the largest churches in America, was on television in 70 different markets, but more than anything else, I just wanted to be a good parent.
I told all three of my children, "When the going gets tough, you have to choose the road less traveled, the narrow path."
I had no idea how difficult that was going to become.
I knew from the time I was three or four years of age that I was transgender.
I knew if I came out, I would lose everything.
But the call toward authenticity is sacred and for the greater good, and it asks you to trust that the truth not only sets you free, it will set everyone free.
I decided to stake my life on it.
So I came out.
Turns out, if you spend most of your life working in the conservative religious world, coming out as transgender is not all that great for your career.
(Laughter) Who knew?
(Laughter) Within seven days, I lost every single one of my jobs.
My family was supportive but struggling.
Most of my friends and coworkers had rejected me; the rest were confused.
One friend said, "You really messed with me."
I said, "Yeah, well, get in line."
They said, "You were my only example of an alpha male who was gentle."
And I thought, "Oh. You're right."
I was an alpha male.
And I was gentle.
And if it was hard for him, how much more difficult was it for my own son?
Jonathan Williams: Estrangement was not an option.
It was Father's Day and my girls brought me craft beer and a homemade jar of pickles, which, in my estimation, is the perfect Father's Day gift.
(Laughter) But the question remained: Do I call my own father?
To call him, and I continue down this spiral of denial, pretending that my dad was still -- well, my dad.
To not call was to acknowledge that everything had changed.
It meant that I was in for years of pain and mourning and sadness, but ultimately, hope for reconciliation.
There's no playbook for when one's father of 30 plus years decides to transition to the female gender.
But my dad did teach me one thing.
He said the road to redemption always comes from choosing the narrow path.
And so I decided not to call that day, and a few months later, Paula flew out and met me at a hotel in New York, my wife and I.
I knocked on the door, and this woman answered.
It definitely wasn't my dad.
"It's good to see you," she said.
It didn't sound like my dad, either.
We went to lunch, and the waiter came to take our order.
He said, "Let's start with the ladies," but there was only one lady at the table and it was my wife, and -- oh my God, there are two women at the table.
And my dad ordered something like lettuce, and I was like, I have fries on my plate.
Did my dad like fries? I don't remember.
I think he liked them.
But she wasn't eating them.
Here's this woman who knew everything about me, and I knew nothing about her.
I don't even remember saying goodbye.
PSW: All I could think about that day was that it was late September in New York, and I was wearing white jeans.
(Laughter) You don't wear white after Labor Day in New York.
There was a knock at the door, and all I could think about was, here I stand in my wrong jeans.
And then I saw these big, blue eyes I love so much, and they were staring back at me in disbelief.
And I thought, "Oh, this is not going to be easy."
When one person in a family transitions, the entire family transitions whether they want to or not.
Now, for those on the fringes it was easy.
The liberals said, "Oh, wonderful!
She's found her truth, how delightful."
And the conservatives said, "That's messed up, I'm out of here."
(Laughter) But for my family, neither extreme was going to work.
Their anger, their hurt, their love and loyalty -- all of it had to be brought on to the road of trials.
JW: Was it all a lie?
Every game of catch in the front yard, the Mets season tickets -- was that with my dad or was that with her?
I remember this one time, my dad took me on a bike ride through Heckscher Park to teach me about sex.
He explained the parts of the body that I now know he wished weren't hers.
Had my father ever even existed?
Now, grief -- grief is without rules.
Grief borrows your car without asking, wrecks it and then doesn't apologize.
And I was a wreck.
This was heavy.
I retreated into myself.
I was angry.
I felt betrayed.
And I guess I should have known by the fact that you encouraged me to be a Mets fan that you were preparing me for life's really big disappointments.
(Laughter) That's true.
And yet, there were the games of catch, and there were the season tickets and bacon, egg and cheese sandwiches every Saturday from the best bagel place on Long Island.
My father lived this life he didn't want to live, but he lived it so that I could have a dad.
I stopped wondering if my dad had ever existed.
He had existed -- willfully, consciously, intentionally -- each and every day of my growing up.
For that, I was thankful.
Paula's body was hers now and her transformation was complete, but my transformation was just beginning.
I had another trial, another journey, another choice to heed my father's advice and continue down that narrow path.
PSW: So most days I believe there is a God.
Tuesdays and Thursdays can be tough, and any day that you're on the New Jersey Turnpike.
I mean, really, you know?
(Laughter) It's hard to believe in God when your soul is in the wrong body.
Still, somehow I ended up in ministry.
When I lost all my jobs, it was nothing personal.
It's what religious tribes do.
They believe an enemy is necessary for the tribe to survive, so where no enemy exists, they create one.
Right now, sexual minorities are the enemy; my departure was swift and sure.
I was surprised when my son left his job teaching in West Philadelphia to go into the ministry.
I did not see that one coming.
And now I wondered: What would he do?
I didn't have to wait that long to find an answer.
Six months after that first visit, he invited me back to New York.
JW: The designers of the Brooklyn Bridge, they had their share of bad luck.
John Roebling, he died shortly after the bridge's construction began.
His son Washington took over, but he suffered from decompression sickness.
His wife Emily became the surrogate executive engineer who oversaw the bridge's completion.
Father and son, John and Washington, done in by their work.
It was this sunny day in May and my father and I sat in the shadow of that Brooklyn Bridge.
Would our lives follow the Roeblings' -- father and son, done in by our work?
My father thought that her friends in church would carry her through her transition, and they did not.
They ditched her and they clung to me.
I was the pastor of a new church in Brooklyn.
This wonderful group of forward-thinking people, and yet, we were financially tied to really conservative churches.
To hold space for Paula meant jeopardizing our own church's livelihood.
I sort of straddled the line between these warring worlds.
So I said to my dad, "Dad, I still live and work in your old world.
Is it possible that you might extend an olive branch for my sake?"
And her response was impassioned.
You said to me, "Do you have any idea what it feels like to finally show yourself to your true friends and have them completely reject you?
To ask you to live a lie?
Do you know what that feels like?"
And I didn't know what that felt like.
But I knew I had a decision to make.
It was the decision to continue down that narrow path through nights, but for the first time, I caught a glimpse of light.
I cannot ask my father to be anything other than her true self.
(Applause) PSW: So as we sat by the river that day, Jonathan talked about his pain, his suffering, his grief, his confusion.
He brought all of himself to that conversation, and it tore at me to be the cause of such pain.
But as he talked, there was something redemptive going on, full of tension but possibility, grounded in that narrow path.
He said, "This is always going to be hard.
It always will be.
But Dad, I love you."
My son is the best of me and more.
He's bold and strong, sensitive and thoughtful.
I guess you could say, he's an alpha male who's gentle.
JW: It was time for my daughters to meet their -- Paula.
We went back to my apartment, and my daughters were coloring at the dining room table, and there was this awkward silence.
And finally, my youngest asked a single, confident question.
"So, Grandpa, do you have a penis?"
(Laughter) And after the tension abated and the laughter subsided, my girls took their grandpa back into their room and showed her their new toys, and they christened her with a new name.
They called her "GrandPaula."
(Laughter) PSW: So this past summer, I had all five of my granddaughters at my home, there in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains.
We went swimming in the cool waters of the river that flows through our little town.
And one day, one of Jonathan's girls said to me, "GrandPaula, can we go tubing on the river?"
And I said, "Well, you know, I'd really wait until your daddy gets here for that.
That feels to me like that ought to be his call."
And she said, "Oh, but GrandPaula, he'll exactly make the same decision you would.
He's a lot like you, you know."
(Laughter) And I thought, yeah, he is a lot like me, both of us determined to find the narrow path and follow it through the long, dark night, all the way to the light of dawn.
JW: Have you ever noticed that a child who is secure, a child who knows love, that child will dance?
They wave their arms, they kick their legs to music that only they can hear.
It's the music of a child who is safe and unharmed and wholly loved.
The day after my children met their GrandPaula, she took them to go get doughnuts, and I watched as they walked down the street, and my girls took my father's arms, and they danced.
My father's arms swung wildly.
You bought them one too many doughnuts, because you always do -- (Laughter) I watched my older daughter take a bite of her doughnut, and she unleashed two jumps and a twirl.
It was perfect.
That narrow path, it always has its share of burdens and challenges.
But I was certain that we were going to see this through to redemption.
I looked at my dad and I looked at my girls who were dancing and eating their doughnuts, and I said aloud to no one in particular, I said, "This ...
this is how God sees my dad."
My father was literally born again.
And by choosing the narrow path of redemption, I was born again with her.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
How will we be remembered in 200 years?
I happen to live in a little town, Princeton, in New Jersey, which every year celebrates the great event in Princeton history: the Battle of Princeton, which was, in fact, a very important battle.
It was the first battle that George Washington won, in fact, and was pretty much of a turning point in the war of independence.
It happened 225 years ago.
It was actually a terrible disaster for Princeton.
The town was burned down; it was in the middle of winter, and it was a very, very severe winter.
And about a quarter of all the people in Princeton died that winter from hunger and cold, but nobody remembers that.
What they remember is, of course, the great triumph, that the Brits were beaten, and we won, and that the country was born.
And so I agree very emphatically that the pain of childbirth is not remembered.
It's the child that's remembered.
And that's what we're going through at this time.
I wanted to just talk for one minute about the future of biotechnology, because I think I know very little about that -- I'm not a biologist -- so everything I know about it can be said in one minute.
(Laughter) What I'm saying is that we should follow the model that has been so successful with the electronic industry, that what really turned computers into a great success, in the world as a whole, is toys. As soon as computers became toys, when kids could come home and play with them, then the industry really took off. And that has to happen with biotech.
There's a huge -- (Laughter) (Applause) -- there's a huge community of people in the world who are practical biologists, who are dog breeders, pigeon breeders, orchid breeders, rose breeders, people who handle biology with their hands, and who are dedicated to producing beautiful things, beautiful creatures, plants, animals, pets. These people will be empowered with biotech, and that will be an enormous positive step to acceptance of biotechnology.
That will blow away a lot of the opposition.
When people have this technology in their hands, you have a do-it-yourself biotech kit, grow your own -- grow your dog, grow your own cat.
(Laughter) (Applause) Just buy the software, you design it. I won't say anymore, you can take it on from there. It's going to happen, and I think it has to happen before the technology becomes natural, becomes part of the human condition, something that everybody's familiar with and everybody accepts.
So, let's leave that aside.
I want to talk about something quite different, which is what I know about, and that is astronomy.
And I'm interested in searching for life in the universe.
And it's open to us to introduce a new way of doing that, and that's what I'll talk about for 10 minutes, or whatever the time remains.
The important fact is, that most of the real estate that's accessible to us -- I'm not talking about the stars, I'm talking about the solar system, the stuff that's within reach for spacecraft and within reach of our earthbound telescopes -- most of the real estate is very cold and very far from the Sun.
If you look at the solar system, as we know it today, it has a few planets close to the Sun. That's where we live.
It has a fairly substantial number of asteroids between the orbit of the Earth out through -- to the orbit of Jupiter.
The asteroids are a substantial amount of real estate, but not very large. And it's not very promising for life, since most of it consists of rock and metal, mostly rock.
It's not only cold, but very dry.
So the asteroids we don't have much hope for.
There stand some interesting places a little further out: the moons of Jupiter and Saturn.
Particularly, there's a place called Europa, which is -- Europa is one of the moons of Jupiter, where we see a very level ice surface, which looks as if it's floating on top of an ocean.
So, we believe that on Europa there is, in fact, a deep ocean.
And that makes it extraordinarily interesting as a place to explore.
Ocean -- probably the most likely place for life to originate, just as it originated on the Earth. So we would love to explore Europa, to go down through the ice, find out who is swimming around in the ocean, whether there are fish or seaweed or sea monsters -- whatever there may be that's exciting --- or cephalopods.
But that's hard to do. Unfortunately, the ice is thick.
We don't know just how thick it is, probably miles thick, so it's very expensive and very difficult to go down there -- send down your submarine or whatever it is -- and explore.
That's something we don't yet know how to do.
There are plans to do it, but it's hard.
Go out a bit further, you'll find that beyond the orbit of Neptune, way out, far from the Sun, that's where the real estate really begins.
You'll find millions or trillions or billions of objects which, in what we call the Kuiper Belt or the Oort Cloud -- these are clouds of small objects which appear as comets when they fall close to the Sun. Mostly, they just live out there in the cold of the outer solar system, but they are biologically very interesting indeed, because they consist primarily of ice with other minerals, which are just the right ones for developing life.
So if life could be established out there, it would have all the essentials -- chemistry and sunlight -- everything that's needed.
So, what I'm proposing is that there is where we should be looking for life, rather than on Mars, although Mars is, of course, also a very promising and interesting place.
But we can look outside, very cheaply and in a simple fashion.
And that's what I'm going to talk about.
There is a -- imagine that life originated on Europa, and it was sitting in the ocean for billions of years.
It's quite likely that it would move out of the ocean onto the surface, just as it did on the Earth.
Staying in the ocean and evolving in the ocean for 2 billion years, finally came out onto the land. And then of course it had great -- much greater freedom, and a much greater variety of creatures developed on the land than had ever been possible in the ocean.
And the step from the ocean to the land was not easy, but it happened.
Now, if life had originated on Europa in the ocean, it could also have moved out onto the surface.
There wouldn't have been any air there -- it's a vacuum.
It is out in the cold, but it still could have come.
You can imagine that the plants growing up like kelp through cracks in the ice, growing on the surface.
What would they need in order to grow on the surface?
They'd need, first of all, to have a thick skin to protect themselves from losing water through the skin.
So they would have to have something like a reptilian skin.
But better -- what is more important is that they would have to concentrate sunlight.
The sunlight in Jupiter, on the satellites of Jupiter, is 25 times fainter than it is here, since Jupiter is five times as far from the Sun.
So they would have to have -- these creatures, which I call sunflowers, which I imagine living on the surface of Europa, would have to have either lenses or mirrors to concentrate sunlight, so they could keep themselves warm on the surface.
Otherwise, they would be at a temperature of minus 150, which is certainly not favorable for developing life, at least of the kind we know.
But if they just simply could grow, like leaves, little lenses and mirrors to concentrate sunlight, then they could keep warm on the surface.
They could enjoy all the benefits of the sunlight and have roots going down into the ocean; life then could flourish much more.
So, why not look? Of course, it's not very likely that there's life on the surface of Europa.
None of these things is likely, but my, my philosophy is, look for what's detectable, not for what's probable.
There's a long history in astronomy of unlikely things turning out to be there. And I mean, the finest example of that was radio astronomy as a whole.
This was -- originally, when radio astronomy began, Mr. Jansky, at the Bell labs, detected radio waves coming from the sky.
And the regular astronomers were scornful about this.
They said, "It's all right, you can detect radio waves from the Sun, but the Sun is the only object in the universe that's close enough and bright enough actually to be detectable. You can easily calculate that radio waves from the Sun are fairly faint, and everything else in the universe is millions of times further away, so it certainly will not be detectable.
So there's no point in looking."
And that, of course, that set back the progress of radio astronomy by about 20 years.
Since there was nothing there, you might as well not look.
Well, of course, as soon as anybody did look, which was after about 20 years, when radio astronomy really took off. Because it turned out the universe is absolutely full of all kinds of wonderful things radiating in the radio spectrum, much brighter than the Sun.
So, the same thing could be true for this kind of life, which I'm talking about, on cold objects: that it could in fact be very abundant all over the universe, and it's not been detected just because we haven't taken the trouble to look.
So, the last thing I want to talk about is how to detect it.
There is something called pit lamping.
That's the phrase which I learned from my son George, who is there in the audience.
You take -- that's a Canadian expression.
If you happen to want to hunt animals at night, you take a miner's lamp, which is a pit lamp.
You strap it onto your forehead, so you can see the reflection in the eyes of the animal. So, if you go out at night, you shine a flashlight, the animals are bright.
You see the red glow in their eyes, which is the reflection of the flashlight.
And then, if you're one of these unsporting characters, you shoot the animals and take them home.
And of course, that spoils the game for the other hunters who hunt in the daytime, so in Canada that's illegal. In New Zealand, it's legal, because the New Zealand farmers use this as a way of getting rid of rabbits, because the rabbits compete with the sheep in New Zealand.
So, the farmers go out at night with heavily armed jeeps, and shine the headlights, and anything that doesn't look like a sheep, you shoot.
(Laughter) So I have proposed to apply the same trick to looking for life in the universe.
That if these creatures who are living on cold surfaces -- either on Europa, or further out, anywhere where you can live on a cold surface -- those creatures must be provided with reflectors.
In order to concentrate sunlight, they have to have lenses and mirrors -- in order to keep themselves warm.
And then, when you shine sunlight at them, the sunlight will be reflected back, just as it is in the eyes of an animal.
So these creatures will be bright against the cold surroundings.
And the further out you go in this, away from the Sun, the more powerful this reflection will be. So actually, this method of hunting for life gets stronger and stronger as you go further away, because the optical reflectors have to be more powerful so the reflected light shines out even more in contrast against the dark background.
So as you go further away from the Sun, this becomes more and more powerful.
So, in fact, you can look for these creatures with telescopes from the Earth.
Why aren't we doing it? Simply because nobody thought of it yet.
But I hope that we shall look, and with any -- we probably won't find anything, none of these speculations may have any basis in fact.
But still, it's a good chance. And of course, if it happens, it will transform our view of life altogether.
Because it means that -- the way life can live out there, it has enormous advantages as compared with living on a planet.
It's extremely hard to move from one planet to another.
We're having great difficulties at the moment and any creatures that live on a planet are pretty well stuck.
Especially if you breathe air, it's very hard to get from planet A to planet B, because there's no air in between. But if you breathe air -- (Laughter) -- you're dead -- (Laughter) -- as soon as you're off the planet, unless you have a spaceship.
But if you live in a vacuum, if you live on the surface of one of these objects, say, in the Kuiper Belt, this -- an object like Pluto, or one of the smaller objects in the neighborhood of Pluto, and you happened -- if you're living on the surface there, and you get knocked off the surface by a collision, then it doesn't change anything all that much.
You still are on a piece of ice, you can still have sunlight and you can still survive while you're traveling from one place to another.
And then if you run into another object, you can stay there and colonize the other object. So life will spread, then, from one object to another. So if it exists at all in the Kuiper Belt, it's likely to be very widespread. And you will have then a great competition amongst species -- Darwinian evolution -- so there'll be a huge advantage to the species which is able to jump from one place to another without having to wait for a collision. And there'll be advantages for spreading out long, sort of kelp-like forest of vegetation.
I call these creatures sunflowers.
They look like, maybe like sunflowers.
They have to be all the time pointing toward the Sun, and they will be able to spread out in space, because gravity on these objects is weak.
So they can collect sunlight from a big area.
So they will, in fact, be quite easy for us to detect.
So, I hope in the next 10 years, we'll find these creatures, and then, of course, our whole view of life in the universe will change.
If we don't find them, then we can create them ourselves.
(Laughter) That's another wonderful opportunity that's opening.
We can -- as soon as we have a little bit more understanding of genetic engineering, one of the things you can do with your take-it-home, do-it-yourself genetic engineering kit -- (Laughter) -- is to design a creature that can live on a cold satellite, a place like Europa, so we could colonize Europa with our own creatures.
That would be a fun thing to do.
(Laughter) In the long run, of course, it would also make it possible for us to move out there.
What's going to happen in the end, it's not going to be just humans colonizing space, it's going to be life moving out from the Earth, moving it into its kingdom. And the kingdom of life, of course, is going to be the universe. And if life is already there, it makes it much more exciting, in the short run.
But in the long run, if there's no life there, we create it ourselves.
We transform the universe into something much more rich and beautiful than it is today.
So again, we have a big and wonderful future to look forward.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I and my colleagues Art Aron and Lucy Brown and others, have put 37 people who are madly in love into a functional MRI brain scanner.
17 who were happily in love, 15 who had just been dumped, and we're just starting our third experiment: studying people who report that they're still in love after 10 to 25 years of marriage.
So, this is the short story of that research.
In the jungles of Guatemala, in Tikal, stands a temple.
It was built by the grandest Sun King, of the grandest city-state, of the grandest civilization of the Americas, the Mayas.
His name was Jasaw Chan K'awiil.
He stood over six feet tall.
He lived into his 80s, and he was buried beneath this monument in 720 AD.
And Mayan inscriptions proclaim that he was deeply in love with his wife.
So, he built a temple in her honor, facing his.
And every spring and autumn, exactly at the equinox, the sun rises behind his temple, and perfectly bathes her temple with his shadow.
And as the sun sets behind her temple in the afternoon, it perfectly bathes his temple with her shadow.
After 1,300 years, these two lovers still touch and kiss from their tomb.
Around the world, people love.
They sing for love, they dance for love, they compose poems and stories about love.
They tell myths and legends about love.
They pine for love, they live for love, they kill for love, and they die for love.
As Walt Whitman once said, "O I would stake all for you."
Anthropologists have found evidence of romantic love in 170 societies.
They've never found a society that did not have it.
But love isn't always a happy experience.
In one study of college students, they asked a lot of questions about love, but the two that stood out to me the most were: "Have you ever been rejected by somebody who you really loved?"
And the second question was: "Have you ever dumped somebody who really loved you?"
And almost 95 percent of both men and women said yes to both.
Almost nobody gets out of love alive.
So, before I start telling you about the brain, I want to read for you what I think is the most powerful love poem on Earth.
There's other love poems that are, of course, just as good, but I don't think this one can be surpassed.
It was told by an anonymous Kwakiutl Indian of southern Alaska to a missionary in 1896.
And here it is.
"Fire runs through my body with the pain of loving you.
Pain runs through my body with the fires of my love for you.
Pain like a boil about to burst with my love for you, consumed by fire with my love for you.
I remember what you said to me.
I am thinking of your love for me.
I am torn by your love for me.
Pain and more pain -- where are you going with my love?
I am told you will leave me here.
Remember what I said, my love.
Goodbye, my love, goodbye."
Emily Dickinson once wrote, "Parting is all we need to know of hell."
How many people have suffered in all the millions of years of human evolution?
How many people around the world are dancing with elation at this very minute?
Romantic love is one of the most powerful sensations on Earth.
So, several years ago, I decided to look into the brain and study this madness.
Our first study of people who were happily in love has been widely publicized, so I'm only going to say very little about it.
We found activity in a tiny, little factory near the base of the brain called the ventral tegmental area.
We found activity in some cells called the A10 cells, cells that actually make dopamine, a natural stimulant, and spray it to many brain regions.
Indeed, this part, the VTA, is part of the brain's reward system.
It's way below your cognitive thinking process.
It's below your emotions.
It's part of what we call the reptilian core of the brain, associated with wanting, with motivation, with focus and with craving.
In fact, the same brain region where we found activity becomes active also when you feel the rush of cocaine.
But romantic love is much more than a cocaine high -- at least you come down from cocaine.
Romantic love is an obsession, it possesses you.
You lose your sense of self.
Somebody is camping in your head.
As an eighth-century Japanese poet said, "My longing had no time when it ceases."
Wild is love.
And the obsession can get worse when you've been rejected.
So, right now, Lucy Brown and I, the neuroscientists on our project, are looking at the data of the people who were put into the machine after they had just been dumped.
It was very difficult actually, putting these people in the machine, because they were in such bad shape.
(Laughter) So anyway, we found activity in three brain regions.
We found activity in the brain region, in exactly the same brain region associated with intense romantic love.
What a bad deal.
You know, when you've been dumped, the one thing you love to do is just forget about this human being, and then go on with your life -- but no, you just love them harder.
As the poet Terence, the Roman poet once said, he said, "The less my hope, the hotter my love."
Two thousand years later, we can explain this in the brain.
That brain system -- the reward system for wanting, for motivation, for craving, for focus -- becomes more active when you can't get what you want.
In this case, life's greatest prize: an appropriate mating partner.
We found activity in other brain regions also -- in a brain region associated with calculating gains and losses.
You're lying there, you're looking at the picture, and you're in this machine, and you're calculating what went wrong.
What have I lost?
As a matter of fact, Lucy and I have a little joke about this.
It comes from a David Mamet play, and there's two con artists in the play, and the woman is conning the man, and the man looks at the woman and says, "Oh, you're a bad pony, I'm not going to bet on you."
And indeed, it's this part of the brain, the core of the nucleus accumbens, that is becoming active as you're measuring your gains and losses.
It's also the brain region that becomes active when you're willing to take enormous risks for huge gains and huge losses.
Last but not least, we found activity in a brain region associated with deep attachment to another individual.
No wonder people suffer around the world, and we have so many crimes of passion.
When you've been rejected in love, not only are you engulfed with feelings of romantic love, but you're feeling deep attachment to this individual.
Moreover, this brain circuit for reward is working, and you're feeling intense energy, intense focus, intense motivation and the willingness to risk it all, to win life's greatest prize.
So, what have I learned from this experiment that I would like to tell the world?
Foremost, I have come to think that romantic love is a drive, a basic mating drive.
Not the sex drive -- the sex drive gets you looking for a whole range of partners.
Romantic love enables you to focus your mating energy on just one at a time, conserve your mating energy, and start the mating process with this single individual.
I think of all the poetry that I've read about romantic love, what sums it up best is something that is said by Plato over 2,000 years ago.
He said, "The god of love lives in a state of need.
It is a need, it is an urge, it is a homeostatic imbalance.
Like hunger and thirst, it's almost impossible to stamp out."
I've also come to believe that romantic love is an addiction: a perfectly wonderful addiction when it's going well, and a perfectly horrible addiction when it's going poorly.
And indeed, it has all of the characteristics of addiction.
You focus on the person, you obsessively think about them, you crave them, you distort reality, your willingness to take enormous risks to win this person.
And it's got the three main characteristics of addiction: tolerance, you need to see them more, and more, and more; withdrawals; and last: relapse.
It's been about eight months, she's beginning to feel better.
And she was driving along in her car the other day, and suddenly she heard a song on the car radio that reminded her of this man.
Not only did the instant craving come back, but she had to pull over from the side of the road and cry.
So, one thing I would like the medical community, and the legal community, and even the college community, to see if they can understand, that indeed, romantic love is one of the most addictive substances on Earth.
I would also like to tell the world that animals love.
There's not an animal on this planet that will copulate with anything that comes along.
Too old, too young, too scruffy, too stupid, and they won't do it.
Unless you're stuck in a laboratory cage -- and you know, if you spend your entire life in a little box, you're not going to be as picky about who you have sex with, but I've looked in a hundred species, and everywhere in the wild, animals have favorites.
As a matter of fact, ethologists know this.
There are over eight words for what they call "animal favoritism:" selective proceptivity, mate choice, female choice, sexual choice.
And indeed, there are now three academic articles in which they've looked at this attraction, which may only last for a second, but it's a definite attraction, and either this same brain region, this reward system, or the chemicals of that reward system are involved.
In fact, I think animal attraction can be instant -- you can see an elephant instantly go for another elephant.
And I think that this is really the origin of what you and I call "love at first sight."
People have often asked me whether what I know about love has spoiled it for me.
And I just simply say, "Hardly."
You can know every single ingredient in a piece of chocolate cake, and then when you sit down and eat that cake, you can still feel that joy.
And certainly, I make all the same mistakes that everybody else does too, but it's really deepened my understanding and compassion, really, for all human life.
As a matter of fact, in New York, I often catch myself looking in baby carriages and feeling a little sorry for the tot.
And in fact, sometimes I feel a little sorry for the chicken on my dinner plate, when I think of how intense this brain system is.
Our newest experiment has been hatched by my colleague, Art Aron -- putting people who are reporting that they are still in love, in a long-term relationship, into the functional MRI.
We've put five people in so far, and indeed, we found exactly the same thing.
The brain areas associated with intense romantic love still become active, 25 years later.
There are still many questions to be answered and asked about romantic love.
The question that I'm working on right this minute -- and I'm only going to say it for a second, and then end -- is, why do you fall in love with one person, rather than another?
I never would have even thought to think of this, but Match.com, the Internet dating site, came to me three years ago and asked me that question.
And I said, I don't know.
I know what happens in the brain, when you do become in love, but I don't know why you fall in love with one person rather than another.
And so, I've spent the last three years on this.
And there are many reasons that you fall in love with one person rather than another, that psychologists can tell you.
And we tend to fall in love with somebody from the same socioeconomic background, the same general level of intelligence, of good looks, the same religious values.
Your childhood certainly plays a role, but nobody knows how.
And that's about it, that's all they know.
No, they've never found the way two personalities fit together to make a good relationship.
So, it began to occur to me that maybe your biology pulls you towards some people rather than another.
And I have concocted a questionnaire to see to what degree you express dopamine, serotonin, estrogen and testosterone.
I think we've evolved four very broad personality types associated with the ratios of these four chemicals in the brain.
And on this dating site that I have created, called Chemistry.com, I ask you first a series of questions to see to what degree you express these chemicals, and I'm watching who chooses who to love.
And 3.7 million people have taken the questionnaire in America.
About 600,000 people have taken it in 33 other countries.
I'm putting the data together now, and at some point -- there will always be magic to love, but I think I will come closer to understanding why it is you can walk into a room and everybody is from your background, your same general level of intelligence, good looks, and you don't feel pulled towards all of them.
I think there's biology to that.
I think we're going to end up, in the next few years, to understand all kinds of brain mechanisms that pull us to one person rather than another.
So, I will close with this.
Faulkner said, "The past is not dead, it's not even past."
Indeed, we carry a lot of luggage from our yesteryear in the human brain.
And so, there's one thing that makes me pursue my understanding of human nature, and this reminds me of it.
These are two women.
Women tend to get intimacy differently than men do.
Women get intimacy from face-to-face talking.
We swivel towards each other, we do what we call the "anchoring gaze" and we talk.
This is intimacy to women.
I think it comes from millions of years of holding that baby in front of your face, cajoling it, reprimanding it, educating it with words.
As soon as one guy looks up, the other guy will look away.
(Laughter) I think it comes from millions of years sitting behind the bush, looking straight ahead, trying to hit that buffalo on the head with a rock.
I think, for millions of years, men faced their enemies, they sat side-by-side with friends.
So my final statement is: love is in us.
It's deeply embedded in the brain.
Our challenge is to understand each other.
Thank you.
As a clergyman, you can imagine how out of place I feel.
I feel like a fish out of water, or maybe an owl out of the air.
(Laughter) I was preaching in San Jose some time ago, and my friend Mark Kvamme, who helped introduce me to this conference, brought several CEOs and leaders of some of the companies here in the Silicon Valley to have breakfast with me, or I with them.
And I was so stimulated.
And had such -- it was an eye-opening experience to hear them talk about the world that is yet to come through technology and science.
I know that we're near the end of this conference, and some of you may be wondering why they have a speaker from the field of religion.
Richard can answer that, because he made that decision.
But some years ago I was on an elevator in Philadelphia, coming down.
I was to address a conference at a hotel.
And on that elevator a man said, "I hear Billy Graham is staying in this hotel."
And another man looked in my direction and said, "Yes, there he is. He's on this elevator with us."
And this man looked me up and down for about 10 seconds, and he said, "My, what an anticlimax!"
(Laughter) I hope that you won't feel that these few moments with me is not a -- is an anticlimax, after all these tremendous talks that you've heard, and addresses, which I intend to listen to every one of them.
But I was on an airplane in the east some years ago, and the man sitting across the aisle from me was the mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina.
His name was John Belk. Some of you will probably know him.
And there was a drunk man on there, and he got up out of his seat two or three times, and he was making everybody upset by what he was trying to do.
And he was slapping the stewardess and pinching her as she went by, and everybody was upset with him.
And finally, John Belk said, "Do you know who's sitting here?"
And the man said, "No, who?"
He said, "It's Billy Graham, the preacher."
He said, "You don't say!"
And he turned to me, and he said, "Put her there!"
He said, "Your sermons have certainly helped me."
(Laughter) And I suppose that that's true with thousands of people.
(Laughter) I know that as you have been peering into the future, and as we've heard some of it here tonight, I would like to live in that age and see what is going to be.
But I won't, because I'm 80 years old. This is my eightieth year, and I know that my time is brief.
I have phlebitis at the moment, in both legs, and that's the reason that I had to have a little help in getting up here, because I have Parkinson's disease in addition to that, and some other problems that I won't talk about.
(Laughter) But this is not the first time that we've had a technological revolution.
We've had others.
And there's one that I want to talk about.
In one generation, the nation of the people of Israel had a tremendous and dramatic change that made them a great power in the Near East.
A man by the name of David came to the throne, and King David became one of the great leaders of his generation.
He was a man of tremendous leadership.
He had the favor of God with him.
He was a brilliant poet, philosopher, writer, soldier -- with strategies in battle and conflict that people study even today.
But about two centuries before David, the Hittites had discovered the secret of smelting and processing of iron, and, slowly, that skill spread.
But they wouldn't allow the Israelis to look into it, or to have any.
But David changed all of that, and he introduced the Iron Age to Israel.
And the Bible says that David laid up great stores of iron, and which archaeologists have found, that in present-day Palestine, there are evidences of that generation.
Now, instead of crude tools made of sticks and stones, Israel now had iron plows, and sickles, and hoes and military weapons.
And in the course of one generation, Israel was completely changed.
The introduction of iron, in some ways, had an impact a little bit like the microchip has had on our generation.
And David found that there were many problems that technology could not solve.
There were many problems still left.
And they're still with us, and you haven't solved them, and I haven't heard anybody here speak to that.
How do we solve these three problems that I'd like to mention?
The first one that David saw was human evil.
Where does it come from?
How do we solve it?
Over again and again in the Psalms, which Gladstone said was the greatest book in the world, David describes the evils of the human race.
And yet he says, "He restores my soul."
Have you ever thought about what a contradiction we are?
On one hand, we can probe the deepest secrets of the universe and dramatically push back the frontiers of technology, as this conference vividly demonstrates.
We've seen under the sea, three miles down, or galaxies hundreds of billions of years out in the future.
But on the other hand, something is wrong.
Our battleships, our soldiers, are on a frontier now, almost ready to go to war with Iraq.
Now, what causes this?
Why do we have these wars in every generation, and in every part of the world?
And revolutions?
We can't get along with other people, even in our own families.
We find ourselves in the paralyzing grip of self-destructive habits we can't break.
Racism and injustice and violence sweep our world, bringing a tragic harvest of heartache and death.
Even the most sophisticated among us seem powerless to break this cycle.
I would like to see Oracle take up that, or some other technological geniuses work on this.
How do we change man, so that he doesn't lie and cheat, and our newspapers are not filled with stories of fraud in business or labor or athletics or wherever?
The Bible says the problem is within us, within our hearts and our souls.
Our problem is that we are separated from our Creator, which we call God, and we need to have our souls restored, something only God can do.
Jesus said, "For out of the heart come evil thoughts: murders, sexual immorality, theft, false testimonies, slander."
The British philosopher Bertrand Russell was not a religious man, but he said, "It's in our hearts that the evil lies, and it's from our hearts that it must be plucked out."
Albert Einstein -- I was just talking to someone, when I was speaking at Princeton, and I met Mr. Einstein.
He didn't have a doctor's degree, because he said nobody was qualified to give him one.
(Laughter) But he made this statement.
He said, "It's easier to denature plutonium than to denature the evil spirit of man."
And many of you, I'm sure, have thought about that and puzzled over it.
You've seen people take beneficial technological advances, such as the Internet we've heard about tonight, and twist them into something corrupting.
You've seen brilliant people devise computer viruses that bring down whole systems.
The Oklahoma City bombing was simple technology, horribly used.
The problem is not technology.
The problem is the person or persons using it.
King David said that he knew the depths of his own soul.
He couldn't free himself from personal problems and personal evils that included murder and adultery.
Yet King David sought God's forgiveness, and said, "You can restore my soul."
You see, the Bible teaches that we're more than a body and a mind.
We are a soul.
And there's something inside of us that is beyond our understanding.
That's the part of us that yearns for God, or something more than we find in technology.
Your soul is that part of you that yearns for meaning in life, and which seeks for something beyond this life.
It's the part of you that yearns, really, for God.
I find [that] young people all over the world are searching for something.
They don't know what it is. I speak at many universities, and I have many questions and answer periods, and whether it's Cambridge, or Harvard, or Oxford -- I've spoken at all of those universities.
I'm going to Harvard in about three or four -- no, it's about two months from now -- to give a lecture.
And I'll be asked the same questions that I was asked the last few times I've been there.
And it'll be on these questions: where did I come from? Why am I here? Where am I going?
What's life all about? Why am I here?
Even if you have no religious belief, there are times when you wonder that there's something else.
Thomas Edison also said, "When you see everything that happens in the world of science, and in the working of the universe, you cannot deny that there's a captain on the bridge."
I remember once, I sat beside Mrs. Gorbachev at a White House dinner.
I went to Ambassador Dobrynin, whom I knew very well.
And I'd been to Russia several times under the Communists, and they'd given me marvelous freedom that I didn't expect.
And I knew Mr. Dobrynin very well, and I said, "I'm going to sit beside Mrs. Gorbachev tonight.
What shall I talk to her about?"
And he surprised me with the answer.
He said, "Talk to her about religion and philosophy.
That's what she's really interested in."
I was a little bit surprised, but that evening that's what we talked about, and it was a stimulating conversation.
And afterward, she said, "You know, I'm an atheist, but I know that there's something up there higher than we are."
The second problem that King David realized he could not solve was the problem of human suffering.
Writing the oldest book in the world was Job, and he said, "Man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward."
Yes, to be sure, science has done much to push back certain types of human suffering.
But I'm -- in a few months, I'll be 80 years of age.
I admit that I'm very grateful for all the medical advances that have kept me in relatively good health all these years.
My doctors at the Mayo Clinic urged me not to take this trip out here to this -- to be here.
I haven't given a talk in nearly four months.
And when you speak as much as I do, three or four times a day, you get rusty.
That's the reason I'm using this podium and using these notes.
Every time you ever hear me on the television or somewhere, I'm ad-libbing.
I'm not reading. I never read an address.
I never read a speech or a talk or a lecture.
I talk ad lib.
But tonight, I've got some notes here so that if I begin to forget, which I do sometimes, I've got something I can turn to.
But even here among us, most -- in the most advanced society in the world, we have poverty.
We have families that self-destruct, friends that betray us.
Unbearable psychological pressures bear down on us.
I've never met a person in the world that didn't have a problem or a worry.
Why do we suffer? It's an age-old question that we haven't answered.
Yet David again and again said that he would turn to God.
He said, "The Lord is my shepherd."
The final problem that David knew he could not solve was death.
Many commentators have said that death is the forbidden subject of our generation.
Most people live as if they're never going to die.
Technology projects the myth of control over our mortality.
We see people on our screens.
Marilyn Monroe is just as beautiful on the screen as she was in person, and our -- many young people think she's still alive.
They don't know that she's dead.
Or Clark Gable, or whoever it is.
The old stars, they come to life.
And they're -- they're just as great on that screen as they were in person.
But death is inevitable.
I spoke some time ago to a joint session of Congress, last year.
And we were meeting in that room, the statue room.
About 300 of them were there.
And I said, "There's one thing that we have in common in this room, all of us together, whether Republican or Democrat, or whoever."
I said, "We're all going to die.
And we have that in common with all these great men of the past that are staring down at us."
And it's often difficult for young people to understand that.
It's difficult for them to understand that they're going to die.
As the ancient writer of Ecclesiastes wrote, he said, there's every activity under heaven.
There's a time to be born, and there's a time to die.
I've stood at the deathbed of several famous people, whom you would know.
I've talked to them.
I've seen them in those agonizing moments when they were scared to death.
And yet, a few years earlier, death never crossed their mind.
I talked to a woman this past week whose father was a famous doctor.
She said he never thought of God, never talked about God, didn't believe in God. He was an atheist.
But she said, as he came to die, he sat up on the side of the bed one day, and he asked the nurse if he could see the chaplain.
And he said, for the first time in his life he'd thought about the inevitable, and about God.
Was there a God?
A few years ago, a university student asked me, "What is the greatest surprise in your life?"
And I said, "The greatest surprise in my life is the brevity of life.
It passes so fast."
But it does not need to have to be that way.
Wernher von Braun, in the aftermath of World War II concluded, quote: "science and religion are not antagonists.
On the contrary, they're sisters."
He put it on a personal basis.
I knew Dr. von Braun very well.
And he said, "Speaking for myself, I can only say that the grandeur of the cosmos serves only to confirm a belief in the certainty of a creator."
He also said, "In our search to know God, I've come to believe that the life of Jesus Christ should be the focus of our efforts and inspiration.
The reality of this life and His resurrection is the hope of mankind."
I've done a lot of speaking in Germany and in France, and in different parts of the world -- 105 countries it's been my privilege to speak in.
And I was invited one day to visit Chancellor Adenauer, who was looked upon as sort of the founder of modern Germany, since the war.
And he once -- and he said to me, he said, "Young man." He said, "Do you believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ?"
And I said, "Sir, I do."
He said, "So do I."
He said, "When I leave office, I'm going to spend my time writing a book on why Jesus Christ rose again, and why it's so important to believe that."
In one of his plays, Alexander Solzhenitsyn depicts a man dying, who says to those gathered around his bed, "The moment when it's terrible to feel regret is when one is dying."
How should one live in order not to feel regret when one is dying?
Blaise Pascal asked exactly that question in seventeenth-century France.
Pascal has been called the architect of modern civilization.
He was a brilliant scientist at the frontiers of mathematics, even as a teenager.
He is viewed by many as the founder of the probability theory, and a creator of the first model of a computer.
And of course, you are all familiar with the computer language named for him.
Pascal explored in depth our human dilemmas of evil, suffering and death.
He was astounded at the phenomenon we've been considering: that people can achieve extraordinary heights in science, the arts and human enterprise, yet they also are full of anger, hypocrisy and have -- and self-hatreds.
Pascal saw us as a remarkable mixture of genius and self-delusion.
On November 23, 1654, Pascal had a profound religious experience.
He wrote in his journal these words: "I submit myself, absolutely, to Jesus Christ, my redeemer."
A French historian said, two centuries later, "Seldom has so mighty an intellect submitted with such humility to the authority of Jesus Christ."
Pascal came to believe not only the love and the grace of God could bring us back into harmony, but he believed that his own sins and failures could be forgiven, and that when he died he would go to a place called heaven.
He experienced it in a way that went beyond scientific observation and reason.
It was he who penned the well-known words, "The heart has its reasons, which reason knows not of."
Equally well known is Pascal's Wager.
Essentially, he said this: "if you bet on God, and open yourself to his love, you lose nothing, even if you're wrong.
But if instead you bet that there is no God, then you can lose it all, in this life and the life to come."
For Pascal, scientific knowledge paled beside the knowledge of God.
The knowledge of God was far beyond anything that ever crossed his mind.
He was ready to face him when he died at the age of 39.
King David lived to be 70, a long time in his era.
Yet he too had to face death, and he wrote these words: "even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are with me."
This was David's answer to three dilemmas of evil, suffering and death.
It can be yours, as well, as you seek the living God and allow him to fill your life and give you hope for the future.
When I was 17 years of age, I was born and reared on a farm in North Carolina.
I milked cows every morning, and I had to milk the same cows every evening when I came home from school.
And there were 20 of them that I had -- that I was responsible for, and I worked on the farm and tried to keep up with my studies.
I didn't make good grades in high school.
I didn't make them in college, until something happened in my heart.
One day, I was faced face-to-face with Christ.
He said, "I am the way, the truth and the life."
Can you imagine that? "I am the truth.
I'm the embodiment of all truth."
He was a liar.
Or he was insane.
Or he was what he claimed to be.
Which was he?
I had to make that decision.
I couldn't prove it.
I couldn't take it to a laboratory and experiment with it.
But by faith I said, I believe him, and he came into my heart and changed my life.
And now I'm ready, when I hear that call, to go into the presence of God.
Thank you, and God bless all of you.
(Applause) Thank you for the privilege. It was great.
Richard Wurman: You did it.
Thanks.
(Applause)
As dawn breaks over a moveable city of ten thousand yurts, Queen Boraqchin is in for a rude awakening.
A rogue sheep has slipped past her servants and guards and bolted into her yurt, where he springs into bed and bleats in her ear.
Although she’s the formidable khatun of the Golden Horde, a huge kingdom in the Mongolian Empire, Boraqchin has a hands-on approach to ruling.
She’s been married to Batu Khan, the fearsome grandson of Genghis Khan himself, since she was fifteen – and while her husband is out on his raids, she juggles the duties of flocks, family and empire at home.
This makes her the manager – and the mover – of a city of thousands.
Twice a year, Boraqchin moves the city between two seasonal camping grounds.
This ensures constant water and lush grass in summer, and protection from harsh winds in winter.
The whole operation requires weeks of strict planning, liaising with the other camps in her domain, strategic delegation – and the patience to move at the speed of dawdling animals.
Today is moving day, and she’ll have to direct throngs of her ladies, commanders, slaves and animals up the river Volga for the summer.
As Boraqchin steps outside, she’s greeted by a commotion – her unwanted visitor is now running circles around her stewards.
They’re attempting to stow her possessions securely into wagons.
Boraqchin orders them to get it under control – but she’s the only one quick enough to catch the stray.
She next supervises her ladies who are unpinning her yurt and lifting it onto its custom wagon.
It requires a team of twenty oxen to pull, and Boraqchin wouldn’t trust anyone to steer it but herself.
Next, Boraqchin and her woolly companion meet with the guards.
She orders them to keep close watch on her husband's special reception yurt and port-able throne during the journey.
They’ll also act as outriders, and she tells them how to secure the route, surround her for safety – and keep the animals in check.
But when the sheep finally breaks free and makes for the fields, the guards can barely keep up as it scampers through crowds packing up their yurts.
Exasperated, Boraqchin rides down to the pastures herself.
When she gets there, she catches sight of the troublesome sheep wriggling into the middle of a flock.
When she follows him in, he’s nestled next to a ewe, his mother.
She’s pregnant, and seems to be in pain.
With a start, Boraqchin realizes that this ewe’s impending delivery has been forgotten in the flurry of moving day.
