There’s no time to find a shepherd – instead, Boraqchin rolls up her sleeves, greases her arm and helps the ewe give birth to two new additions to the empire.
Leaving the lambs and their mother, Boraqchin dashes back to the camp.
Here the final touches have been put to packing, and vehicles are starting to line up.
This vast procession starts with the queen and two hundred wagons filled with her treasures.
Next up are the junior wives and crew, then the concubines – and this is only Boraqchin's camp.
After this comes the second imperial camp led by another senior wife, then two more camps, also led by wives.
Boraqchin has been checking in with them for weeks to ensure a smooth departure and orderly queue.
But they only make up the royal portion of the line – behind them winds the entire civilian city, which includes holy men with portable chapels and mosques, families, tradesmen, and shepherds.
Finally, Boraqchin settles into her wagon.
It’ll take weeks to reach their destination – but over the course of the journey, she’ll keep everyone expertly in check – from her proud children and attentive subjects, to the most meandering sheep at the back of line.
Curiosity: a blessing, or a curse?
The paradoxical nature of this trait was personified for the ancient Greeks in the mythical figure of Pandora.
According to legend, she was the first mortal woman, whose blazing curiosity set a chain of earth-shattering events in motion.
Pandora was breathed into being by Hephaestus, God of fire, who enlisted the help of his divine companions to make her extraordinary.
From Aphrodite she received the capacity for deep emotion; from Hermes she gained mastery over language.
Athena gave the gift of fine craftsmanship and attention to detail, and Hermes gave her her name.
Finally, Zeus bestowed two gifts on Pandora.
The first was the trait of curiosity, which settled in her spirit and sent her eagerly out into the world.
The second was a heavy box, ornately curved, heavy to hold – and screwed tightly shut.
But the contents, Zeus told her, were not for mortal eyes.
She was not to open the box under any circumstance.
On earth, Pandora met and fell in love with Epimetheus, a talented titan who had been given the task of designing the natural world by Zeus.
He had worked alongside his brother Prometheus, who created the first humans but was eternally punished for giving them fire.
Epimetheus missed his brother desperately, but in Pandora he found another fiery-hearted soul for companionship.
Pandora brimmed with excitement at life on earth.
She was also easily distracted and could be impatient, given her thirst for knowledge and desire to question her surroundings.
Often, her mind wandered to the contents of the sealed box.
What treasure was so great it could never be seen by human eyes, and why was it in her care?
Her fingers itched to pry it open.
Sometimes she was convinced she heard voices whispering and the contents rattling around inside, as if straining to be free.
Its enigma became maddening.
Over time, Pandora became more and more obsessed with the box.
It seemed there was a force beyond her control that drew her to the contents, which echoed her name louder and louder.
One day she could bear it no longer.
Stealing away from Epimetheus, she stared at the mystifying box.
She’d take one glance inside, then be able to rid her mind of it forever...
But at the first crack of the lid, the box burst open.
Monstrous creatures and horrendous sounds rushed out in a cloud of smoke and swirled around her, screeching and cackling.
Filled with terror, Pandora clawed desperately at the air to direct them back into their prison.
But the creatures surged out in a gruesome cloud.
She felt a wave of foreboding as they billowed away.
Zeus had used the box as a vessel for all the forces of evil and suffering he’d created – and once released, they were uncontainable.
As she wept, Pandora became aware of a sound echoing from within the box.
This was not the eerie whispering of demons, but a light tinkling that seemed to ease her anguish.
When she once again lifted the lid and peered in, a warm beam of light rose out and fluttered away.
As she watched it flickering in the wake of the evil she’d unleashed, Pandora’s pain was eased.
She knew that opening the box was irreversible – but alongside the strife, she’d set hope forth to temper its effects.
Today, Pandora’s Box suggests the extreme consequences of tampering with the unknown – but Pandora’s burning curiosity also suggests the duality that lies at the heart of human inquiry.
Are we bound to investigate everything we don’t know, to mine the earth for more – or are there some mysteries that are better left unsolved?
We all know that saving is important and is something that we should be doing.
And yet, overall, we're doing less and less of it.
[The Way We Work] We know what we need to do.
The question is: How do we do it?
And that's what I'm here to teach you.
Your savings behavior isn't a question of how smart you are or how much willpower you have.
The amount we save depends on the environmental cues around us.
Let me give you an example.
We ran a study in which, in one group, we showed people their income on a monthly basis.
In another group, we showed people their income on a weekly basis.
And what we found was that people who saw their income on a weekly basis were able to budget better throughout the month.
Now, it's important to know that we didn't change how much money people were receiving, we just changed the environment in which they understood their income.
And environmental cues like this have an impact.
So I'm not going to share tricks with you that you already know.
I'm not going to tell you how to open up a savings account or how to start saving for your retirement.
What I am going to share with you is how to bridge this gap from your intentions to save and your actions.
Are you ready?
Here's number one: harness the power of pre-commitment.
Fundamentally, we think about ourselves in two different ways: our present self and our future self.
In the future, we're perfect.
In the future, we're going to save for retirement, we're going to lose weight, we're going to call our parents more.
But we oftentimes forget that our future self is exactly the same person as our present self.
We know that one of the best times to save is when you get your tax return.
So we tried an A/B test.
In the first group, we texted people in early February, hopefully before they even filed for their taxes.
And we asked them, "If you get a tax refund, what percentage would you like to save?"
Now this is a really hard question.
They didn't know if they would receive a tax refund or how much.
But we asked the question anyway.
In the second group, we asked people right after they received their refund, "What percentage would you like to save?"
Now, here's what happened.
In that second condition, when people just received their tax refund, they wanted to save about 17 percent of their tax refund.
But in the condition when we asked people before they even filed their taxes, savings rates increased from 17 percent to 27 percent when we asked in February.
Why?
Because you're committing for your future self, and of course your future self can save 27 percent.
These large changes in savings behavior came from the fact that we changed the decision-making environment.
We want you to be able to harness that same power.
So take a moment and think about the ways in which you can sign up your future self for something that you know today will be a little bit hard.
Sign up for an app that lets you make savings decisions in advance.
The trick is, you have to have that binding contract.
Number two: use transition moments to your advantage.
We did an experiment with a website that helps older adults share their housing.
We ran two ads on social media, targeted to the same population of 64-year-olds.
In one group, we said, "Hey, you're getting older.
Are you ready for retirement?
House sharing can help."
In the second group, we got a little bit more specific and said, "You're 64 turning 65.
Are you ready for retirement?
House sharing can help."
What we're doing in that second group is highlighting that a transition is happening.
All of a sudden, we saw click-through rates, and ultimately sign-up rates, increase when we highlight that.
In psychology, we call this the "fresh start effect."
Whether it's the start of a new year or even a new season, your motivation to act increases.
So right now, put a meeting request on your calendar for the day before your next birthday.
Identify the one financial thing you most want to do.
And commit yourself to it.
The third and final trick: get a handle on small, frequent purchases.
We've run a few different studies and found that the number one purchase people say they regret, after bank fees, is eating out.
It's a frequent purchase we make almost every day, and it's death by a thousand cuts.
A coffee here, a burrito there ...
It adds up and decreases our ability to save.
Back when I lived in New York City, I looked at my expenses and saw that I spent over 2,000 dollars on ride-sharing apps.
It was more than my New York City rent.
I vowed to make a change.
And the next month, I spent 2,000 dollars again -- no change, because the information alone didn't change my behavior.
I didn't change my environment.
So now that I was 4,000 dollars in the hole, I did two things.
The first is that I unlinked my credit card from my car-sharing apps.
Instead, I linked a debit card that only had 300 dollars a month.
If I needed more, I had to go through the whole process of adding a new card, and we know that every click, every barrier, changes our behavior.
We aren't machines.
We don't carry around an abacus every day, adding up what we're spending, in comparison to what we wanted.
But what our brains are very good at is counting up the number of times we've done something.
So I gave myself a limit.
I can only use ride-sharing apps three times a week.
It forced me to ration my travels.
I got a handle on my car-sharing expenses to the benefit of my husband, because of the environmental changes that I did.
So get a handle on whatever that purchase is for you, and change your environment to make it harder to do so.
Those are my tips for you.
But I want you to remember one thing.
As human beings, we can be irrational when it comes to saving and spending and budgeting.
But luckily, we know this about ourselves, and we can predict how we'll act under certain environments.
Let's do that with saving.
Let's change our environment to help our future selves.
Brain magic. What's brain magic all about?
Brain magic to me indicates that area of magic dealing with psychological and mind-reading effects.
So unlike traditional magic, it uses the power of words, linguistic deception, non-verbal communication and various other techniques to create the illusion of a sixth sense.
I'm going to show you all how easy it is to manipulate the human mind once you know how.
I want everybody downstairs also to join in with me and everybody.
I want everybody to put out your hands like this for me, first of all.
OK, clap them together, once.
OK, reverse your hands.
Now, follow my actions exactly.
Now about half the audience has their left hand up. Why is that?
OK, swap them around, put your right hand up.
Cross your hands over, so your right hand goes over, interlace your fingers like this, then make sure your right thumb is outside your left thumb -- that's very important.
Yours is the other way around, so swap it around.
Excellent, OK. Extend your fingers like this for me.
All right. Tap them together once.
OK, now, if you did not allow me to deceive your minds, you would all be able to do this.
(Laughter) (Laughter ends) Now you can see how easy it is for me to manipulate the human mind, once you know how.
(Laughter) Now, I remember when I was about 15, (Laughter) I read a copy of Life magazine, which detailed a story about a 75-year-old blind Russian woman who could sense printed letters -- there's still people trying to do it -- (Laughter) -- who could sense printed letters and even sense colors, just by touch.
And she was completely blind.
She could also read the serial numbers on bills when they were placed, face down, on a hard surface.
Now, I was fascinated, but at the same time, skeptical.
How could somebody read using their fingertips?
You know, if you actually think about it, if somebody is totally blind -- a guy yesterday did a demonstration in one of the rooms, where people had to close their eyes and they could just hear things.
And it's just a really weird thing to try and figure out.
How could somebody read using their fingertips?
Now earlier on, as part of a TV show that I have coming up on MTV, I attempted to give a similar demonstration of what is now known as second sight.
So, let's take a look.
(Video) Man: There we go.
I'm going to guide you into the car.
Kathryn Thomas: (Laughter) Man: You're OK, keep on going.
KT: How are you?
Keith Barry: Kathryn, it's Keith here.
Kathryn, there was no way you could see through that blindfold.
KT: OK, but don't say my name like that. KB: But you're OK?
KT: Yes.
KB: No way to see through it? KT: No.
KB: I'll take it off.
Do you want to take the rest off?
Take it off, you're OK. We'll stop for a second.
KT: I'm so afraid of what I'm going to see.
KB: You're fine, take it off. You're OK. You're safe.
Have you ever heard of second sight?
KT: No.
KB: Second sight is whereby a mind-control expert can see through somebody else's eyes.
And I'm going to try that right now.
KT: God.
KB: Are you ready?
Where is it? There's no way -- KT: (Beep) KT: Oh, my God!
KB: Don't say anything, I'm trying to see through your eyes. I can't see.
KT: There's a wall, there's a wall.
KB: Look at the road, look at the road.
KT: OK, OK, OK. Oh, my God!
KB: Now, anything coming at all? KT: No.
KB: Sure there's not?
KT: No, no, I'm just still looking at the road.
I'm looking at the road, all the time.
I'm not taking my eyes off the road.
(Beep) (Beep) (Beep) KT: Oh, my God!
KB: Where are we? Where are we?
We're going uphill, are we going uphill?
KT: Look at the road -- (Beep) Still got that goddamn blindfold on.
KB: What?
KT: How are you doing this?
KB: Just don't break my concentration.
We're OK, though? KT: Yes.
That's so weird.
We're nearly there. Oh, my God!
Oh, my God!
KB: And I've stopped.
KT: That is weird.
You're like a freak-ass of nature.
That was the most scary thing I've ever done in my life!
(Applause) KB: Thank you.
By the way, two days ago, we were going to film this down there, at the race course, and we got a guy into a car, and we got a camera man in the back, but halfway through the drive, he told me he had, I think it was a nine-millimeter, stuck to his leg.
So, I stopped pretty quick, and that was it.
So, do you believe it's possible to see through somebody else's eyes?
That's the question.
OK, but I want you to realize some facts.
I couldn't see through the blindfold.
The car was not gimmicked or tricked in any way.
The girl, I'd never met before, all right.
So, I want you to just think about it for a moment.
A lot of people try to come up with a logical solution to what just happened, all right.
But because your brains are not trained in the art of deception, the solutions you come up with will, 99 percent of the time, be way off the mark.
If, for instance, I didn't want you to look at my right hand, then I don't look at it.
But if I wanted you to look at my right hand, then I look at it, too.
You see, it's very simple, once you know how, but very complicated in other ways.
I'm going to give you some demonstrations right now.
I need two people to help me out real quick. Can you come up?
And let's see, down at the end, here, can you also come up, real quick?
Do you mind? Yes, at the end.
OK, give them a round of applause as they come up.
You might want to use the stairs, there.
(Applause) It's very important for everybody here to realize I haven't set anything up with you.
You don't know what will happen, right?
Would you mind just standing over here for a moment?
Your name is? Nicole: Nicole.
KB: Nicole, and?
(Telephone ringing) KB: Actually, here's the thing, answer it, answer it, answer it.
(Laughter) Is it a girl? Man: They've already gone.
KB: OK, swap over positions.
Can you stand over here? This will make it easier.
Pity, I would have told them it was the ace of spades.
OK, a little bit closer.
(Laughter) OK, a little bit closer, come over -- they look really nervous up here.
Do you believe in witchcraft?
Nicole: No.
KB: Voodoo? Nicole: No.
KB: Things that go bump in the night? Nicole: No.
KB: Besides, who's next, no, OK.
I want you to just stand exactly like this for me, pull up your sleeves, if you don't mind.
OK, now, I want you to be aware of all the different sensations around you, because we'll try a voodoo experiment.
I want you to be aware of the sensations, but don't say anything until I ask you, and don't open your eyes until I ask you.
From this point onwards, close your eyes, do not say anything, do not open them, be aware of the sensations.
Yes or no, did you feel anything?
Nicole: Yes.
KB: You did feel that? What did you feel?
Nicole: A touch on my back.
Nicole: Twice.
KB: Twice. OK, extend your left arm out in front of you.
Extend your left arm, OK.
OK, keep it there.
Be aware of the sensations, don't say anything, don't open your eyes, OK.
Did you feel anything, there?
Nicole: Yes. KB: What did you feel?
Nicole: Three -- KB: Like a tickling sensation? Nicole: Yes.
KB: Can you show us where?
OK, excellent. Open your eyes.
I never touched you.
I just touched his back, and I just touched his arm.
A voodoo experiment.
(Laughter) Yeah, I walk around nightclubs all night like this.
(Laughter) You just take a seat over here for a second.
I'm going to use you again, in a moment.
Can you take a seat right over here, if you don't mind.
Sit right here. Man: OK.
KB: OK, take a seat. Excellent, OK.
Now, what I want you to do is look directly at me, OK, just take a deep breath in through your nose, letting it out through your mouth, and relax.
Allow your eyes to close, on five, four, three, two, one.
Close your eyes right now.
OK, now, I'm not hypnotizing you, I'm merely placing you in a heightened state of synchronicity, so our minds are along the same lines.
And as you sink and drift and float into this relaxed state of mind, I'm going to take your left hand, and just place it up here.
I want you to hold it there just for a moment, and I only want you to allow your hand to sink and drift and float back to the tabletop at the same rate and speed as you drift and float into this relaxed state of awareness, and allow it to go all the way down to the tabletop.
That's it, all the way down, all the way down.
and further, and further.
I want you to allow your hand to stick firmly to the tabletop.
OK, now, allow it to stay there.
OK, now, in a moment, you'll feel a certain pressure, OK, and I want you to be aware of the pressure.
Just be aware of the pressure.
And I only want you to allow your hand to float slowly back up from the tabletop as you feel the pressure release, but only when you feel the pressure release.
Do you understand? Just answer yes or no.
Man: Yes.
KB: Hold it right there.
And only when you feel the pressure go back, allow your hand to drift back to the tabletop, but only when you feel the pressure.
(Laughter) OK, that was wonderfully done. Let's try it again.
Excellent. Now that you've got the idea, let's try something even more interesting.
Allow it to stick firmly to the tabletop, keep your eyes closed.
Can you stand up? Just stand, stage forward.
I want you to point directly at his forehead.
Imagine a connection between you and him.
Only when you want the pressure to be released, make an upward gesture, like this, but only when you want it to be released.
You can wait as long as you want, but only when you want the pressure released.
OK, let's try it again.
Point directly at his forehead.
Only when you want the pressure released, we'll try it again.
OK, it worked that time, excellent.
And hold it there, both of you.
Only when you want the pressure to go back, make a downward gesture.
You can wait as long as you want.
You did it pretty quickly, but it went down, OK.
Now, I want you to be aware that in a moment, when I snap my fingers, your eyes will open, again.
It's OK to remember to forget, or forget to remember what happened.
Most people ask you, "What the hell just happened up here?"
But it's OK that even though you're not hypnotized, you will forget everything that happened.
On five, four, three, two, one -- open your eyes, wide awake.
Give them a round of applause, as they go back to their seats.
(Applause) OK, you can go back.
(Applause) I once saw a film called "The Gods Are Crazy."
Has anybody here seen that film? Yeah.
Remember when they threw the Coke out of the airplane, and it landed on the ground, and it didn't break?
Now, see, that's because Coke bottles are solid.
Do you want to try it?
Good job. She's not taking any chances.
(Laughter) You see, psychokinesis is the paranormal influence of the mind on physical events and processes.
For some magicians or mentalists, sometimes the spoon will bend or melt, sometimes it will not.
Sometimes the object will slide across the table, sometimes it will not.
It depends on how much energy you have that day, so on and so forth.
We're going to try an experiment in psychokinesis, right now.
Come right over here, next to me. Excellent.
Now, have a look at the Coke bottle.
And you can whack it against the table, if you want; be careful.
Even though it's solid, I'm standing away.
I want you to pinch right here with two fingers and your thumb.
Excellent. Now, I've got a shard of glass here, OK.
I want you to examine the shard of glass.
Careful, it's sharp. Just hold on to it for a moment.
Now, hold it out here.
I want you to imagine, right now, a broken relationship from many years ago.
I want you to imagine all the negative energy from that broken relationship, from that guy, being imparted into the broken piece of glass, which will represent him, OK.
But I want you to take this very seriously.
Stare at the glass, ignore everybody right here.
In a moment, you'll feel a certain sensation, OK, and when you feel that sensation, I want you to drop the piece of glass into the bottle.
Think of that guy, that ba -- that guy.
(Laughter) I'm trying to be good here.
OK, and when you feel the sensation -- it might take a while -- drop it into the glass.
OK, drop it in.
Now, imagine all that negative energy in there.
Imagine his name and imagine him inside the glass.
And I want you to release that negative energy by shaking it from side to side.
(Burst) (Laughter) That was a lot of negative energy, built up in there.
(Laughter) (Applause) I also want you to look at me and think of his name.
OK, think of how many letters in the title of his name.
There's five letters in the title.
You didn't react to that, so it's four letters.
Think of one of the letters in the title.
There's a K in his name, there is a K.
I knew that because my name starts with a K also, but his name doesn't start with a K, it starts with an M.
Was that his name? Nicole: Mm-hmm.
KB: OK, give her a round of applause.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) (Applause ends) I've got one more thing to share with you right now.
Actually, Chris, I was going to pick you for this, but instead of picking you, can you hop up here and pick a victim for this next experiment?
And it should be a male victim, that's the only thing.
Chris Anderson: Oh, OK.
KB: I was going to use you, but I decided I might want to come back another year.
(Laughter) CA: Well, to reward him for saying "eureka," and for selecting Michael Mercil to come and talk to us -- Steve Jurvetson.
KB: OK, Steve, come on up here.
(Applause) CA: You knew!
Now, Steve -- oh, you can check underneath.
They insist that because I was a magician, put a nice, black tablecloth on.
There you are, OK.
(Laughter) I've got four wooden plinths here, Steve.
One, two, three and four.
Now, they're all the exact same except this one obviously has a stainless steel spike sticking out of it.
I want you to examine it, and make sure it's solid.
Happy?
Steve Jurvetson: Mmm, yes.
KB: OK. Now, Steve, I'm going to stand in front of the table, When I stand in front of the table, I want you to put the cups on the plinths, in any order you want, and then mix them all up, so nobody has any idea where the spike is, all right?
SJ: No one in the audience?
KB: Yes, and just to help you out, I'll block them from view, so nobody can see what you're doing.
I'll also look away. So, go ahead and mix them up, now.
OK, and tell me when you're done.
(Laughter) (Laughter) KB: You done? SJ: Almost.
KB: Almost, oh. OK, you're making sure that's well hidden.
Oh, we've got one here, we've got one here.
(Applause) So, all right, we'll leave them like that.
(Laughter) I'm going to have the last laugh, though.
(Laughter) Now, Steve, you know where the spike is, but nobody else, does? Correct?
But I don't want you to know either, so swivel around on your chair.
They'll keep an eye on me to make sure I don't do anything funny.
No, stay around, OK.
Now, Steve, look back.
Now you don't know where the spike is, and I don't know where it is either.
Now, is there any way to see through this blindfold?
SJ: Put this on?
KB: No, just, is there any way to see through it? No?
SJ: No, I can't see through it. KB: Excellent.
Now, I'm going to put on the blindfold.
Don't stack them up, OK. Give them an extra mix up.
Don't move the cups, I don't want anybody to see where the spike is, but give the plinths an extra mix up, and then line them up.
I'll put the blindfold on. Give them an extra mix up.
No messing around this time. OK, go ahead, mix them up.
My hand is at risk here.
(Laughter) Tell me when you're done. SJ: Done.
KB: OK, where are you? Put out your hand. Your right hand.
Tell me when I'm over a cup.
SJ: You're over a cup. KB: I'm over a cup, right now?
SJ: Mm-hmm.
SJ: Oh!
(Laughter) KB: I told you I'd have the last laugh.
(Laughter) SJ: I don't think it's there. KB: No? Good decision.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Applause ends) Now, if I go this way, is there another cup over here?
SJ: Can we do the left hand?
KB: Oh, no, no, no. He asked me could he do the left hand. Absolutely not.
(Laughter) KB: If I go this way, is there another cup?
SJ: Yes. KB: Tell me when to stop.
SJ: OK. KB: There?
SJ: Yes, there's one.
KB: OK. Do you think it's here, yes or no? This is your decision, not mine.
(Laughter) SJ: I'm going to say no. KB: Good decision.
(Laughter) OK, give me both hands.
Now, put them on both cups.
Do you think the spike is under your left or your right hand?
SJ: Neither.
KB: Neither, oh, OK.
But if you were to guess.
(Laughter) SJ: Under my right hand. KB: Under your right hand?
Now, remember, you made all the decisions all along.
Psychologists, figure this out.
(SJ gasps) Have a look.
SJ: Oh!
(Applause) KB: Thank you.
(Applause ends) If anybody wants to see some sleight of hand later on, I'll be outside.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
“It was a pleasure to burn.
It was a special pleasure to see things eaten, to see things blackened and changed.” Fahrenheit 451 opens in a blissful blaze - and before long, we learn what’s going up in flames.
Ray Bradbury’s novel imagines a world where books are banned from all areas of life - and possessing, let alone reading them, is forbidden.
The protagonist, Montag, is a fireman responsible for destroying what remains.
But as his pleasure gives way to doubt, the story raises critical questions of how to preserve one’s mind in a society where free will, self-expression, and curiosity are under fire.
In Montag’s world, mass media has a monopoly on information, erasing almost all ability for independent thought.
On the subway, ads blast out of the walls.
At home, Montag’s wife Mildred listens to the radio around the clock, and three of their parlor walls are plastered with screens.
At work, the smell of kerosene hangs over Montag’s colleagues, who smoke and set their mechanical hound after rats to pass the time.
When the alarm sounds they surge out in salamander-shaped vehicles, sometimes to burn whole libraries to the ground.
But as he sets tomes ablaze day after day like “black butterflies,” Montag’s mind occasionally wanders to the contraband that lies hidden in his home.
Gradually, he begins to question the basis of his work.
Montag realizes he’s always felt uneasy - but has lacked the descriptive words to express his feelings in a society where even uttering the phrase “once upon a time” can be fatal.
Fahrenheit 451 depicts a world governed by surveillance, robotics, and virtual reality- a vision that proved remarkably prescient, but also spoke to the concerns of the time.
The novel was published in 1953, at the height of the Cold War.
This era kindled widespread paranoia and fear throughout Bradbury’s home country of the United States, amplified by the suppression of information and brutal government investigations.
In particular, this witch hunt mentality targeted artists and writers who were suspected of Communist sympathies.
Bradbury was alarmed at this cultural crackdown.
He believed it set a dangerous precedent for further censorship, and was reminded of the destruction of the Library of Alexandria and the book-burning of Fascist regimes.
He explored these chilling connections in Fahrenheit 451, titled after the temperature at which paper burns.
The accuracy of that temperature has been called into question, but that doesn’t diminish the novel’s standing as a masterpiece of dystopian fiction.
Dystopian fiction as a genre amplifies troubling features of the world around us and imagines the consequences of taking them to an extreme.
In many dystopian stories, the government imposes constrictions onto unwilling subjects.
But in Fahrenheit 451, Montag learns that it was the apathy of the masses that gave rise to the current regime.
The government merely capitalized on short attention spans and the appetite for mindless entertainment, reducing the circulation of ideas to ash.
As culture disappears, imagination and self-expression follow.
Even the way people talk is short-circuited - such as when Montag’s boss Captain Beatty describes the acceleration of mass culture: "Speed up the film, Montag, quick. Click? Pic? Look, Eye, Now, Flick, Here, There, Swift, Pace, Up, Down, In, Out, Why, How, Who, What, Where, Eh? Uh!
Bang! Smack! Wallop, Bing, Bong, Boom! Digest-digests, digest-digest-digests.
Politics? One column, two sentences, a headline! Then, in mid-air, all vanishes!"
In this barren world, Montag learns how difficult it is to resist when there's nothing left to hold on to.
Altogether, Fahrenheit 451 is a portrait of independent thought on the brink of extinction - and a parable about a society which is complicit in its own combustion.
The full scope of a nuclear detonation is almost unimaginable.
Hopefully, no one will ever experience another of these catastrophic incidents.
But there is a scientifically supported plan of action that could save hundreds of thousands of lives in the area surrounding a nuclear explosion.
So what is this plan, and what exactly would it protect us from?
To create their destructive blast, these weapons harness the power of nuclear fission– in which an atom’s nucleus is split in two.
This process produces an incredible amount of energy, and in some materials the neutrons produced by one fission are absorbed by nearby atoms, splitting additional nuclei.
These chain reactions can produce a range of explosive yields, but let’s consider an explosion equivalent to 10,000 tons of TNT.
An explosion like this would create a fireball capable of decimating a few city blocks and a shockwave damaging buildings several kilometers away.
There is tragically nothing that can be done to save those in the fireball’s radius.
However, for those in the shockwave and beyond, our scientifically supported protocol could be life saving.
And though it may sound surprising, the best way to stay protected before, during, and after a nuclear detonation, is getting inside.
Similar to protecting yourself from tornadoes or hurricanes, getting and staying inside a sturdy building would offer protection from the explosion’s shockwave, heat, and radiation.
The shockwave of energy would travel several kilometers beyond the fireball’s radius in the first few seconds.
Sturdy buildings within that range should be able to withstand the shockwave, and staying in the centers and basements of these buildings also helps provide protection from heat and flying objects.
Finding shelter is especially important if the fireball occurs close to the earth, as it will pull thousands of tons of dirt and debris several kilometers into the atmosphere.
As the fireball cools, unstable atoms created by the nuclear fission mix with the debris to produce the most dangerous long-term effect of a nuclear detonation: radioactive particles called fallout.
These sand-sized particles emit ionizing radiation, capable of separating electrons from molecules and atoms.
Exposure to massive amounts of this radiation can result in cell damage, radiation burns, radiation sickness, cancer, and even death.
Created several kilometers up, dangerous concentrations of this material would be driven by upper atmospheric winds, potentially leading to hazardous levels of fallout in areas up to tens of kilometers downwind.
Thankfully, the same buildings that offer protection from the blast are even better at guarding against fallout.
Radiation is reduced as it travels through space and mass.
So while a broken window and sealed window both have the same minimal effect on radiation, thick layers of steel, concrete, and packed earth can offer serious protection.
And since fallout gives off half of its energy in the first hour and 80% in the first day, staying inside for 24 hours could dramatically improve the odds of avoiding the most serious effects of radiation.
Following the blast there would be at least 15 minutes to find shelter before the fallout begins.
Since the most hazardous fallout particles are the heaviest, they sink through the air and collect on streets and rooftops, making ideal shelters underground or in the middle of high-rise buildings.
But if someone were to get caught in the fallout, there are still measures they could take.
After finding a safe space, they should remove their shoes and outer layers, wash any exposed skin, and store the contaminated clothing far away.
Once inside, plan on staying there for at least 24 hours.
If the shelter is poor, or someone inside needs urgent medical attention, try seeking outside help after an hour.
But ideally, stay inside and stay tuned for more information from first responders.
While electric power, cell service, and Internet would be down, most radios would likely survive.
So listen in for emergency responders to determine the safest course forward.
Nuclear weapons are some of the most powerful tools of destruction on Earth, and it may seem naive to put faith in these straightforward protective measures.
But studies and simulations have repeatedly shown the benefits of getting inside.
So while we’ll hopefully never need to, remember to Get Inside, Stay Inside, and Stay Tuned.
I'd like to take you back about seven years in my life.
Friday afternoon, a few days before Christmas 2009, I was the director of operations at a consumer products company in San Francisco, and I was called into a meeting that was already in progress.
That meeting turned out to be my exit interview.
I was fired, along with several others.
I was 64 years old at the time.
It wasn't completely unexpected.
I signed a stack of papers, gathered my personal effects, and left to join my wife who was waiting for me at a nearby restaurant, completely unaware.
Fast-forward several hours, we both got really silly drunk.
(Laughter) So, 40 plus years of continuous employment for a variety of companies, large and small, was over.
I had a good a network, a good reputation -- I thought I'd be just fine.
I was an engineer in manufacturing and packaging, I had a good background.
Retirement was, like for so many people, simply not an option for me, so I turned to consulting for the next couple of years without any passion whatsoever.
And then an idea began to take root, born from my concern for our environment.
I wanted to build my own business, designing and manufacturing biodegradable packaging from waste -- paper, agricultural, even textile waste -- replacing the toxic, disposable plastic packaging to which we've all become addicted.
This is called clean technology, and it felt really meaningful to me.
A venture that could help to reduce the billions of pounds of single-use plastic packaging dumped each year, and polluting our land, our rivers and our oceans, and left for future generations to resolve -- our grandchildren, my grandchildren.
And so now at the age of 66, with 40 years of experience, I became an entrepreneur for the very first time.
(Cheers) (Applause) Thank you.
But there's more.
(Laughter) Lots of issues to deal with: manufacturing, outsourcing, job creation, patents, partnerships, funding -- these are all typical issues for a start-up, but hardly typical for me.
And a word about funding.
I live and work in San Francisco, and if you're looking for funding, you are typically going to compete with some very young people from the high-tech industry, and it can be very discouraging and intimidating.
I have shoes older than most of these people.
(Laughter) I do.
(Laughter) But five years later, I'm thrilled and proud to share with you that our revenues have doubled every year, we have no debt, we have several marquee clients, our patent was issued, I have a wonderful partner who's been with me right from the beginning, and we've won more than 20 awards for the work that we've done.
But best of all, we've made a small dent -- a very small dent -- in the worldwide plastic pollution crisis.
(Applause) And I am doing the most rewarding and meaningful work of my life right now.
I can tell you there's lots of resources available to entrepreneurs of all ages, but what I really yearned for five years ago was to find other first-time entrepreneurs who were my age.
I had no role models, absolutely none.
That 20-something app developer from Silicon Valley was not my role model.
(Laughter) I'm sure he was very clever -- (Laughter) I want to do something about that, and I want all of us to do something about that.
I want us to start talking more about people who don't become entrepreneurs until they are seniors.
Talking about these bold men and women who are checking in when their peers, in essence, are checking out.
And then connecting all these people across industries, across regions, across countries -- building a community.
You know, the Small Business Administration tells us that 64 percent of new jobs created in the private sector in the USA are thanks to small businesses like mine.
And who's to say that we'll stay forever small?
We have an interesting culture that really expects when you reach a certain age, you're going to be golfing, or playing checkers, or babysitting the grandkids all of the time.
And I adore my grandchildren -- (Laughter) and I'm also passionate about doing something meaningful in the global marketplace.
And I'm going to have lots of company.
The Census Bureau says that by 2050, there will be 84 million seniors in this country.
That's an amazing number.
That's almost twice as many as we have today.
Can you imagine how many first-time entrepreneurs there will be among 84 million people?
And they'll all have four decades of experience.
(Laughter) So when I say, "Let's start talking more about these wonderful entrepreneurs," I mean, let's talk about their ventures, just as we do the ventures of their much younger counterparts.
The older entrepreneurs in this country have a 70 percent success rate starting new ventures.
We're like the Golden State Warriors of entrepreneurs -- (Laughter) (Applause) And that number plummets to 28 percent for younger entrepreneurs.
This is according to a UK-based group called CMI.
Aren't the accomplishments of a 70-year-old entrepreneur every bit as meaningful, every bit as newsworthy, as the accomplishments of a 30-year-old entrepreneur?
Of course they are.
That's why I'd like to make the phrase "70 over 70" just as -- (Laughter) just as commonplace as the phrase "30 under 30."
(Applause) Thank you.
(Cheers) (Applause)
When I was President of the American Psychological Association, they tried to media-train me.
And an encounter I had with CNN summarizes what I'm going to be talking about today, which is the eleventh reason to be optimistic.
The editor of Discover told us 10 of them; I'm going to give you the eleventh.
So they came to me, CNN, and they said, "Professor Seligman -- would you tell us about the state of psychology today?
We'd like to interview you about that."
And she said, "But this is CNN, so you only get a sound bite."
I said, "Well, how many words do I get?"
And she said, "Well, one."
(Laughter) And the cameras rolled, and she said, "Professor Seligman, what is the state of psychology today?"
"Good."
(Laughter) "Cut! Cut. That won't do.
We'd really better give you a longer sound bite."
"How many words do I get this time?"
(Laughter) "Doctor Seligman, what is the state of psychology today?"
"Not good."
(Laughter) "Look, Doctor Seligman, we can see you're really not comfortable in this medium.
We'd better give you a real sound bite.
This time you can have three words.
Professor Seligman, what is the state of psychology today?"
"Not good enough."
I want to say why psychology was good, why it was not good, and how it may become, in the next 10 years, good enough.
And by parallel summary, I want to say the same thing about technology, about entertainment and design, because I think the issues are very similar.
So, why was psychology good?
Well, for more than 60 years, psychology worked within the disease model.
Ten years ago, when I was on an airplane and I introduced myself to my seatmate, and told them what I did, they'd move away from me, because, quite rightly, they were saying psychology is about finding what's wrong with you.
And now, when I tell people what I do, they move toward me.
What was good about psychology -- about the $30 billion investment NIMH made, about working in the disease model, about what you mean by psychology -- is that, 60 years ago, none of the disorders were treatable; it was entirely smoke and mirrors.
And now, 14 of the disorders are treatable, two of them actually curable.
And the other thing that happened is that a science developed, a science of mental illness.
We found out we could take fuzzy concepts like depression, alcoholism, and measure them with rigor; that we could create a classification of the mental illnesses; that we could understand the causality of the mental illnesses.
We could look across time at the same people -- people, for example, who were genetically vulnerable to schizophrenia -- and ask what the contribution of mothering, of genetics are, and we could isolate third variables by doing experiments on the mental illnesses.
And best of all, we were able, in the last 50 years, to invent drug treatments and psychological treatments.
And then we were able to test them rigorously, in random-assignment, placebo-controlled designs, throw out the things that didn't work, keep the things that actively did.
The conclusion of that is, psychology and psychiatry of the last 60 years can actually claim that we can make miserable people less miserable.
And I think that's terrific.
But what was not good, the consequences of that, were three things.
The first was moral; that psychologists and psychiatrists became victimologists, pathologizers; that our view of human nature was that if you were in trouble, bricks fell on you.
And we forgot that people made choices and decisions.
We forgot responsibility.
The second cost was that we forgot about you people.
We forgot about improving normal lives.
We forgot about a mission to make relatively untroubled people happier, more fulfilled, more productive.
No one works on that.
And the third problem about the disease model is, in our rush to do something about people in trouble, in our rush to do something about repairing damage, it never occurred to us to develop interventions to make people happier -- positive interventions.
So that was not good.
And so that's what led people like Nancy Etcoff, Dan Gilbert, Mike Csikszentmihalyi and myself to work in something I call, "positive psychology," which has three aims.
The first is that psychology should be just as concerned with human strength as it is with weakness.
It should be just as concerned with building strength as with repairing damage.
It should be interested in the best things in life.
And it should be just as concerned with making the lives of normal people fulfilling, and with genius, with nurturing high talent.
So in the last 10 years and the hope for the future, we've seen the beginnings of a science of positive psychology, a science of what makes life worth living.
It turns out that we can measure different forms of happiness.
And any of you, for free, can go to that website -- [www.authentichappiness.org] and take the entire panoply of tests of happiness.
You can ask, how do you stack up for positive emotion, for meaning, for flow, against literally tens of thousands of other people?
We created the opposite of the diagnostic manual of the insanities: a classification of the strengths and virtues that looks at the sex ratio, how they're defined, how to diagnose them, what builds them and what gets in their way.
We found that we could discover the causation of the positive states, the relationship between left hemispheric activity and right hemispheric activity, as a cause of happiness.
I've spent my life working on extremely miserable people, and I've asked the question: How do extremely miserable people differ from the rest of you?
And starting about six years ago, we asked about extremely happy people.
How do they differ from the rest of us?
It turns out there's one way, very surprising -- they're not more religious, they're not in better shape, they don't have more money, they're not better looking, they don't have more good events and fewer bad events.
The one way in which they differ: they're extremely social.
They don't sit in seminars on Saturday morning.
(Laughter) They don't spend time alone.
Each of them is in a romantic relationship and each has a rich repertoire of friends.
But watch out here -- this is merely correlational data, not causal, and it's about happiness in the first, "Hollywood" sense, I'm going to talk about, happiness of ebullience and giggling and good cheer.
And I'm going to suggest to you that's not nearly enough, in just a moment.
We found we could begin to look at interventions over the centuries, from the Buddha to Tony Robbins.
About 120 interventions have been proposed that allegedly make people happy.
And we find that we've been able to manualize many of them, and we actually carry out random-assignment efficacy and effectiveness studies.
That is, which ones actually make people lastingly happier?
In a couple of minutes, I'll tell you about some of those results.
But the upshot of this is that the mission I want psychology to have, in addition to its mission of curing the mentally ill, and in addition to its mission of making miserable people less miserable, is, can psychology actually make people happier?
And to ask that question -- "happy" is not a word I use very much -- we've had to break it down into what I think is askable about "happy."
And I believe there are three different -- I call them "different" because different interventions build them, it's possible to have one rather than the other -- three different happy lives.
The first happy life is the pleasant life.
This is a life in which you have as much positive emotion as you possibly can, and the skills to amplify it.
The second is a life of engagement: a life in your work, your parenting, your love, your leisure; time stops for you.
That's what Aristotle was talking about.
And third, the meaningful life.
I want to say a little bit about each of those lives and what we know about them.
The first life is the pleasant life, and it's simply, as best we can find it, it's having as many of the pleasures as you can, as much positive emotion as you can, and learning the skills -- savoring, mindfulness -- that amplify them, that stretch them over time and space.
But the pleasant life has three drawbacks, and it's why positive psychology is not happy-ology, and why it doesn't end here.
The first drawback is, it turns out the pleasant life, your experience of positive emotion, is about 50 percent heritable, and, in fact, not very modifiable.
So the different tricks that Matthieu and I and others know about increasing the amount of positive emotion in your life are 15 to 20 percent tricks, getting more of it.
Second is that positive emotion habituates.
It's all like French vanilla ice cream: the first taste is 100 percent; by the time you're down to the sixth taste, it's gone.
And, as I said, it's not particularly malleable.
And this leads to the second life.
I have to tell you about my friend Len, to talk about why positive psychology is more than positive emotion, more than building pleasure.
In two of the three great arenas of life, by the time Len was 30, Len was enormously successful.
By the time he was 20, he was an options trader.
By the time he was 25, he was a multimillionaire and the head of an options trading company.
Second, in play, he's a national champion bridge player.
But in the third great arena of life, love, Len is an abysmal failure.
And the reason he was, was that Len is a cold fish.
(Laughter) Len is an introvert.
American women said to Len, when he dated them, "You're no fun. You don't have positive emotion. Get lost."
And Len was wealthy enough to be able to afford a Park Avenue psychoanalyst, who for five years tried to find the sexual trauma that had somehow locked positive emotion inside of him.
But it turned out there wasn't any sexual trauma.
It turned out that -- Len grew up in Long Island and he played football and watched football, and played bridge.
Len is in the bottom five percent of what we call positive affectivities.
The question is: Is Len unhappy?
Contrary to what psychology told us about the bottom 50 percent of the human race in positive affectivity, I think Len is one of the happiest people I know.
He's not consigned to the hell of unhappiness, and that's because Len, like most of you, is enormously capable of flow.
When he walks onto the floor of the American Exchange at 9:30 in the morning, time stops for him.
When the first card is played till 10 days later, when the tournament is over, time stops for Len.
And this is indeed what Mike Csikszentmihalyi has been talking about, about flow.
And it's distinct from pleasure in a very important way: pleasure has raw feel -- you know it's happening; it's thought and feeling.
But what Mike told you yesterday -- during flow ...
You're one with the music.
You have intense concentration.
And this is indeed the characteristic of what we think of as the good life.
And we think there's a recipe for it, and it's knowing what your highest strengths are -- again, there's a valid test of what your five highest strengths are -- and then re-crafting your life to use them as much as you possibly can.
Re-crafting your work, your love, your play, your friendship, your parenting.
Just one example.
Hated the job.
She's working her way through college.
Her highest strength was social intelligence.
So she re-crafted bagging to make the encounter with her the social highlight of every customer's day.
Now, obviously she failed.
But what she did was to take her highest strengths, and re-craft work to use them as much as possible.
What you get out of that is not smiley-ness.
You don't look like Debbie Reynolds.
You don't giggle a lot.
So, that's the second path.
The first path, positive emotion; the second path is eudaemonian flow; and the third path is meaning.
This is the most venerable of the happinesses, traditionally.
And meaning, in this view, consists of -- very parallel to eudaemonia -- it consists of knowing what your highest strengths are, and using them to belong to and in the service of something larger than you are.
I mentioned that for all three kinds of lives -- the pleasant life, the good life, the meaningful life -- people are now hard at work on the question: Are there things that lastingly change those lives?
And the answer seems to be yes.
It's being done in a rigorous manner.
It's being done in the same way that we test drugs to see what really works.
So we do random-assignment, placebo-controlled, long-term studies of different interventions.
Just to sample the kind of interventions that we find have an effect: when we teach people about the pleasant life, how to have more pleasure in your life, one of your assignments is to take the mindfulness skills, the savoring skills, and you're assigned to design a beautiful day.
Next Saturday, set a day aside, design yourself a beautiful day, and use savoring and mindfulness to enhance those pleasures.
And we can show in that way that the pleasant life is enhanced.
Gratitude visit.
Close your eyes.
I'd like you to remember someone who did something enormously important that changed your life in a good direction, and who you never properly thanked.
The person has to be alive.
Now, OK, you can open your eyes.
I hope all of you have such a person.
Your assignment, when you're learning the gratitude visit, is to write a 300-word testimonial to that person, call them on the phone in Phoenix, ask if you can visit, don't tell them why.
Show up at their door, you read the testimonial -- everyone weeps when this happens.
And what happens is, when we test people one week later, a month later, three months later, they're both happier and less depressed.
Another example is a strengths date, in which we get couples to identify their highest strengths on the strengths test, and then to design an evening in which they both use their strengths.
We find this is a strengthener of relationships.
And fun versus philanthropy.
It's so heartening to be in a group like this, in which so many of you have turned your lives to philanthropy.
Well, my undergraduates and the people I work with haven't discovered this, so we actually have people do something altruistic and do something fun, and contrast it.
And what you find is when you do something fun, it has a square wave walk set.
When you do something philanthropic to help another person, it lasts and it lasts.
So those are examples of positive interventions.
So the next to last thing I want to say is: we're interested in how much life satisfaction people have.
This is really what you're about.
And we ask the question as a function of the three different lives, how much life satisfaction do you get?
So we ask -- and we've done this in 15 replications, involving thousands of people: To what extent does the pursuit of pleasure, the pursuit of positive emotion, the pleasant life, the pursuit of engagement, time stopping for you, and the pursuit of meaning contribute to life satisfaction?
And our results surprised us; they were backward of what we thought.
It turns out the pursuit of pleasure has almost no contribution to life satisfaction.
The pursuit of meaning is the strongest.
The pursuit of engagement is also very strong.
Where pleasure matters is if you have both engagement and you have meaning, then pleasure's the whipped cream and the cherry.
Which is to say, the full life -- the sum is greater than the parts, if you've got all three.
Conversely, if you have none of the three, the empty life, the sum is less than the parts.
And what we're asking now is: Does the very same relationship -- physical health, morbidity, how long you live and productivity -- follow the same relationship?
That is, in a corporation, is productivity a function of positive emotion, engagement and meaning?
Is health a function of positive engagement, of pleasure, and of meaning in life?
And there is reason to think the answer to both of those may well be yes.
So, Chris said that the last speaker had a chance to try to integrate what he heard, and so this was amazing for me.
I've never seen speakers stretch beyond themselves so much, which was one of the remarkable things.
But I found that the problems of psychology seemed to be parallel to the problems of technology, entertainment and design in the following way: we all know that technology, entertainment and design have been and can be used for destructive purposes.
We also know that technology, entertainment and design can be used to relieve misery.
And by the way, the distinction between relieving misery and building happiness is extremely important.
I thought, when I first became a therapist 30 years ago, that if I was good enough to make someone not depressed, not anxious, not angry, that I'd make them happy.
And I never found that; I found the best you could ever do was to get to zero; that they were empty.
And it turns out the skills of happiness, the skills of the pleasant life, the skills of engagement, the skills of meaning, are different from the skills of relieving misery.
And so, the parallel thing holds with technology, entertainment and design, I believe.
That is, it is possible for these three drivers of our world to increase happiness, to increase positive emotion.
And that's typically how they've been used.
But once you fractionate happiness the way I do -- not just positive emotion, that's not nearly enough -- there's flow in life, and there's meaning in life.
As Laura Lee told us, design and, I believe, entertainment and technology, can be used to increase meaning engagement in life as well.
So in conclusion, the eleventh reason for optimism, in addition to the space elevator, is that I think with technology, entertainment and design, we can actually increase the amount of tonnage of human happiness on the planet.
And if technology can, in the next decade or two, increase the pleasant life, the good life and the meaningful life, it will be good enough.
If entertainment can be diverted to also increase positive emotion, meaning eudaemonia, it will be good enough.
And if design can increase positive emotion, eudaemonia, and flow and meaning, what we're all doing together will become good enough.
(Applause)
We survey CEOs, police officers, truck drivers, cooks, engineers.
If people are working, we've surveyed them.
And what we know, in terms of their happiness: workers all want the same things.
[The Way We Work] There's three billion working people in the world.
And about 40 percent of them would say they're happy at work.
That means about 1.8 billion, or almost two billion people, are not happy at work.
What does that do, both to those people and the organizations that they work in?
Well, let's talk about money.
Organizations that have a lot of happy employees have three times the revenue growth, compared to organizations where that's not true.
They outperform the stock market by a factor of three.
And if you look at employee turnover, it's half that of organizations that have a lot of unhappy employees.
The miracle thing is, you don't have to spend more money to make this happen.
It's not about ping-pong tables and massages and pet walking.
It's not about the perks.
It's all about how they're treated by their leaders and by the people that they work with.
So I'd like to share a few ideas that create happy employees.
Idea number one: in organizations where employees are happy, what you find is two things are present: trust and respect.
Leaders often say, "We trust our employees.
We empower our employees."
And then when an employee needs a laptop -- and this is a true example -- 15 people have to approve that laptop.
So for the employee, all the words are right, but 15 levels of approval for a $1,500 laptop?
You've actually spent more money than the laptop, on the approval.
And the employee feels maybe they're really not trusted.
So what can an organization do to have a high level of trust?
The first organization that comes to mind is Four Seasons.
They have magnificent properties all around the world.
And their employees are told, "Do whatever you think is right when servicing the customer."
To hand that trust to your employees to do whatever they think is right makes the employees feel great.
And this is why they're known for delivering some of the best service in the world.
Idea number two: fairness.
The thing that erodes trust in an organization faster than anything else is when employees feel that they're being treated unfairly.
Employees want to be treated the same, regardless of their rank or their tenure or their age or their experience or their job category, compared to anyone else.
When I think about great organizations who get fairness right, the first organization that comes to mind is Salesforce.
They found that men and women working in the same job with the same level of proficiency were making different amounts of money.
So immediately, they calculated the difference, and they invested three million dollars to try and balance things out.
Idea number three is listening.
So, to be a listener who connects with all types of people, we have to unlearn a few things.
We've all been taught about active listening and eye contact -- an intense stare and a compassionate look.
That's not listening.
Repeating what the person says -- that's not listening.
Being humble and always hunting and searching for the best idea possible -- that's what listening is.
And employees can feel whether you're doing that or not.
They want to know, when they talk to you and share an idea, did you consider it when you made a decision?
The one thing that everybody appreciates and wants when they're speaking is to know that what they say matters so much you might actually change your mind.
Otherwise, what's the point of the conversation?
We all know the things we need to change, the things that we need to do differently.
The way you behave, the way you treat others, the way you respond, the way you support, defines the work experience for everyone around you.
Changing to be a better person -- the world is littered with those failures.
But changing because there's something you believe in, some purpose that you have, where you're willing to risk almost everything because it's so important to you -- that's the reason to change.
If it's not, you should probably find a different place to work.
The basic problem with working in an office is you're just not in control of your work environment.
[The Way We Work] Howdy, my name is Matt, and I'm the CEO of Automattic, the company behind WordPress.com, Jetpack and WooCommerce.
We're coming up on over 800 employees, and they live everywhere, from California to Alabama, Mississippi, to where I live in Texas.
They're also in 67 countries.
Canada, Mexico, India, New Zealand.
Some of them choose not even to have a home base, they're nomads.
Whether they are in RVs or traveling through Airbnbs, they are in new places every day, week or month.
As long as they can find good Wi-Fi, we don't care where they are.
Our focus on distributed work didn't happen accidentally.
It was a conscious choice from the very beginning.
Notice I don't use the word "remote," because it sets up the expectation, that some people are essential and some aren't.
I use the word "distributed" to describe what we do, where everyone is on an equal playing field.
I think a distributed workforce is the most effective way to build a company.
The key is you have to approach it consciously.
When we started WordPress, many of the first 20 hires were people I'd never met in person.
But we'd collaborated online, sometimes for years.
I wanted to continue that for one simple reason.
I believe that talent and intelligence are equally distributed throughout the world.
But opportunity is not.
In Silicon Valley, the big tech companies fish from essentially the same small pond or bay.
A distributed company can fish from the entire ocean.
Instead of hiring someone who grew up in Japan but lives in California, you can gain someone who lives, works, wakes up and goes to sleep wherever they are in the world.
They bring a different understanding of that culture and a different lived experience.
At the base of the decision to go distributed, there's a desire to give people autonomy over how they do their work.
Unless you're in a role where specific hours are important, you can make your own schedule.
Everyone can have a corner office, their windows, the food they want to eat, you can choose when there's music and when there's silence.
You can choose what temperature the room should be.
You can save the time you'd spend commuting and put it into things that are important to you.
A distributed workforce is ideal for a technology company.
But people often ask me, "This works great for y'all, but what about everyone else?"
If you have an office, you can do a few things to build distributed capability.
First: document everything.
In an office, it's easy to make decisions in the moment, in the kitchen, in the hall.
But if people work remotely and some members of the team are having those conversations they don't have access to, they'll see these decisions being made without understanding the why.
Always leave a trail of where you were and what you were thinking about.
This allows others to pick up where you left off.
It allows people in different time zones to interact, it's also great to think about as an organization evolves, people leaving and people joining.
Try to have as much communication as possible online.
When everything's shared and public, it allows new people to catch up quickly.
You also need to find the right tools.
There are so many apps and services that help with day-to-day communication, video conferencing, project management.
The things that changed how you work probably aren't objects anymore.
They're things you access through your computer.
So experiment with different tools that enable collaboration, see what works.
Create productive, face-to-face time.
In a traditional office, you're in the same place 48 weeks out of the year and you might have three or four weeks apart.
We try to flip that: we come together for short, intense bursts.
Once a year we do a grand meet-up where the entire company comes together for a week.
It's half-work, half-play.
The primary goal is connecting people.
We want to make sure everyone's aligned and on the same page, and they have a deeper connection with their colleagues.
When they work together the rest of the year, they can bring together that understanding and empathy.
And the final practice: give people the flexibility to make their own work environment.
Every person at Automattic has a co-working stipend that they can put towards a co-working space or just to buy coffee, so they don't get kicked out of the coffee shop.
One group in Seattle decided to pool their stipends together and rented a workspace on a fishing pier.
Each person who joins the company gets a home-office stipend.
This is money they can invest in getting the right chair, monitor, the right desk setup, so they can have the most productive environment for them.
Today, there are just a few companies that are distributed first.
In a decade or two, I predict that 90 percent of companies that are going to be changing the course of the world are going to function this way.
As you think about what you're going to build next, consider how you can tap into global talent, give people autonomy to live and work where they feel they should and still participate fully in whatever it is that you're creating together.
The decorative use of wire in southern Africa dates back hundreds of years.
But modernization actually brought communication and a whole new material, in the form of telephone wire.
Rural to urban migration meant that newfound industrial materials started to replace hard-to-come-by natural grasses.
So, here you can see the change from use -- starting to use contemporary materials.
These pieces date back from the '40s to the late '50s.
In the '90s, my interest and passion for transitional art forms led me to a new form, which came from a squatter camp outside Durban.
And I got the opportunity to start working with this community at that point, and started developing, really, and mentoring them in terms of scale, in terms of the design.
And the project soon grew from five to 50 weavers in about a year.
Soon we had outgrown the scrap yards, what they could provide, so we coerced a wire manufacturer to help us, and not only to supply the materials on bobbins, but to produce to our color specifications.
At the same time, I was thinking, well, there's lots of possibility here to produce contemporary products, away from the ethnic, a little bit more contemporary.
So I developed a whole range around -- mass-produced range -- that obviously fitted into a much higher-end decor market that could be exported and also service our local market.
We started experimenting, as you can see, in terms of shapes, forms. The scale became very important, and it's become our pet project. It's successful, it's been running for 12 years. And we supply the Conran shops, and Donna Karan, and so it's kind of great.
This is our group, our main group of weavers.
They come on a weekly basis to Durban.
They all have bank accounts.
They've all moved back to the rural area where they came from.
It's a weekly turnaround of production.
This is the community that I originally showed you the slide of.
And that's also modernized today, and it's supporting work for 300 weavers.
And the rest says it all.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When was I was 21 years old, I had all this physics homework.
Physics homework requires taking breaks, and Wikipedia was relatively new, so I took a lot of breaks there.
I kept going back to the same articles, reading them again and again, on glaciers, Antarctica and Greenland.
How cool would it be to visit these places and what would it take to do so?
Well, here we are on a repurposed Air Force cargo plane operated by NASA flying over the Greenland ice sheet.
There's a lot to see here, but there's more that is hidden, waiting to be uncovered.
What the Wikipedia articles didn't tell me is that there's liquid water hidden inside the ice sheet, because we didn't know that yet.
I did learn on Wikipedia that the Greenland ice sheet is huge, the size of Mexico, and its ice from top to bottom is two miles thick.
But it's not just static.
The ice flows like a river downhill towards the ocean.
As it flows around bends, it deforms and cracks.
I get to study these amazing ice dynamics, which are located in one of the most remote physical environments remaining on earth.
To work in glaciology right now is like getting in on the ground floor at Facebook in the 2000s.
(Laughter) Our capability to fly airplanes and satellites over the ice sheets is revolutionizing glaciology.
It's just starting to do for science what the smartphone has done for social media.
The satellites are reporting a wealth of observations that are revealing new hidden facts about the ice sheets continuously.
For instance, we have observations of the size of the Greenland ice sheet every month going back to 2002.
You can look towards the bottom of the screen here to see the month and the year go forward.
You can see that some areas of the ice sheet melt or lose ice in the summer.
Other areas experience snowfall or gain ice back in the winter.
This seasonal cycle, though, is eclipsed by an overall rate of mass loss that would have stunned a glaciologist 50 years ago.
We never thought that an ice sheet could lose mass into the ocean this quickly.
Since these measurements began in 2002, the ice sheet has lost so much ice that if that water were piled up on our smallest continent, it would drown Australia knee-deep.
How is this possible?
Well, under the ice lies the bedrock.
We used radar to image the hills, valleys, mountains and depressions that the ice flows over.
Hidden under the ice sheet are channels the size of the Grand Canyon that funnel ice and water off of Greenland and into the ocean.
The reason that radar can reveal the bedrock is that ice is entirely transparent to radar.
You can do an experiment.
Go home and put an ice cube in the microwave.
It won't melt, because microwaves, or radar, pass straight through the ice without interacting.
If you want to melt your ice cube, you have to get it wet, because water heats up easily in the microwave.
That's the whole principle the microwave oven is designed around.
Radar can see water.
And radar has revealed a vast pool of liquid water hidden under my colleague Olivia, seven stories beneath her feet.
Here, she's used a pump to bring some of that water back to the ice sheet's surface.
Just six years ago, we had no idea this glacier aquifer existed.
The aquifer formed when snow melts in the summer sun and trickles downward.
It puddles up in huge pools.
From there, the snow acts as an igloo, insulating this water from the cold and the wind above.
So the water can stay hidden in the ice sheet in liquid form year after year.
The question is, what happens next?
Does the water stay there forever?
It could.
Or does it find a way out to reach the global ocean?
One possible way for the water to reach the bedrock and from there the ocean is a crevasse, or a crack in the ice.
When cracks fill with water, the weight of the water forces them deeper and deeper.
This is how fracking works to extract natural gas from deep within the earth.
Pressurized fluids fracture rocks.
All it takes is a crack to get started.
Well, we recently discovered that there are cracks available in the Greenland ice sheet near this glacier aquifer.
You can fly over most of the Greenland ice sheet and see nothing, no cracks, no features on the surface, but as this helicopter flies towards the coast, the path that water would take on its quest to flow downhill, one crack appears, then another and another.
Are these cracks filled with liquid water?
And if so, how deep do they take that water?
Can they take it to the bedrock and the ocean?
To answer these questions, we need something beyond remote sensing data.
We need numeric models.
I write numeric models that run on supercomputers.
A numeric model is simply a set of equations that works together to describe something.
It can be as simple as the next number in a sequence -- one, three, five, seven -- or it can be a more complex set of equations that predict the future based on known conditions in the present.
In our case, what are the equations for how ice cracks?
Well, engineers already have a very good understanding of how aluminum, steel and plastics fracture under stress.
It's an important problem in our society.
And it turns out that the engineering equations for how materials fracture are not that different from my physics homework.
So I borrowed them, adapted them for ice, and then I had a numeric model for how a crevasse can fracture when filled with water from the aquifer.
This is the power of math.
It can help us understand real processes in our world.
I'll show you now the results of my numeric model, but first I should point out that the crevasse is about a thousand times narrower than it is deep, so in the main panel here, we've zoomed in to better see the details.
You can look to the smaller panel on the right to see the true scale for how tall and skinny the crevasse is.
As the aquifer water flows into the crevasse, some of it refreezes in the negative 15 degree Celsius ice.
That's about as cold as your kitchen freezer.
But this loss can be overcome if the flow rate in from the glacier aquifer is high enough.
In our case, it is, and the aquifer water drives the crevasse all the way to the base of the ice sheet a thousand meters below.
From there, it has a clear path to reach the ocean.
So the aquifer water is a part of the three millimeters per year of sea level rise that we experience as a global society.
But there's more: the aquifer water might be punching above its weight.
The ice flows in complex ways.
In some places, the ice flows very fast.
There tends to be water at the base of the ice sheet here.
In other places, not so fast.
Usually, there's not water present at the base there.
Now that we know the aquifer water is getting to the base of the ice sheet, the next question is: Is it making the ice itself flow faster into the ocean?
We're trying to uncover these mysteries hidden inside the Greenland ice sheet so that we can better plan for the sea level rise it holds.
The amount of ice that Greenland has lost since 2002 is just a small fraction of what that ice sheet holds.
Ice sheets are immense, powerful machines that operate on long timescales.
In the next 80 years, global sea levels will rise at least 20 centimeters, perhaps as much as one meter, and maybe more.
Our understanding of future sea level rise is good, but our projections have a wide range.
It's our role as glaciologists and scientists to narrow these uncertainties.
How much sea level rise is coming, and how fast will it get here?
We need to know how much and how fast, so the world and its communities can plan for the sea level rise that's coming.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Almost 50 years ago, psychiatrists Richard Rahe and Thomas Holmes developed an inventory of the most distressing human experiences that we could have.
Number one on the list? Death of a spouse.
Number two, divorce. Three, marital separation.
Now, generally, but not always, for those three to occur, we need what comes in number seven on the list, which is marriage.
(Laughter) Fourth on the list is imprisonment in an institution.
Now, some say number seven has been counted twice.
(Laughter) I don't believe that.
When the life stress inventory was built, back then, a long-term relationship pretty much equated to a marriage.
Not so now.
So for the purposes of this talk, I'm going to be including de facto relationships, common-law marriages and same-sex marriages, or same-sex relationships soon hopefully to become marriages.
And I can say from my work with same-sex couples, the principles I'm about to talk about are no different.
They're the same across all relationships.
So in a modern society, we know that prevention is better than cure.
We vaccinate against polio, diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, measles.
We have awareness campaigns for melanoma, stroke, diabetes -- all important campaigns.
But none of those conditions come close to affecting 45 percent of us.
Forty-five percent: that's our current divorce rate.
Why no prevention campaign for divorce?
Well, I think it's because our policymakers don't believe that things like attraction and the way relationships are built is changeable or educable.
Why?
Well, our policymakers currently are Generation X.
They're in their 30s to 50s.
And when I'm talking to these guys about these issues, I see their eyes glaze over, and I can see them thinking, "Doesn't this crazy psychiatrist get it?
You can't control the way in which people attract other people and build relationships."
Not so, our dear millennials.
This is the most information-connected, analytical and skeptical generation, making the most informed decisions of any generation before them.
And when I talk to millennials, I get a very different reaction.
They actually want to hear about this.
They want to know about how do we have relationships that last?
So for those of you who want to embrace the post- "romantic destiny" era with me, let me talk about my three life hacks for preventing divorce.
Now, we can intervene to prevent divorce at two points: later, once the cracks begin to appear in an established relationship; or earlier, before we commit, before we have children.
And that's where I'm going to take us now.
So my first life hack: millennials spend seven-plus hours on their devices a day.
That's American data.
And some say, probably not unreasonably, this has probably affected their face-to-face relationships.
Indeed, and add to that the hookup culture, ergo apps like Tinder, and it's no great surprise that the 20-somethings that I work with will often talk to me about how it is often easier for them to have sex with somebody that they've met than have a meaningful conversation.
Now, some say this is a bad thing.
I say this is a really good thing.
It's a particularly good thing to be having sex outside of the institution of marriage.
Now, before you go out and get all moral on me, remember that Generation X, in the American Public Report, they found that 91 percent of women had had premarital sex by the age of 30.
Ninety-one percent.
It's a particularly good thing that these relationships are happening later.
See, boomers in the '60s -- they were getting married at an average age for women of 20 and 23 for men.
2015 in Australia?
That is now 30 for women and 32 for men.
That's a good thing, because the older you are when you get married, the lower your divorce rate.
Why?
Why is it helpful to get married later?
Three reasons.
Firstly, getting married later allows the other two preventers of divorce to come into play.
They are tertiary education and a higher income, which tends to go with tertiary education.
So these three factors all kind of get mixed up together.
Number two, neuroplasticity research tell us that the human brain is still growing until at least the age of 25.
So that means how you're thinking and what you're thinking is still changing up until 25.
And thirdly, and most importantly to my mind, is personality.
Your personality at the age of 20 does not correlate with your personality at the age of 50.
But your personality at the age of 30 does correlate with your personality at the age of 50.
So when I ask somebody who got married young why they broke up, and they say, "We grew apart," they're being surprisingly accurate, because the 20s is a decade of rapid change and maturation.
So the first thing you want to get before you get married is older.
(Laughter) Number two, John Gottman, psychologist and relationship researcher, can tell us many factors that correlate with a happy, successful marriage.
But the one that I want to talk about is a big one: 81 percent of marriages implode, self-destruct, if this problem is present.
And the second reason why I want to talk about it here is because it's something you can evaluate while you're dating.
Gottman found that the relationships that were the most stable and happy over the longer term were relationships in which the couple shared power.
They were influenceable: big decisions, like buying a house, overseas trips, buying a car, having children.
But when Gottman drilled down on this data, what he found was that women were generally pretty influenceable.
Guess where the problem lay?
(Laughter) Yeah, there's only two options here, isn't there?
Yeah, we men were to blame.
The other thing that Gottman found is that men who are influenceable also tended to be "outstanding fathers."
So women: How influenceable is your man?
Men: you're with her because you respect her.
Make sure that respect plays out in the decision-making process.
Number three.
I'm often intrigued by why couples come in to see me after they've been married for 30 or 40 years.
This is a time when they're approaching the infirmities and illness of old age.
It's a time when they're particularly focused on caring for each other.
They'll forgive things that have bugged them for years.
They'll forgive all betrayals, even infidelities, because they're focused on caring for each other.
So what pulls them apart?
The best word I have for this is reliability, or the lack thereof.
Does your partner have your back?
It takes two forms.
Firstly, can you rely on your partner to do what they say they're going to do?
Do they follow through?
Secondly, if, for example, you're out and you're being verbally attacked by somebody, or you're suffering from a really disabling illness, does your partner step up and do what needs to be done to leave you feeling cared for and protected?
And here's the rub: if you're facing old age, and your partner isn't doing that for you -- in fact, you're having to do that for them -- then in an already-fragile relationship, it can look a bit like you might be better off out of it rather than in it.
So is your partner there for you when it really matters?
Not all the time, 80 percent of the time, but particularly if it's important to you.
On your side, think carefully before you commit to do something for your partner.
It is much better to commit to as much as you can follow through than to commit to more sound-good-in-the-moment and then let them down.
And if it's really important to your partner, and you commit to it, make sure you move hell and high water to follow through.
Now, these are things that I'm saying you can look for.
Don't worry, these are also things that can be built in existing relationships.
I believe that the most important decision that you can make is who you choose as a life partner, who you choose as the other parent of your children.
And of course, romance has to be there.
Romance is a grand and beautiful and quirky thing.
But we need to add to a romantic, loving heart an informed, thoughtful mind, as we make the most important decision of our life.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When my 91-year-old mother, Elia, moved in with me, I thought I was doing her a service.
In fact, it was the other way around.
You see, Mom was having issues with memory loss and accepting her age.
She looked defeated.
I tried to make her as comfortable as possible, but when I was at my easel, painting, I would peek over and see her just ... there.
She'd be staring at nothing in particular.
I'd watch her slowly climb the stairs, and she wasn't the mom I grew up with.
I saw, instead, a frail, tiny, old woman.
A few weeks went by, and I needed a break from my painting.
I wanted to play with the new camera I had just bought.
I was excited -- it had all sorts of dials, buttons and settings I wanted to learn, so I set up my tripod facing this large mirror, blocking the doorway to the only bathroom in the house.
(Laughter) After a while, I hear, (Imitating Italian accent) "I need to use the washroom."
(Laughter) "Five minutes, Mom. I need to do this."
15 minutes later, and I hear, again, "I need to use the washroom."
"Five more minutes."
Then this happened.
(Laughter) (Applause) And this.
(Laughter) And then, this.
(Laughter) I had my "aha!" moment.
We connected.
We had something tangible we could do together.
My mom was born in a small mountain village in central Italy, where her parents had land and sheep.
At a young age, her father died of pneumonia, leaving his wife and two daughters alone with all the heavy chores.
They found that they couldn't cope.
So a very hard decision was made.
Mom, the oldest, at 13, was married off to a complete stranger twice her age.
She went from being just a kid and was pushed into adulthood.
Mom had her first child when she was only 16.
Years later, and now living in Toronto, Mom got work in a clothing factory and soon became manager of a very large sewing department.
And because it was full of immigrant workers, Mom taught herself words from translation books.
She then practiced them in French, Greek, Spanish, Portuguese, Danish, Polish, Russian, Romanian, Hungarian, all around the house.
I was in awe of her focus and determination to succeed at whatever she loved to do.
After that bathroom "aha!" moment, I practiced my newfound camera skills with Mom as portrait model.
Through all of this, she talked, and I listened.
She'd tell me about her early childhood and how she was feeling now.
We had each other's attention.
Mom was losing her short-term memory, but was better recalling her younger years.
I'd ask, and she would tell me stories.
I listened, and I was her audience.
I got ideas.
I wrote them down, and I sketched them out.
I showed her what to do by acting out the scenarios myself.
We would then stage them.
So she posed, and I learned more about photography.
Mom loved the process, the acting.
She felt worthy again, she felt wanted and needed.
And she certainly wasn't camera-shy.
(Laughter) (Applause) Mom laughed hysterically at this one.
(Laughter) The idea for this image came from an old German film I'd seen, about a submarine, called "Das Boot."
As you can see, what I got instead looked more like "E.T."
(Laughter) So I put this image aside, thinking it was a total failure, because it didn't reach my particular vision.
But Mom laughed so hard, I eventually, for fun, decided to post it online anyway.
It got an incredible amount of attention.
Now, with any Alzheimer's, dementia, there's a certain amount of frustration and sadness for everyone involved.
This is Mom's silent scream.
Her words to me one day were, "Why is my head so full of things to say, but before they reach my mouth, I forget what they are?"
"Why is my head so full of things to say, but before they reach my mouth, I forget what they are?"
(Applause) Now, as full-time care partner and full-time painter, I had my frustrations too.
(Laughter) But to balance off all the difficulties, we played.
That was Mom's happy place.
And I needed her to be there, too.
(Laughter) (Laughter) (Laughter) Now, Mom was also preoccupied with aging.
She would say, "How did I get so old, so fast?"
(Audience sighs) "So old."
"So fast."
I also got Mom to model for my oil paintings.
This painting is called "The Dressmaker."
I remember, as a kid, Mom sewing clothes for the whole family on this massive, heavy sewing machine that was bolted to the floor in the basement.
Many nights, I would go downstairs and bring my schoolwork with me.
I would sit behind her in this overstuffed chair.
The low hum of the huge motor and the repetitive stitching sounds were comforting to me.
When Mom moved into my house, I saved this machine and stored it in my studio for safekeeping.
This painting brought me back to my childhood.
The interesting part was that it was now Mom, sitting behind me, watching me paint her working on that very same machine she sewed at when I sat behind her, watching her sew, 50 years earlier.
I also gave Mom a project to do, to keep her busy and thinking.
I provided her with a small camera and asked her to take at least 10 pictures a day of anything she wanted.
These are Mom's photographs.
She's never held a camera in her life before this.
She was 93.
We would sit down together and talk about our work.
I would try to explain (Laughter) how and why I did them, the meaning, the feeling, why they were relevant.
Mom, on the other hand, would just bluntly say, "sì," "no," "bella" or "bruta."
(Laughter) I watched her facial expressions.
She always had the last say, with words or without.
This voyage of discovery hasn't ended with Mom.
She is now in an assisted living residence, a 10-minute walk away from my home.
I visit her every other day.
Her dementia had gotten to the point where it was unsafe for her to be in my house.
It has a lot of stairs.
She doesn't know my name anymore.
(Voice breaking) But you know what? That's OK.
She still recognizes my face and always has a big smile when she sees me.
(Applause) (Applause ends) I don't take pictures of her anymore.
That wouldn't be fair or ethical on my part.
And she wouldn't understand the reasons for doing them.
My father, my brother, (Voice breaking) my nephew, my partner and my best friend, all passed away suddenly.
And I didn't have the chance to tell them how much I appreciated and loved them.
With Mom, I need to be there and make it a very long goodbye.
(Applause) (Applause ends) For me, it's about being present and really listening.
Dependents want to feel a part of something, anything.
It doesn't need to be something exceptionally profound that's shared -- it could be as simple as walks together.
Give them a voice of interaction, participation, and a feeling of belonging.
Make the time meaningful.
Life, it's about wanting to live and not waiting to die.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Can I get a wave and a smile from everyone, please?
(Laughter) This is for you, Mom.
(Camera clicks) (Applause)
When I was 13, I lost my grandfather to a silent heart attack.
What happened to be more shocking was that at 75, grandpa was really normal, healthy and energetic, but he was diabetic.
Learning all of this was so painful that I decided to go out on a war against this deadly killer and see what could be done.
It was shocking to discover the results of recent studies that have shown an estimate of nearly eight million people who die from heart attacks every year.
Heart attacks occur for many reasons, but most often, they occur when arteries get clogged, blood flow is cut off and oxygen-starved cells in the heart muscles start to die.
You may know the common symptoms of a heart attack: chest pain, arm pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, et cetera ...
but there is a type of heart attack that is quite common, just as deadly, but harder to detect because the symptoms are silent.
People having silent heart attacks just don't realize what's happening, so they're not seeking medical attention, which means they're less likely to receive the treatment that they need at the critical moment.
And even if they do get to the hospital by chance, either before or after they are struck by a heart attack, they might have to go through one or more of these time-consuming, expensive tests and treatments, which are currently considered the gold standards of heart-attack diagnosis.
The greater concern, however, is that these silent heart attacks account for nearly 45 percent of all heart attacks.
Patients with diabetes and similar disorders suffer from nerve damage that prevents them from feeling the sort of pain that usually signals to someone that he or she may be having a heart attack.
Which means they suffer the damage of a heart attack without even knowing or feeling anything.
These already at-risk patients suffer from nerve damage, and they do not get immediate medical care.
They do not know anything before an unlikely event is about to occur.
My grandfather was an at-risk patient, too.
I probed this issue further -- read as much as I could to understand the heart, met researchers and worked across labs in India.
And finally, after three long years of persistent research, what I have to share with the world today is a promising solution.
A noninvasive device that is inexpensive, portable, wearable by at-risk patients at all times.
It greatly reduces the need for a blood test and works 24/7, collecting and analyzing data at preset intervals.
And all this data is collected for a single purpose: detecting heart attacks as they occur.
This is a very promising solution that might help us in the future.
You may not know how intelligent your heart really is.
It tries to communicate to your body multiple times before failing, by indicating symptoms like chest pain.
These symptoms are triggered when the heart loses out on oxygen-rich blood flow.
But remember I told you about the nerve damage.
It silences these symptoms before a silent heart attack, which makes it even deadlier.
And you may not even know the common symptoms.
Meanwhile, the heart also sends out certain biomarkers -- cardiac biomarkers or proteins that are SOS messages -- in the form of SOS messages -- into your bloodstream, indicating that the heart is at risk.
As it gets riskier and riskier, the concentrations of these cardiac biomarker proteins keep increasing abysmally.
My device solely relies on this data.
The key is that these cardiac biomarkers are found in one of the earliest stages of a heart attack, when someone is almost sure to survive if he or she gets prompt care.
And my device is solely based on that basis.
And here's how my device works.
A silicon patch is worn around your wrist or placed near your chest.
Without having to prick your skin for a biomarker blood test, this patch can spot, isolate and track a heart-attack specific biomarker called H-FABP, and alerts you if and when it reaches a critical level in your bloodstream -- a process that's much simpler, easier and cheaper than conventional methods of heart-attack diagnosis.
By checking on biomarker concentration data, a system like this, with advanced research in the future, could significantly reduce the need for an at-risk patient to go to a doctor for a biomarker blood test, because the device could be worn at all times, sensing biomarker elevations in real time.
Thus, if the device senses the biomarker levels going beyond the critical point, the at-risk patient could be warned of an impending cardiac arrest and that he or she needs immediate medical attention.
Although the device may not be able to provide the patient with the complete analysis of the cardiac injury, it might be of immense help in actually indicating that the patient is in danger, so that the patient can be alarmed and know that immediate care is crucial.
Every at-risk patient will now receive more time to survive and reach out for medical help.
Consequently, they don't have to go for expensive and invasive medical treatments that would otherwise be necessary after a heart attack.
When I got my device tested on at-risk patients under observation, results from the clinical validation tests certified close to a 96 percent accuracy and sensitivity.
I intend to make my device available to people in two variants: one which gives digital analysis of the biomarker levels and a simpler version for the people in rural areas which simply vibrates when the biomarker levels go beyond the critical point.
When we look at our progress in cardiac health care today, it is more of sick care than preventative self-care and technology.
We literally wait for the heart attack to occur and put our vast majority of resources into post-care treatment.
But by then, irreversible damage will already be done.
I firmly believe it's time for us to rethink medicine.
We must establish proactive health-care technologies.
A change must be brought out not 10 years from now, not five years from now, but today.
And so, hopefully, one day, with the help of these devices, someone else won't lose his or her grandfather just like I did.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
At this very moment, with every breath we take, major delta cities across the globe are sinking, including New York, London, Tokyo, Shanghai, New Orleans, and as well as my city, Bangkok.
Here is the usual version of climate change.
This is mine.
Nothing much, just a crocodile on the street.
(Laughter) This is an urgent impact of climate change: over sinking cities.
Here, you can see the urbanization of Bangkok, growing in every direction, shifting from porous, agricultural land -- the land that can breathe and absorb water -- to a concrete jungle.
This is what parts of it look like after 30 minutes of rainfall.
And every time it rains, I wish my car could turn into a boat.
This land has no room for water.
It has lost its absorbent capacity.
The reality of Bangkok's metropolitan region is a city of 15 million people living, working and commuting on top of a shifting, muddy river delta.
Bangkok is sinking more than one centimeter per year, which is four times faster than the rate of predicted sea level rise.
And we could be below sea level by 2030, which will be here too soon.
There is no coincidence that I am here as a landscape architect.
As a child, I grew up in a row house next to the busy road always filled with traffic.
In front of my house, there was a concrete parking lot, and that was my playground.
The only living creature I would find, and had fun with, were these sneaky little plants trying to grow through the crack of the concrete pavement.
My favorite game with friends was to dig a bigger and bigger hole through this crack to let this little plant creep out -- sneak out more and more.
And yes, landscape architecture gives me the opportunity to continue my cracking ambition -- (Laughter) to connect this concrete land back to nature.
Before, Thais -- my people -- we were adapted to the cycle of the wet and dry season, and you could call us amphibious.
(Laughter) We lived both on land and on water.
We were adapted to both.
And flooding was a happy event, when the water fertilized our land.
But now, flooding means ...
disaster.
In 2011, Thailand was hit by the most damaging and the most expensive flood disaster in our history.
Flooding has turned central Thailand into an enormous lake.
Here, you can see the scale of the flood in the center of the image, to the scale of Bangkok, outlined in yellow.
The water was overflowing from the north, making its way across several provinces.
Millions of my people, including me and my family, were displaced and homeless.
Some had to escape the city.
Many were terrified of losing their home and their belongings, so they stayed back in the flood with no electricity and clean water.
For me, this flood reflects clearly that our modern infrastructure, and especially our notion of fighting flood with concrete, had made us so extremely vulnerable to the climate uncertainty.
But in the heart of this disaster, I found my calling.
I cannot just sit and wait as my city continues to sink.
The city needed me, and I had the ability to fix this problem.
Six years ago, I started my project.
My teams and I won the design competition for Chulalongkorn Centenary Park.
This was the big, bold mission of the first university in Thailand for celebrating its hundredth anniversary by giving this piece of land as a public park to our city.
Having a park sounds very normal to many other cities, but not in Bangkok, which has one of the lowest public green space per capita among megacities in Asia.
Our project's become the first new public park in almost 30 years.
The 11-acre park -- a big green crack at the heart of Bangkok -- opened just last year.
(Applause and cheers) Thank you.
(Applause) For four years, we have pushed through countless meetings to convince and never give up to convincing that this park isn't just for beautification or recreation: it must help the city deal with water, it must help the city confront climate change.
And here is how it works.
Bangkok is a flat city, so we harnessed the power of gravity by inclining the whole park to collect every drop of rain.
The gravity force pulls down the runoff from the highest point to the lowest point.
This park has three main elements that work as one system.
The first -- the green roof.
This is the biggest green roof in Thailand, with the rainwater tanks and museum underneath.
In the dry season, the collected rain can be used to water the park for up to a month.
The runoff on the green roof then falls through wetlands with the native water plants that can help filter and help clean water.
And at the lower end, the retention pond collects all of the water.
At this pond, there are water bikes.
People can pedal and help clean water.
Their exercise becomes an active part of the park water system.
When life gives you a flood, you have fun with the water.
(Laughter) Centenary Park gives room for people and room for water, which is exactly what we and our cities need.
This is an amphibious design.
This park is not about getting rid of flood.
It's about creating a way to live with it.
And not a single drop of rain is wasted in this park.
This park can hold and collect a million gallons of water.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Every given project, for me, is an opportunity to create more green cracks through this concrete jungle by using landscape architecture as a solution, like turning this concrete roof into an urban farm, which can help absorb rain; reduce urban heat island and grow food in the middle of the city; reuse the abandoned concrete structure to become a green pedestrian bridge; and another flood-proof park at Thammasat University, which nearly completes the biggest green roof on an academic campus yet in Southeast Asia.
Severe flooding is our new normal, putting the southeast Asian region -- the region with the most coastline -- at extreme risk.
Creating a park is just one solution.
The awareness of climate change means we, in every profession we are involved, are increasingly obligated to understand the climate risk and put whatever we are working on as part of the solution.
Because if our cities continue the way they are now, a similar catastrophe will happen again ...
and again.
Creating a solution in these sinking cities is like making the impossible possible.
And for that, I would like to share one word that I always keep in mind, that is, "tangjai."
The literal translation for "tang" is "to firmly stand," and "jai" means "heart."
Firmly stand your heart at your goal.
In Thai language, when you commit to do something, you put tangjai in front of your word, so your heart will be in your action.
No matter how rough the path, how big the crack, you push through to your goal, because that's where your heart is.
And yes, Thailand is home.
This land is my only home, and that's where I firmly stand my heart.
Where do you stand yours?
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Kòp kun ka.
(Applause and cheers)
Who are we?
That is the big question.
And essentially we are just an upright-walking, big-brained, super-intelligent ape.
This could be us.
We belong to the family called the Hominidae.
We are the species called Homo sapiens sapiens, and it's important to remember that, in terms of our place in the world today and our future on planet Earth.
We are one species of about five and a half thousand mammalian species that exist on planet Earth today.
And that's just a tiny fraction of all species that have ever lived on the planet in past times.
We're one species out of approximately, or let's say, at least 16 upright-walking apes that have existed over the past six to eight million years.
But as far as we know, we're the only upright-walking ape that exists on planet Earth today, except for the bonobos.
And it's important to remember that, because the bonobos are so human, and they share 99 percent of their genes with us.
And we share our origins with a handful of the living great apes.
It's important to remember that we evolved.
Now, I know that's a dirty word for some people, but we evolved from common ancestors with the gorillas, the chimpanzee and also the bonobos.
We have a common past, and we have a common future.
And it is important to remember that all of these great apes have come on as long and as interesting evolutionary journey as we ourselves have today.
And it's this journey that is of such interest to humanity, and it's this journey that has been the focus of the past three generations of my family, as we've been in East Africa looking for the fossil remains of our ancestors to try and piece together our evolutionary past.
And this is how we look for them.
A group of dedicated young men and women walk very slowly out across vast areas of Africa, looking for small fragments of bone, fossil bone, that may be on the surface.
And that's an example of what we may do as we walk across the landscape in Northern Kenya, looking for fossils.
I doubt many of you in the audience can see the fossil that's in this picture, but if you look very carefully, there is a jaw, a lower jaw, of a 4.1-million-year-old upright-walking ape as it was found at Lake Turkana on the west side.
(Laughter) It's extremely time-consuming, labor-intensive and it is something that is going to involve a lot more people, to begin to piece together our past.
We still really haven't got a very complete picture of it.
When we find a fossil, we mark it.
Today, we've got great technology: we have GPS.
We mark it with a GPS fix, and we also take a digital photograph of the specimen, so we could essentially put it back on the surface, exactly where we found it.
And we can bring all this information into big GIS packages, today.
When we then find something very important, like the bones of a human ancestor, we begin to excavate it extremely carefully and slowly, using dental picks and fine paintbrushes.
And all the sediment is then put through these screens, and where we go again through it very carefully, looking for small bone fragments, and it's then washed.
And these things are so exciting. They are so often the only, or the very first time that anybody has ever seen the remains.
And here's a very special moment, when my mother and myself were digging up some remains of human ancestors.
And it is one of the most special things to ever do with your mother.
(Laughter) Not many people can say that.
But now, let me take you back to Africa, two million years ago.
I'd just like to point out, if you look at the map of Africa, it does actually look like a hominid skull in its shape.
Now we're going to go to the East African and the Rift Valley.
It essentially runs up from the Gulf of Aden, or runs down to Lake Malawi.
And the Rift Valley is a depression.
It's a basin, and rivers flow down from the highlands into the basin, carrying sediment, preserving the bones of animals that lived there.
If you want to become a fossil, you actually need to die somewhere where your bones will be rapidly buried.
You then hope that the earth moves in such a way as to bring the bones back up to the surface.
And then you hope that one of us lot will walk around and find small pieces of you.
(Laughter) OK, so it is absolutely surprising that we know as much as we do know today about our ancestors, because it's incredibly difficult, A, for these things to become -- to be -- preserved, and secondly, for them to have been brought back up to the surface.
And we really have only spent 50 years looking for these remains, and begin to actually piece together our evolutionary story.
So, let's go to Lake Turkana, which is one such lake basin in the very north of our country, Kenya.
And if you look north here, there's a big river that flows into the lake that's been carrying sediment and preserving the remains of the animals that lived there.
Fossil sites run up and down both lengths of that lake basin, which represents some 20,000 square miles.
That's a huge job that we've got on our hands.
Two million years ago at Lake Turkana, Homo erectus, one of our human ancestors, actually lived in this region.
You can see some of the major fossil sites that we've been working in the north. But, essentially, two million years ago, Homo erectus, up in the far right corner, lived alongside three other species of human ancestor.
And here is a skull of a Homo erectus, which I just pulled off the shelf there.
(Laughter) But it is not to say that being a single species on planet Earth is the norm.
In fact, if you go back in time, it is the norm that there are multiple species of hominids or of human ancestors that coexist at any one time.
Where did these things come from?
That's what we're still trying to find answers to, and it is important to realize that there is diversity in all different species, and our ancestors are no exception.
Here's some reconstructions of some of the fossils that have been found from Lake Turkana.
But I was very lucky to have been brought up in Kenya, essentially accompanying my parents to Lake Turkana in search of human remains.
And we were able to dig up, when we got old enough, fossils such as this, a slender-snouted crocodile.
And we dug up giant tortoises, and elephants and things like that.
But when I was 12, as I was in this picture, a very exciting expedition was in place on the west side, when they found essentially the skeleton of this Homo erectus.
I could relate to this Homo erectus skeleton very well, because I was the same age that he was when he died.
And I imagined him to be tall, dark-skinned.
His brothers certainly were able to run long distances chasing prey, probably sweating heavily as they did so.
He was very able to use stones effectively as tools.
And this individual himself, this one that I'm holding up here, actually had a bad back. He'd probably had an injury as a child.
He had a scoliosis and therefore must have been looked after quite carefully by other female, and probably much smaller, members of his family group, to have got to where he did in life, age 12.
Unfortunately for him, he fell into a swamp and couldn't get out.
Essentially, his bones were rapidly buried and beautifully preserved.
And he remained there until 1.6 million years later, when this very famous fossil hunter, Kamoya Kimeu, walked along a small hillside and found that small piece of his skull lying on the surface amongst the pebbles, recognized it as being hominid.
It's actually this little piece up here on the top.
Well, an excavation was begun immediately, and more and more little bits of skull started to be extracted from the sediment.
And what was so fun about it was this: the skull pieces got closer and closer to the roots of the tree, and fairly recently the tree had grown up, but it had found that the skull had captured nice water in the hillside, and so it had decided to grow its roots in and around this, holding it in place and preventing it from washing away down the slope.
We began to find limb bones; we found finger bones, the bones of the pelvis, vertebrae, ribs, the collar bones, things that had never, ever been seen before in Homo erectus.
It was truly exciting.
He had a body very similar to our own, and he was on the threshold of becoming human.
Well, shortly afterwards, members of his species started to move northwards out of Africa, and you start to see fossils of Homo erectus in Georgia, China and also in parts of Indonesia.
So, Homo erectus was the first human ancestor to leave Africa and begin its spread across the globe.
Some exciting finds, again, as I mentioned, from Dmanisi, in the Republic of Georgia.
But also, surprising finds recently announced from the Island of Flores in Indonesia, where a group of these human ancestors have been isolated, and have become dwarfed, and they're only about a meter in height.
But they lived only 18,000 years ago, and that is truly extraordinary to think about.
Just to put this in terms of generations, because people do find it hard to think of time, Homo erectus left Africa 90,000 generations ago.
We evolved essentially from an African stock.
Again, at about 200,000 years as a fully-fledged us.
And we only left Africa about 70,000 years ago.
And until 30,000 years ago, at least three upright-walking apes shared the planet Earth.
The question now is, well, who are we?
We're certainly a polluting, wasteful, aggressive species, with a few nice things thrown in, perhaps.
(Laughter) For the most part, we're not particularly pleasant at all.
We have a much larger brain than our ape ancestors.
Is this a good evolutionary adaptation, or is it going to lead us to being the shortest-lived hominid species on planet Earth?
And what is it that really makes us us?
I think it's our collective intelligence.
It's our ability to write things down, our language and our consciousness.
From very primitive beginnings, with a very crude tool kit of stones, we now have a very advanced tool kit, and our tool use has really reached unprecedented levels: we've got buggies to Mars; we've mapped the human genome; and recently even created synthetic life, thanks to Craig Venter.
And we've also managed to communicate with people all over the world, from extraordinary places.
Even from within an excavation in northern Kenya, we can talk to people about what we're doing.
As Al Gore so clearly has reminded us, we have reached extraordinary numbers of people on this planet.
Human ancestors really only survive on planet Earth, if you look at the fossil record, for about, on average, a million years at a time.
We've only been around for the past 200,000 years as a species, yet we've reached a population of more than six and a half billion people.
And last year, our population grew by 80 million.
I mean, these are extraordinary numbers.
You can see here, again, taken from Al Gore's book.
But what's happened is our technology has removed the checks and balances on our population growth.
We have to control our numbers, and I think this is as important as anything else that's being done in the world today.
But we have to control our numbers, because we can't really hold it together as a species.
My father so appropriately put it, that "We are certainly the only animal that makes conscious choices that are bad for our survival as a species."
Can we hold it together?
It's important to remember that we all evolved in Africa.
We all have an African origin.
We have a common past and we share a common future.
Evolutionarily speaking, we're just a blip.
We're sitting on the edge of a precipice, and we have the tools and the technology at our hands to communicate what needs to be done to hold it together today.
We could tell every single human being out there, if we really wanted to.
But will we do that, or will we just let nature take its course?
Well, to end on a very positive note, I think evolutionarily speaking, this is probably a fairly good thing, in the end.
I'll leave it at that, thank you very much.
(Applause)
So I'm going to talk today about collecting stories in some unconventional ways.
This is a picture of me from a very awkward stage in my life.
You might enjoy the awkwardly tight, cut-off pajama bottoms with balloons.
Anyway, it was a time when I was mainly interested in collecting imaginary stories.
So this is a picture of me holding one of the first watercolor paintings I ever made.
And recently I've been much more interested in collecting stories from reality -- so, real stories.
And specifically, I'm interested in collecting my own stories, stories from the Internet, and then recently, stories from life, which is kind of a new area of work that I've been doing recently.
So I'll be talking about each of those today.
So, first of all, my own stories. These are two of my sketchbooks.
I have many of these books, and I've been keeping them for about the last eight or nine years.
They accompany me wherever I go in my life, and I fill them with all sorts of things, records of my lived experience: so watercolor paintings, drawings of what I see, dead flowers, dead insects, pasted ticket stubs, rusting coins, business cards, writings.
And in these books, you can find these short, little glimpses of moments and experiences and people that I meet.
And, you know, after keeping these books for a number of years, I started to become very interested in collecting not only my own personal artifacts, but also the artifacts of other people.
So, I started collecting found objects.
This is a photograph I found lying in a gutter in New York City about 10 years ago.
On the front, you can see the tattered black-and-white photo of a woman's face, and on the back it says, "To Judy, the girl with the Bill Bailey voice.
Have fun in whatever you do."
And I really loved this idea of the partial glimpse into somebody's life.
As opposed to knowing the whole story, just knowing a little bit of the story, and then letting your own mind fill in the rest.
And that idea of a partial glimpse is something that will come back in a lot of the work I'll be showing later today.
So, around this time I was studying computer science at Princeton University, and I noticed that it was suddenly possible to collect these sorts of personal artifacts, not just from street corners, but also from the Internet.
And that suddenly, people, en masse, were leaving scores and scores of digital footprints online that told stories of their private lives.
Blog posts, photographs, thoughts, feelings, opinions, all of these things were being expressed by people online, and leaving behind trails.
So, I started to write computer programs that study very, very large sets of these online footprints.
One such project is about a year and a half old.
It's called "We Feel Fine."
This is a project that scans the world's newly posted blog entries every two or three minutes, searching for occurrences of the phrases "I feel" and "I am feeling." And when it finds one of those phrases, it grabs the full sentence up to the period and also tries to identify demographic information about the author.
So, their gender, their age, their geographic location and what the weather conditions were like when they wrote that sentence.
It collects about 20,000 such sentences a day and it's been running for about a year and a half, having collected over 10 and a half million feelings now.
This is, then, how they're presented.
These dots here represent some of the English-speaking world's feelings from the last few hours, each dot being a single sentence stated by a single blogger.
And the color of each dot corresponds to the type of feeling inside, so the bright ones are happy, and the dark ones are sad.
And the diameter of each dot corresponds to the length of the sentence inside.
So the small ones are short, and the bigger ones are longer.
"I feel fine with the body I'm in, there'll be no easy excuse for why I still feel uncomfortable being close to my boyfriend," from a twenty-two-year-old in Japan.
"I got this on some trading locally, but really don't feel like screwing with wiring and crap."
Also, some of the feelings contain photographs in the blog posts.
And when that happens, these montage compositions are automatically created, which consist of the sentence and images being combined.
And any of these can be opened up to reveal the sentence inside.
"I feel good."
"I feel rough now, and I probably gained 100,000 pounds, but it was worth it."
"I love how they were able to preserve most in everything that makes you feel close to nature -- butterflies, man-made forests, limestone caves and hey, even a huge python."
So the next movement is called mobs.
This provides a slightly more statistical look at things.
This is showing the world's most common feelings overall right now, dominated by better, then bad, then good, then guilty, and so on.
Weather causes the feelings to assume the physical traits of the weather they represent. So the sunny ones swirl around, the cloudy ones float along, the rainy ones fall down, and the snowy ones flutter to the ground.
You can also stop a raindrop and open the feeling inside.
Finally, location causes the feelings to move to their spots on a world map, giving you a sense of their geographic distribution.
So I'll show you now some of my favorite montages from "We Feel Fine."
These are the images that are automatically constructed.
"I feel like I'm diagonally parked in a parallel universe."
(Laughter) "I've kissed numerous other boys and it hasn't felt good, the kisses felt messy and wrong, but kissing Lucas feels beautiful and almost spiritual."
"I can feel my cancer grow."
"I feel pretty."
"I feel skinny, but I'm not."
"I'm 23, and a recovering meth and heroin addict, and feel absolutely blessed to still be alive."
"I can't wait to see them racing for the first time at Daytona next month, because I feel the need for speed."
(Laughter) "I feel sassy."
"I feel so sexy in this new wig."
As you can see, "We Feel Fine" collects very, very small-scale personal stories.
Sometimes, stories as short as two or three words.
So, really even challenging the notion of what can be considered a story.
And recently, I've become interested in diving much more deeply into a single story.
And that's led me to doing some work with the physical world, not with the Internet, and only using the Internet at the very last moment, as a presentation medium.
So these are some newer projects that actually aren't even launched publicly yet.
The first such one is called "The Whale Hunt."
Last May, I spent nine days living up in Barrow, Alaska, the northernmost settlement in the United States, with a family of Inupiat Eskimos, documenting their annual spring whale hunt.
This is the whaling camp here, we're about six miles from shore, camping on five and a half feet of thick, frozen pack ice.
And that water that you see there is the open lead, and through that lead, bowhead whales migrate north each springtime.
And the Eskimo community basically camps out on the edge of the ice here, waits for a whale to come close enough to attack. And when it does, it throws a harpoon at it, and then hauls the whale up under the ice, and cuts it up.
And that would provide the community's food supply for a long time.
So I went up there, and I lived with these guys out in their whaling camp here, and photographed the entire experience, beginning with the taxi ride to Newark airport in New York, and ending with the butchering of the second whale, seven and a half days later.
I photographed that entire experience at five-minute intervals.
So every five minutes, I took a photograph.
When I was awake, with the camera around my neck.
When I was sleeping, with a tripod and a timer.
And then in moments of high adrenaline, like when something exciting was happening, I would up that photographic frequency to as many as 37 photographs in five minutes.
So what this created was a photographic heartbeat that sped up and slowed down, more or less matching the changing pace of my own heartbeat.
That was the first concept here.
The second concept was to use this experience to think about the fundamental components of any story.
What are the things that make up a story?
So, stories have characters. Stories have concepts.
Stories take place in a certain area. They have contexts.
They have colors. What do they look like?
They have time. When did it take place? Dates -- when did it occur?
And in the case of the whale hunt, also this idea of an excitement level.
The thing about stories, though, in most of the existing mediums that we're accustomed to -- things like novels, radio, photographs, movies, even lectures like this one -- we're very accustomed to this idea of the narrator or the camera position, some kind of omniscient, external body through whose eyes you see the story.
We're very used to this.
But if you think about real life, it's not like that at all.
I mean, in real life, things are much more nuanced and complex, and there's all of these overlapping stories intersecting and touching each other.
And so I thought it would be interesting to build a framework to surface those types of stories. So, in the case of "The Whale Hunt," how could we extract something like the story of Simeon and Crawford, involving the concepts of wildlife, tools and blood, taking place on the Arctic Ocean, dominated by the color red, happening around 10 a.m. on May 3, with an excitement level of high?
So, how to extract this order of narrative from this larger story?
I built a web interface for viewing "The Whale Hunt" that attempts to do just this.
So these are all 3,214 pictures taken up there.
This is my studio in Brooklyn. This is the Arctic Ocean, and the butchering of the second whale, seven days later.
You can start to see some of the story here, told by color.
So this red strip signifies the color of the wallpaper in the basement apartment where I was staying.
And things go white as we move out onto the Arctic Ocean.
Introduction of red down here, when whales are being cut up.
You can see a timeline, showing you the exciting moments throughout the story.
These are organized chronologically.
Wheel provides a slightly more playful version of the same, so these are also all the photographs organized chronologically.
And any of these can be clicked, and then the narrative is entered at that position.
So here I am sleeping on the airplane heading up to Alaska.
That's "Moby Dick."
This is the food we ate.
This is in the Patkotak's family living room in their house in Barrow. The boxed wine they served us.
Cigarette break outside -- I don't smoke.
This is a really exciting sequence of me sleeping.
This is out at whale camp, on the Arctic Ocean.
This graph that I'm clicking down here is meant to be reminiscent of a medical heartbeat graph, showing the exciting moments of adrenaline.
This is the ice starting to freeze over. The snow fence they built.
And so what I'll show you now is the ability to pull out sub-stories.
So, here you see the cast. These are all of the people in "The Whale Hunt" and the two whales that were killed down here.
And we could do something as arbitrary as, say, extract the story of Rony, involving the concepts of blood and whales and tools, taking place on the Arctic Ocean, at Ahkivgaq camp, with the heartbeat level of fast.
And now we've whittled down that whole story to just 29 matching photographs, and then we can enter the narrative at that position.
And you can see Rony cutting up the whale here.
These whales are about 40 feet long, and weighing over 40 tons. And they provide the food source for the community for much of the year.
Skipping ahead a bit more here, this is Rony on the whale carcass.
They use no chainsaws or anything; it's entirely just blades, and an incredibly efficient process.
This is the guys on the rope, pulling open the carcass.
This is the muktuk, or the blubber, all lined up for community distribution.
It's baleen. Moving on.
So what I'm going to tell you about next is a very new thing. It's not even a project yet.
So, just yesterday, I flew in here from Singapore, and before that, I was spending two weeks in Bhutan, the small Himalayan kingdom nestled between Tibet and India.
And I was doing a project there about happiness, interviewing a lot of local people.
So Bhutan has this really wacky thing where they base most of their high-level governmental decisions around the concept of gross national happiness instead of gross domestic product, and they've been doing this since the '70s.
And it leads to just a completely different value system.
It's an incredibly non-materialistic culture, where people don't have a lot, but they're incredibly happy.
So I went around and I talked to people about some of these ideas.
So, I did a number of things. I asked people a number of set questions, and took a number of set photographs, and interviewed them with audio, and also took pictures.
I would start by asking people to rate their happiness between one and 10, which is kind of inherently absurd.
And then when they answered, I would inflate that number of balloons and give them that number of balloons to hold.
So, you have some really happy person holding 10 balloons, and some really sad soul holding one balloon.
But you know, even holding one balloon is like, kind of happy.
(Laughter) And then I would ask them a number of questions like what was the happiest day in their life, what makes them happy.
And then finally, I would ask them to make a wish.
And when they made a wish, I would write their wish onto one of the balloons and take a picture of them holding it.
So I'm going to show you now just a few brief snippets of some of the interviews that I did, some of the people I spoke with.
This is an 11-year-old student.
He was playing cops and robbers with his friends, running around town, and they all had plastic toy guns.
His wish was to become a police officer.
He was getting started early. Those were his hands.
I took pictures of everybody's hands, because I think you can often tell a lot about somebody from how their hands look. I took a portrait of everybody, and asked everybody to make a funny face.
A 17-year-old student. Her wish was to have been born a boy.
She thinks that women have a pretty tough go of things in Bhutan, and it's a lot easier if you're a boy.
A 28-year-old cell phone shop owner.
If you knew what Paro looked like, you'd understand how amazing it is that there's a cell phone shop there.
He wanted to help poor people.
A 53-year-old farmer. She was chaffing wheat, and that pile of wheat behind her had taken her about a week to make.
She wanted to keep farming until she dies.
You can really start to see the stories told by the hands here.
She was wearing this silver ring that had the word "love" engraved on it, and she'd found it in the road somewhere.
A 16-year-old quarry worker.
This guy was breaking rocks with a hammer in the hot sunlight, but he just wanted to spend his life as a farmer.
A 21-year-old monk. He was very happy.
He wanted to live a long life at the monastery.
He had this amazing series of hairs growing out of a mole on the left side of his face, which I'm told is very good luck.
He was kind of too shy to make a funny face.
A 16-year-old student.
She wanted to become an independent woman.
I asked her about that, and she said she meant that she doesn't want to be married, because, in her opinion, when you get married in Bhutan as a woman, your chances to live an independent life kind of end, and so she had no interest in that.
A 24-year-old truck driver.
There are these terrifyingly huge Indian trucks that come careening around one-lane roads with two-lane traffic, with 3,000-foot drop-offs right next to the road, and he was driving one of these trucks.
But all he wanted was to just live a comfortable life, like other people.
A 24-year-old road sweeper. I caught her on her lunch break.
She'd built a little fire to keep warm, right next to the road.
Her wish was to marry someone with a car.
She wanted a change in her life.
She lives in a little worker's camp right next to the road, and she wanted a different lot on things.
An 81-year-old itinerant farmer.
I saw this guy on the side of the road, and he actually doesn't have a home.
He travels from farm to farm each day trying to find work, and then he tries to sleep at whatever farm he gets work at.
So his wish was to come with me, so that he had somewhere to live.
He had this amazing knife that he pulled out of his gho and started brandishing when I asked him to make a funny face.
It was all good-natured.
A 10-year-old.
He wanted to join a school and learn to read, but his parents didn't have enough money to send him to school.
He was eating this orange, sugary candy that he kept dipping his fingers into, and since there was so much saliva on his hands, this orange paste started to form on his palms.
(Laughter) A 37-year-old road worker.
One of the more touchy political subjects in Bhutan is the use of Indian cheap labor that they import from India to build the roads, and then they send these people home once the roads are built.
So these guys were in a worker's gang mixing up asphalt one morning on the side of the highway.
His wish was to make some money and open a store.
A 75-year-old farmer. She was selling oranges on the side of the road.
I asked her about her wish, and she said, "You know, maybe I'll live, maybe I'll die, but I don't have a wish."
She was chewing betel nut, which caused her teeth over the years to turn very red.
Finally, this is a 26-year-old nun I spoke to.
Her wish was to make a pilgrimage to Tibet.
I asked her how long she planned to live in the nunnery and she said, "Well, you know, of course, it's impermanent, but my plan is to live here until I'm 30, and then enter a hermitage."
And I said, "You mean, like a cave?" And she said, "Yeah, like a cave."
And I said, "Wow, and how long will you live in the cave?"
And she said, "Well, you know, I think I'd kind of like to live my whole life in the cave."
I just thought that was amazing. I mean, she spoke in a way -- with amazing English, and amazing humor, and amazing laughter -- that made her seem like somebody I could have bumped into on the streets of New York, or in Vermont, where I'm from.
But here she had been living in a nunnery for the last seven years.
I asked her a little bit more about the cave and what she planned would happen once she went there, you know.
What if she saw the truth after just one year, what would she do for the next 35 years in her life?
And this is what she said.
Woman: I think I'm going to stay for 35. Maybe -- maybe I'll die.
Jonathan Harris: Maybe you'll die? Woman: Yes.
JH: 10 years? Woman: Yes, yes. JH: 10 years, that's a long time.
Woman: Yes, not maybe one, 10 years, maybe I can die within one year, or something like that.
JH: Are you hoping to?
Woman: Ah, because you know, it's impermanent.
JH: Yeah, but -- yeah, OK. Do you hope -- would you prefer to live in the cave for 40 years, or to live for one year?
Woman: But I prefer for maybe 40 to 50.
JH: 40 to 50? Yeah.
Woman: Yes. From then, I'm going to the heaven.
JH: Well, I wish you the best of luck with it.
Woman: Thank you.
JH: I hope it's everything that you hope it will be.
So thank you again, so much.
Woman: You're most welcome.
JH: So if you caught that, she said she hoped to die when she was around 40. That was enough life for her.
So, the last thing we did, very quickly, is I took all those wish balloons -- there were 117 interviews, 117 wishes -- and I brought them up to a place called Dochula, which is a mountain pass in Bhutan, at 10,300 feet, one of the more sacred places in Bhutan.
And up there, there are thousands of prayer flags that people have spread out over the years.
And we re-inflated all of the balloons, put them up on a string, and hung them up there among the prayer flags.
And they're actually still flying up there today.
So if any of you have any Bhutan travel plans in the near future, you can go check these out. Here are some images from that.
We said a Buddhist prayer so that all these wishes could come true.
You can start to see some familiar balloons here.
"To make some money and to open a store" was the Indian road worker.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
"To do two things at once is to do neither."
It's a great smackdown of multitasking, isn't it, often attributed to the Roman writer Publilius Syrus, although you know how these things are, he probably never said it.
What I'm interested in, though, is -- is it true?
I mean, it's obviously true for emailing at the dinner table or texting while driving or possibly for live tweeting at TED Talk, as well.
But I'd like to argue that for an important kind of activity, doing two things at once -- or three or even four -- is exactly what we should be aiming for.
Look no further than Albert Einstein.
In 1905, he published four remarkable scientific papers.
One of them was on Brownian motion, it provided empirical evidence that atoms exist, and it laid out the basic mathematics behind most of financial economics.
Another one was on the theory of special relativity.
Another one was on the photoelectric effect, that's why solar panels work, it's a nice one.
Gave him the Nobel prize for that one.
And the fourth introduced an equation you might have heard of: E equals mc squared.
So, tell me again how you shouldn't do several things at once.
Now, obviously, working simultaneously on Brownian motion, special relativity and the photoelectric effect -- it's not exactly the same kind of multitasking as Snapchatting while you're watching "Westworld."
Very different.
And Einstein, yeah, well, Einstein's -- he's Einstein, he's one of a kind, he's unique.
But the pattern of behavior that Einstein was demonstrating, that's not unique at all.
It's very common among highly creative people, both artists and scientists, and I'd like to give it a name: slow-motion multitasking.
Slow-motion multitasking feels like a counterintuitive idea.
What I'm describing here is having multiple projects on the go at the same time, and you move backwards and forwards between topics as the mood takes you, or as the situation demands.
But the reason it seems counterintuitive is because we're used to lapsing into multitasking out of desperation.
We're in a hurry, we want to do everything at once.
If we were willing to slow multitasking down, we might find that it works quite brilliantly.
Sixty years ago, a young psychologist by the name of Bernice Eiduson began a long research project into the personalities and the working habits of 40 leading scientists.
Einstein was already dead, but four of her subjects won Nobel prizes, including Linus Pauling and Richard Feynman.
The research went on for decades, in fact, it continued even after professor Eiduson herself had died.
And one of the questions that it answered was, "How is it that some scientists are able to go on producing important work right through their lives?"
What is it about these people?
Is it their personality, is it their skill set, their daily routines, what?
Well, a pattern that emerged was clear, and I think to some people surprising.
The top scientists kept changing the subject.
They would shift topics repeatedly during their first 100 published research papers.
Do you want to guess how often?
Three times?
Five times?
No. On average, the most enduringly creative scientists switched topics 43 times in their first 100 research papers.
Seems that the secret to creativity is multitasking in slow motion.
Eiduson's research suggests we need to reclaim multitasking and remind ourselves how powerful it can be.
And she's not the only person to have found this.
Different researchers, using different methods to study different highly creative people have found that very often they have multiple projects in progress at the same time, and they're also far more likely than most of us to have serious hobbies.
Slow-motion multitasking among creative people is ubiquitous.
So, why?
I think there are three reasons.
And the first is the simplest.
Creativity often comes when you take an idea from its original context and you move it somewhere else.
It's easier to think outside the box if you spend your time clambering from one box into another.
For an example of this, consider the original eureka moment.
Archimedes -- he's wrestling with a difficult problem.
And he realizes, in a flash, he can solve it, using the displacement of water.
And if you believe the story, this idea comes to him as he's taking a bath, lowering himself in, and he's watching the water level rise and fall.
And if solving a problem while having a bath isn't multitasking, I don't know what is.
The second reason that multitasking can work is that learning to do one thing well can often help you do something else.
Any athlete can tell you about the benefits of cross-training.
It's possible to cross-train your mind, too.
A few years ago, researchers took 18 randomly chosen medical students and they enrolled them in a course at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, where they learned to criticize and analyze works of visual art.
And at the end of the course, these students were compared with a control group of their fellow medical students.
And the ones who had taken the art course had become substantially better at performing tasks such as diagnosing diseases of the eye by analyzing photographs.
They'd become better eye doctors.
So if we want to become better at what we do, maybe we should spend some time doing something else, even if the two fields appear to be as completely distinct as ophthalmology and the history of art.
And if you'd like an example of this, should we go for a less intimidating example than Einstein? OK.
Michael Crichton, creator of "Jurassic Park" and "E.R."
So in the 1970s, he originally trained as a doctor, but then he wrote novels and he directed the original "Westworld" movie.
But also, and this is less well-known, he also wrote nonfiction books, about art, about medicine, about computer programming.
So in 1995, he enjoyed the fruits of all this variety by penning the world's most commercially successful book.
And the world's most commercially successful TV series.
And the world's most commercially successful movie.
In 1996, he did it all over again.
There's a third reason why slow-motion multitasking can help us solve problems.
It can provide assistance when we're stuck.
This can't happen in an instant.
So, imagine that feeling of working on a crossword puzzle and you can't figure out the answer, and the reason you can't is because the wrong answer is stuck in your head.
It's very easy -- just go and do something else.
You know, switch topics, switch context, you'll forget the wrong answer and that gives the right answer space to pop into the front of your mind.
But on the slower timescale that interests me, being stuck is a much more serious thing.
You get turned down for funding.
Your cell cultures won't grow, your rockets keep crashing.
Nobody wants to publish you fantasy novel about a school for wizards.
Or maybe you just can't find the solution to the problem that you're working on.
And being stuck like that means stasis, stress, possibly even depression.
But if you have another exciting, challenging project to work on, being stuck on one is just an opportunity to do something else.
We could all get stuck sometimes, even Albert Einstein.
Ten years after the original, miraculous year that I described, Einstein was putting together the pieces of his theory of general relativity, his greatest achievement.
And he was exhausted.
And so he turned to an easier problem.
He proposed the stimulated emission of radiation.
Which, as you may know, is the S in laser.
So he's laying down the theoretical foundation for the laser beam, and then, while he's doing that, he moves back to general relativity, and he's refreshed.
He sees what the theory implies -- that the universe isn't static.
It's expanding.
It's an idea so staggering, Einstein can't bring himself to believe it for years.
Look, if you get stuck and you get the ball rolling on laser beams, you're in pretty good shape.
(Laughter) So, that's the case for slow-motion multitasking.
And I'm not promising that it's going to turn you into Einstein.
I'm not even promising it's going to turn you into Michael Crichton.
But it is a powerful way to organize our creative lives.
But there's a problem.
How do we stop all of these projects becoming completely overwhelming?
How do we keep all these ideas straight in our minds?
Well, here's a simple solution, a practical solution from the great American choreographer, Twyla Tharp.
Over the last few decades, she's blurred boundaries, mixed genres, won prizes, danced to the music of everybody, from Philip Glass to Billy Joel.
She's written three books.
I mean, she's a slow-motion multitasker, of course she is.
She says, "You have to be all things.
Why exclude?
You have to be everything."
And Tharp's method for preventing all of these different projects from becoming overwhelming is a simple one.
She gives each project a big cardboard box, writes the name of the project on the side of the box.
And into it, she tosses DVDs and books, magazine cuttings, theater programs, physical objects, really anything that's provided a source of creative inspiration.
And she writes, "The box means I never have to worry about forgetting.
One of the biggest fears for a creative person is that some brilliant idea will get lost because you didn't write it down and put it in a safe place.
I don't worry about that.
Because I know where to find it.
It's all in the box."
You can manage many ideas like this, either in physical boxes or in their digital equivalents.
So, I would like to urge you to embrace the art of slow-motion multitasking.
Not because you're in a hurry, but because you're in no hurry at all.
And I want to give you one final example, my favorite example.
Charles Darwin.
A man whose slow-burning multitasking is so staggering, I need a diagram to explain it all to you.
We know what Darwin was doing at different times, because the creativity researchers Howard Gruber and Sara Davis have analyzed his diaries and his notebooks.
So, when he left school, age of 18, he was initially interested in two fields, zoology and geology.
Pretty soon, he signed up to be the onboard naturalist on the "Beagle."
This is the ship that eventually took five years to sail all the way around the southern oceans of the Earth, stopping at the Galápagos, passing through the Indian ocean.
While he was on the "Beagle," he began researching coral reefs.
This is a great synergy between his two interests in zoology and geology, and it starts to get him thinking about slow processes.
But when he gets back from the voyage, his interests start to expand even further: psychology, botany; for the rest of his life, he's moving backwards and forwards between these different fields.
He never quite abandons any of them.
In 1837, he begins work on two very interesting projects.
One of them: earthworms.
The other, a little notebook which he titles "The transmutation of species."
Then, Darwin starts studying my field, economics.
He reads a book by the economist Thomas Malthus.
And he has his eureka moment.
In a flash, he realizes how species could emerge and evolve slowly, through this process of the survival of the fittest.
It all comes to him, he writes it all down, every single important element of the theory of evolution, in that notebook.
But then, a new project.
His son William is born.
Well, there's a natural experiment right there, you get to observe the development of a human infant.
So immediately, Darwin starts making notes.
Now, of course, he's still working on the theory of evolution and the development of the human infant.
But during all of this, he realizes he doesn't really know enough about taxonomy.
So he starts studying that.
And in the end, he spends eight years becoming the world's leading expert on barnacles.
Then, "Natural Selection."
A book that he's to continue working on for his entire life, he never finishes it.
"Origin of Species" is finally published 20 years after Darwin set out all the basic elements.
Then, the "Descent of Man," controversial book.
And then, the book about the development of the human infant.
The one that was inspired when he could see his son, William, crawling on the sitting room floor in front of him.
When the book was published, William was 37 years old.
And all this time, Darwin's working on earthworms.
He fills his billiard room with earthworms in pots, with glass covers.
He shines lights on them, to see if they'll respond.
He holds a hot poker next to them, to see if they move away.
He chews tobacco and -- (Blows) He blows on the earthworms to see if they have a sense of smell.
He even plays the bassoon at the earthworms.
I like to think of this great man when he's tired, he's stressed, he's anxious about the reception of his book "The Descent of Man."
You or I might log into Facebook or turn on the television.
Darwin would go into the billiard room to relax by studying the earthworms intensely.
And that's why it's appropriate that one of his last great works is the "Formation of Vegetable Mould Through The Action of Worms."
(Laughter) He worked upon that book for 44 years.
We don't live in the 19th century anymore.
I don't think any of us could sit on our creative or scientific projects for 44 years.
But we do have something to learn from the great slow-motion multitaskers.
From Einstein and Darwin to Michael Crichton and Twyla Tharp.
The modern world seems to present us with a choice.
If we're not going to fast-twitch from browser window to browser window, we have to live like a hermit, focus on one thing to the exclusion of everything else.
I think that's a false dilemma.
We can make multitasking work for us, unleashing our natural creativity.
We just need to slow it down.
So ...
Make a list of your projects.
Put down your phone.
Pick up a couple of cardboard boxes.
And get to work.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I have a tendency to assume the worst, and once in a while, this habit plays tricks on me.
For example, if I feel unexpected pain in my body that I have not experienced before and that I cannot attribute, then all of a sudden, my mind might turn a tense back into heart disease or calf muscle pain into deep vein thrombosis.
But so far, I haven't been diagnosed with any deadly or incurable disease.
Sometimes things just hurt for no clear reason.
But not everyone is as lucky as me.
Every year, more than 50 million people die worldwide.
Especially in high-income economies like ours, a large fraction of deaths is caused by slowly progressing diseases: heart disease, chronic lung disease, cancer, Alzheimer's, diabetes, just to name a few.
Now, humanity has made tremendous progress in diagnosing and treating many of these.
But we are at a stage where further advancement in health cannot be achieved only by developing new treatments.
And this becomes evident when we look at one aspect that many of these diseases have in common: the probability for successful treatment strongly depends on when treatment is started.
But a disease is typically only detected once symptoms occur.
The problem here is that, in fact, many diseases can remain asymptomatic, hence undetected, for a long period of time.
Because of this, there is a persisting need for new ways of detecting disease at early stage, way before any symptoms occur.
In health care, this is called screening.
And as defined by the World Health Organization, screening is "the presumptive identification of unrecognized disease in an apparently healthy person, by means of tests ... that can be applied rapidly and easily ..."
That's a long definition, so let me repeat it: identification of unrecognized disease in an apparently healthy person by means of tests that can be applied both rapidly and easily.
And I want to put special emphasis on the words "rapidly" and "easily" because many of the existing screening methods are exactly the opposite.
And those of you who have undergone colonoscopy as part of a screening program for colorectal cancer will know what I mean.
Obviously, there's a variety of medical tools available to perform screening tests.
This ranges from imaging techniques such as radiography or magnetic resonance imaging to the analysis of blood or tissue.
We have all had such tests.
But there's one medium that for long has been overlooked: a medium that is easily accessible, basically nondepletable, and it holds tremendous promise for medical analysis.
And that is our breath.
Human breath is essentially composed of five components: nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, water and argon.
But besides these five, there are hundreds of other components that are present in very low quantity.
These are called volatile organic compounds, and we release hundreds, even thousands of them every time we exhale.
The analysis of these volatile organic compounds in our breath is called breath analysis.
In fact, I believe that many of you have already experienced breath analysis.
Imagine: you're driving home late at night, when suddenly, there's a friendly police officer who asks you kindly but firmly to pull over and blow into a device like this one.
This is an alcohol breath tester that is used to measure the ethanol concentration in your breath and determine whether driving in your condition is a clever idea.
Now, I'd say my driving was pretty good, but let me check.
(Beep) 0.0, so nothing to worry about, all fine.
(Laughter) Now imagine a device like this one, that does not only measure alcohol levels in your breath, but that detects diseases like the ones I've shown you and potentially many more.
The concept of correlating the smell of a person's breath with certain medical conditions, in fact, dates back to Ancient Greece.
But only recently, research efforts on breath analysis have skyrocketed, and what once was a dream is now becoming reality.
And let me pull up this list again that I showed you earlier.
For the majority of diseases listed here, there's substantial scientific evidence suggesting that the disease could be detected by breath analysis.
But how does it work, exactly?
The essential part is a sensor device that detects the volatile organic compounds in our breath.
Simply put: when exposed to a breath sample, the sensor outputs a complex signature that results from the mixture of volatile organic compounds that we exhale.
Now, this signature represents a fingerprint of your metabolism, your microbiome and the biochemical processes that occur in your body.
If you have a disease, your organism will change, and so will the composition of your exhaled breath.
And then the only thing that is left to do is to correlate a certain signature with the presence or absence of certain medical conditions.
The technology promises several undeniable benefits.
Firstly, the sensor can be miniaturized and integrated into small, handheld devices like this alcohol breath tester.
This would allow the test to be used in many different settings and even at home, so that a visit at the doctor's office is not needed each time a test shall be performed.
Secondly, breath analysis is noninvasive and can be as simple as blowing into an alcohol breath tester.
Such simplicity and ease of use would reduce patient burden and provide an incentive for broad adoption of the technology.
And thirdly, the technology is so flexible that the same device could be used to detect a broad range of medical conditions.
Breath analysis could be used to screen for multiple diseases at the same time.
Nowadays, each disease typically requires a different medical tool to perform a screening test.
But this means you can only find what you're looking for.
With all of these features, breath analysis is predestined to deliver what many traditional screening tests are lacking.
And most importantly, all of these features should eventually provide us with a platform for medical analysis that can operate at attractively low cost per test.
On the contrary, existing medical tools often lead to rather high cost per test.
Then, in order to keep costs down, the number of tests needs to be restricted, and this means (a) that the tests can only be performed on a narrow part of the population, for example, the high-risk population; and (b) that the number of tests per person needs to be kept at a minimum.
But wouldn't it actually be beneficial if the test was performed on a larger group of people, and more often and over a longer period of time for each individual?
Especially the latter would give access to something very valuable that is called longitudinal data.
Longitudinal data is a data set that tracks the same patient over the course of many months or years.
Nowadays, medical decisions are often based on a limited data set, where only a glimpse of a patient's medical history is available for decision-making.
In such a case, abnormalities are typically detected by comparing a patient's health profile to the average health profile of a reference population.
Longitudinal data would open up a new dimension and allow abnormalities to be detected based on a patient's own medical history.
This will pave the way for personalized treatment.
Sounds pretty great, right?
Now you will certainly have a question that is something like, "If the technology is as great as he says, then why aren't we using it today?"
And the only answer I can give you is: not everything is as easy as it sounds.
There are technical challenges, for example.
There's the need for extremely reliable sensors that can detect mixtures of volatile organic compounds with sufficient reproducibility.
And another technical challenge is this: How do you sample a person's breath in a very defined manner so that the sampling process itself does not alter the result of the analysis?
And there's the need for data.
Breath analysis needs to be validated in clinical trials, and enough data needs to be collected so that individual conditions can be measured against baselines.
Breath analysis can only succeed if a large enough data set can be generated and made available for broad use.
If breath analysis holds up to its promises, this is a technology that could truly aid us to transform our health care system -- transform it from a reactive system where treatment is triggered by symptoms of disease to a proactive system, where disease detection, diagnosis and treatment can happen at early stage, way before any symptoms occur.
Now this brings me to my last point, and it's a fundamental one.
What exactly is a disease?
Imagine that breath analysis can be commercialized as I describe it, and early detection becomes routine.
A problem that remains is, in fact, a problem that any screening activity has to face because, for many diseases, it is often impossible to predict with sufficient certainty whether the disease would ever cause any symptoms or put a person's life at risk.
This is called overdiagnosis, and it leads to a dilemma.
If a disease is identified, you could decide not to treat it because there's a certain probability that you would never suffer from it.
But how much would you suffer just from knowing that you have a potentially deadly disease?
And wouldn't you actually regret that the disease was detected in the first place?
Your second option is to undergo early treatment with the hope for curing it.
But often, this would not come without side effects.
To be precise: the bigger problem is not overdiagnosis, it's overtreatment, because not every disease has to be treated immediately just because a treatment is available.
The increasing adoption of routine screening will raise the question: What do we call a disease that can rationalize treatment, and what is just an abnormality that should not be a source of concern?
My hopes are that routine screening using breath analysis can provide enough data and insight so that at some point, we'll be able to break this dilemma and predict with sufficient certainty whether and when to treat at early stage.
Our breath and the mixture of volatile organic compounds that we exhale hold tremendous amounts of information on our physiological condition.
With what we know today, we have only scratched the surface.
As we collect more and more data and breath profiles across the population, including all varieties of gender, age, origin and lifestyle, the power of breath analysis should increase.
And eventually, breath analysis should provide us with a powerful tool not only to proactively detect specific diseases but to predict and ultimately prevent them.
And this should be enough motivation to embrace the opportunities and challenges that breath analysis can provide, even for people that are not part-time hypochondriacs like me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 1992, a cargo ship carrying bath toys got caught in a storm.
Shipping containers washed overboard, and the waves swept 28,000 rubber ducks and other toys into the North Pacific.
But they didn’t stick together.
Quite the opposite– the ducks have since washed up all over the world, and researchers have used their paths to chart a better understanding of ocean currents.
Ocean currents are driven by a range of sources: the wind, tides, changes in water density, and the rotation of the Earth.
The topography of the ocean floor and the shoreline modifies those motions, causing currents to speed up, slow down, or change direction.
Ocean currents fall into two main categories: surface currents and deep ocean currents.
Surface currents control the motion of the top 10 percent of the ocean’s water, while deep-ocean currents mobilize the other 90 percent.
Though they have different causes, surface and deep ocean currents influence each other in an intricate dance that keeps the entire ocean moving.
Near the shore, surface currents are driven by both the wind and tides, which draw water back and forth as the water level falls and rises.
Meanwhile, in the open ocean, wind is the major force behind surface currents.
As wind blows over the ocean, it drags the top layers of water along with it.
That moving water pulls on the layers underneath, and those pull on the ones beneath them.
In fact, water as deep as 400 meters is still affected by the wind at the ocean’s surface.
If you zoom out to look at the patterns of surface currents all over the earth, you’ll see that they form big loops called gyres, which travel clockwise in the northern hemisphere and counter-clockwise in the southern hemisphere.
That’s because of the way the Earth’s rotation affects the wind patterns that give rise to these currents.
If the earth didn’t rotate, air and water would simply move back and forth between low pressure at the equator and high pressure at the poles.
But as the earth spins, air moving from the equator to the North Pole is deflected eastward, and air moving back down is deflected westward.
The mirror image happens in the southern hemisphere, so that the major streams of wind form loop-like patterns around the ocean basins.
This is called the Coriolis Effect.
The winds push the ocean beneath them into the same rotating gyres.
And because water holds onto heat more effectively than air, these currents help redistribute warmth around the globe.
Unlike surface currents, deep ocean currents are driven primarily by changes in the density of seawater.
As water moves towards the North Pole, it gets colder.
It also has a higher concentration of salt, because the ice crystals that form trap water while leaving salt behind.
This cold, salty water is more dense, so it sinks, and warmer surface water takes its place, setting up a vertical current called thermohaline circulation.
Thermohaline circulation of deep water and wind-driven surface currents combine to form a winding loop called the Global Conveyor Belt.
As water moves from the depths of the ocean to the surface, it carries nutrients that nourish the microorganisms which form the base of many ocean food chains.
The global conveyor belt is the longest current in the world, snaking all around the globe.
But it only moves a few centimeters per second.
It could take a drop of water a thousand years to make the full trip.
However, rising sea temperatures are causing the conveyor belt to seemingly slow down.
Models show this causing havoc with weather systems on both sides of the Atlantic, and no one knows what would happen if it continues to slow or if it stopped altogether.
The only way we’ll be able to forecast correctly and prepare accordingly will be to continue to study currents and the powerful forces that shape them.
In March of 1892, three Black grocery store owners in Memphis, Tennessee, were murdered by a mob of white men.
Lynchings like these were happening all over the American South, often without any subsequent legal investigation or consequences for the murderers.
But this time, a young journalist and friend of the victims set out to expose the truth about these killings.
Her reports would shock the nation and launch her career as an investigative journalist, civic leader, and civil rights advocate.
Her name was Ida B. Wells.
Ida Bell Wells was born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi on July 16, 1862, several months before the Emancipation Proclamation released her and her family.
After losing both parents and a brother to yellow fever at the age of 16, she supported her five remaining siblings by working as a schoolteacher in Memphis, Tennessee.
During this time, she began working as a journalist.
Writing under the pen name “Iola,” by the early 1890s she gained a reputation as a clear voice against racial injustice and become co-owner and editor of the Memphis Free Speech and Headlight newspaper.
She had no shortage of material: in the decades following the Civil War, Southern whites attempted to reassert their power by committing crimes against Black people including suppressing their votes, vandalizing their businesses, and even murdering them.
After the murder of her friends, Wells launched an investigation into lynching.
She analyzed specific cases through newspaper reports and police records, and interviewed people who had lost friends and family to lynch mobs.
She risked her life to get this information.
As a Black person investigating racially motivated murders, she enraged many of the same southern white men involved in lynchings.
Her bravery paid off.
Most whites had claimed and subsequently reported that lynchings were responses to criminal acts by Black people.
But that was not usually the case.
Through her research, Wells showed that these murders were actually a deliberate, brutal tactic to control or punish black people who competed with whites.
Her friends, for example, had been lynched when their grocery store became popular enough to divert business from a white competitor.
Wells published her findings in 1892.
In response, a white mob destroyed her newspaper presses.
She was out of town when they struck, but they threatened to kill her if she ever returned to Memphis.
So she traveled to New York, where that same year she re-published her research in a pamphlet titled Southern Horrors: Lynch Law in All Its Phases.
In 1895, after settling in Chicago, she built on Southern Horrors in a longer piece called The Red Record.
Her careful documentation of the horrors of lynching and impassioned public speeches drew international attention.
Wells used her newfound fame to amplify her message.
She traveled to Europe, where she rallied European outrage against racial violence in the American South in hopes that the US government and public would follow their example.
Back in the US, she didn’t hesitate to confront powerful organizations, fighting the segregationist policies of the YMCA and leading a delegation to the White House to protest discriminatory workplace practices.
She did all this while disenfranchised herself.
Women didn’t win the right to vote until Wells was in her late 50s.
And even then, the vote was primarily extended to white women only.
Wells was a key player in the battle for voting inclusion, starting a Black women’s suffrage organization in Chicago.
But in spite of her deep commitment to women’s rights, she clashed with white leaders of the movement.
During a march for women’s suffrage in Washington D.C., she ignored the organizers’ attempt to placate Southern bigotry by placing Black women in the back, and marched up front alongside the white women.
She also chafed with other civil rights leaders, who saw her as a dangerous radical.
She insisted on airing, in full detail, the atrocities taking place in the South, while others thought doing so would be counterproductive to negotiations with white politicians.
Although she participated in the founding of the NAACP, she was soon sidelined from the organization.
Wells’ unwillingness to compromise any aspect of her vision of justice shined a light on the weak points of the various rights movements, and ultimately made them stronger— but also made it difficult for her to find a place within them.
She was ahead of her time, waging a tireless struggle for equality and justice decades before many had even begun to imagine it possible.
To be new at TED -- it's like being the last high-school virgin.
(Laughter) You know that all of the cool people are -- they're doing it.
And you're on the outside, you're at home.
You're like the Raspyni Brothers, where you've got your balls in cold water. And -- (Laughter) -- you just play with your fingers all day. And then you get invited.
And you're on the inside, and it's everything you hoped it would be.
It's exciting and there's music playing all of the time and then suddenly it's over. And it's only taken five minutes.
And you want to go back and do it again.
But I really appreciate being here. And thank you, Chris, and also, thank you, Deborah Patton, for making this possible.
So anyway, today we'll talk about architecture a little bit, within the subject of creation and optimism.
And if you put creation and optimism together, you've got two choices that you can talk about.
You can talk about creationism -- which I think wouldn't go down well with this audience, at least not from a view where you were a proponent of it -- or you can talk about optimisations, spelled the British way, with an S, instead of a Z.
And I think that's what I'd like to talk about today.
But any kind of conversation about architecture -- which is, in fact, what you were just talking about, what was going on here, setting up TED, small-scale architecture -- at the present time can't really happen without a conversation about this, the World Trade Center, and what's been going on there, what it means to us.
Because if architecture is what I believe it to be, which is the built form of our cultural ambitions, what do you do when presented with an opportunity to rectify a situation that represents somebody else's cultural ambitions relative to us?
And our own opportunity to make something new there?
This has been a really galvanizing issue for a long time.
I think that the World Trade Center in, rather an unfortunate way, brought architecture into focus in a way that I don't think people had thought of in a long time, and made it a subject for common conversation.
I don't remember, in my 20-year career of practicing and writing about architecture, a time when five people sat me down at a table and asked me very serious questions about zoning, fire exiting, safety concerns and whether carpet burns.
These are just not things we talked about very often.
And yet, now, it's talked about all the time.
At the point where you can weaponize your buildings, you have to suddenly think about architecture in a very different way.
And so now we're going to think about architecture in a very different way, we're going to think about it like this.
How many of you saw USA Today, today? There it is. Looks like that.
There's the World Trade Center site, on the front cover.
They've made a selection.
They've chosen a project by Daniel Libeskind, the enfant terrible of the moment of architecture.
Child-prodigy piano player, he started on the squeezebox, and moved to a little more serious issue, a bigger instrument, and now to an even larger instrument, upon which to work his particular brand of deconstructivist magic, as you see here.
He was one of six people who were invited to participate in this competition, after six previous firms struck out with things that were so stupid and banal that even the city of New York was forced to go, "Oh, I'm really sorry, we screwed up."
Right. Can we do this again from the top, except use some people with a vague hint of talent, instead of just six utter boobs like we brought in last time, real estate hacks of the kind who usually plan our cities.
Let's bring in some real architects for a change.
And so we got this, or we had a choice of that. Oh, stop clapping.
(Laughter) It's too late. That is gone.
This was a scheme by a team called THINK, a New York-based team, and then there was that one, which was the Libeskind scheme.
This one, this is going to be the new World Trade Center: a giant hole in the ground with big buildings falling into it.
Now, I don't know what you think, but I think this is a pretty stupid decision, because what you've done is just made a permanent memorial to destruction by making it look like the destruction is going to continue forever.
But that's what we're going to do.
But I want you to think about these things in terms of a kind of ongoing struggle that American architecture represents, and that these two things talk about very specifically.
And that is the wild divergence in how we choose our architects, in trying to decide whether we want architecture from the kind of technocratic solution to everything -- that there is a large, technical answer that can solve all problems, be they social, be they physical, be they chemical -- or something that's more of a romantic solution.
Now, I don't mean romantic as in, this is a nice place to take someone on a date.
I mean romantic in the sense of, there are things larger and grander than us.
So, in the American tradition, the difference between the technocratic and the romantic, would be the difference between Thomas Jefferson's Cartesian grids spreading across the United States, that gives us basically the whole shape of every western state in the United States, as a really, truly, technocratic solution, a bowing to the -- in Jefferson's time -- current, popular philosophy of rationalism.
Or the way we went to describe that later: manifest destiny.
Now, which would you rather be? A grid, or manifest destiny?
Manifest destiny.
(Laughter) It's a big deal. It sounds big, it sounds important, it sounds solid. It sounds American. Ballsy, serious, male.
And that kind of fight has gone on back and forth in architecture all the time.
I mean, it goes on in our private lives, too, every single day.
We all want to go out and buy an Audi TT, don't we?
Everyone here must own one, or at least they craved one the moment they saw one.
And then they hopped in it, turned the little electronic key, rather than the real key, zipped home on their new superhighway, and drove straight into a garage that looks like a Tudor castle.
(Laughter) Why? Why? Why do you want to do that?
Why do we all want to do that? I even owned a Tudor thing once myself.
(Laughter) It's in our nature to go ricocheting back and forth between this technocratic solution and a larger, sort of more romantic image of where we are.
So we're going to go straight into this.
Can I have the lights off for a moment?
I'm going to talk about two architects very, very briefly that represent the current split, architecturally, between these two traditions of a technocratic or technological solution and a romantic solution.
And these are two of the top architectural practices in the United States today.
One very young, one a little more mature.
This is the work of a firm called SHoP, and what you're seeing here, is their isometric drawings of what will be a large-scale camera obscura in a public park.
Does everybody know what a camera obscura is?
Yeah, it's one of those giant camera lenses that takes a picture of the outside world -- it's sort of a little movie, without any moving parts -- and projects it on a page, and you can see the world outside you as you walk around it.
This is just the outline of it, and you can see, does it look like a regular building? No.
It's actually non-orthogonal: it's not up and down, square, rectangular, anything like that, that you'd see in a normal shape of a building.
The computer revolution, the technocratic, technological revolution, has allowed us to jettison normal-shaped buildings, traditionally shaped buildings, in favor of non-orthogonal buildings such as this.
What's interesting about it is not the shape.
What's interesting about it is how it's made. How it's made.
A brand-new way to put buildings together, something called mass customization. No, it is not an oxymoron.
What makes the building expensive, in the traditional sense, is making individual parts custom, that you can't do over and over again.
That's why we all live in developer houses.
They all want to save money by building the same thing 500 times.
That's because it's cheaper.
Mass customization works by an architect feeding into a computer, a program that says, manufacture these parts.
The computer then talks to a machine -- a computer-operated machine, a cad-cam machine -- that can make a zillion different changes, at a moment's notice, because the computer is just a machine.
It doesn't care. It's manufacturing the parts.
It doesn't see any excess cost. It doesn't spend any extra time.
It's not a laborer -- it's simply an electronic lathe, so the parts can all be cut at the same time.
Meanwhile, instead of sending someone working drawings, which are those huge sets of blueprints that you've seen your whole life, what the architect can do is send a set of assembly instructions, like you used to get when you were a child, when you bought little models that said, "Bolt A to B, and C to D."
And so what the builder will get is every single individual part that has been custom manufactured off-site and delivered on a truck to the site, to that builder, and a set of these instruction manuals.
Just simple "Bolt A to B" and they will be able to put them together.
Here's the little drawing that tells them how that works -- and that's what will happen in the end.
You're underneath it, looking up into the lens of the camera obscura.
Lest you think this is all fiction, lest you think this is all fantasy, or romance, these same architects were asked to produce something for the central courtyard of PS1, which is a museum in Brooklyn, New York, as part of their young architects summer series.
And they said, well, it's summer, what do you do?
In the summer, you go to the beach.
And when you go to the beach, what do you get? You get sand dunes.
So let's make architectural sand dunes and a beach cabana.
So they went out and they modeled a computer model of a sand dune.
They took photographs, they fed the photographs into their computer program, and that computer program shaped a sand dune and then took that sand dune shape and turned it into -- at their instructions, using standard software with slight modifications -- a set of instructions for pieces of wood.
And those are the pieces of wood. Those are the instructions.
These are the pieces, and here's a little of that blown up.
What you can see is there's about six different colors, and each color represents a type of wood to be cut, a piece of wood to be cut.
All of which were delivered by flat bed, on a truck, and hand assembled in 48 hours by a team of eight people, only one of whom had ever seen the plans before.
Only one of whom had ever seen the plans before.
And here comes dune-scape, coming up out of the courtyard, and there it is fully built.
There are only 16 different pieces of wood, only 16 different assembly parts here.
Looks like a beautiful piano sounding board on the inside.
It has its own built-in swimming pool, very, very cool.
It's a great place for parties -- it was, it was only up for six weeks.
It's got little dressing rooms and cabanas, where lots of interesting things went on, all summer long.
Now, lest you think that this is only for the light at heart, or just temporary installations, this is the same firm working at the World Trade Center, replacing the bridge that used to go across West Street, that very important pedestrian connection between the city of New York and the redevelopment of the West Side.
They were asked to design, replace that bridge in six weeks, building it, including all of the parts, manufactured.
And they were able to do it. That was their design, using that same computer modeling system and only five or six really different kinds of parts, a couple of struts, like this, some exterior cladding material and a very simple framing system that was all manufactured off-site and delivered by truck.
They were able to create that.
They were able to create something wonderful.
They're now building a 16-story building on the side of New York, using the same technology.
Here we're going to walk across the bridge at night.
It's self-lit, you don't need any overhead lighting, so the neighbors don't complain about metal-halide lighting in their face.
Here it is going across. And there, down the other side, and you get the same kind of grandeur.
Now, let me show you, quickly, the opposite, if I may.
Woo, pretty, huh. This is the other side of the coin.
This is the work of David Rockwell from New York City, whose work you can see out here today.
The current king of the romantics, who approaches his work in a very different fashion.
It's not to create a technological solution, it's to seduce you into something that you can do, into something that will please you, something that will lift your spirits, something that will make you feel as if are in another world -- such as his Nobu restaurant in New York, which is supposed to take you from the clutter of New York City to the simplicity of Japan and the elegance of Japanese tradition.
"When it's all said and done, it's got to look like seaweed," said the owner.
Or his restaurant, Pod, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
I want you to know the room you're looking at is stark white.
Every single surface of this restaurant is white.
The reason it has so much color is that it changes using lighting.
It's all about sensuality. It's all about transforming.
Watch this -- I'm not touching any buttons, ladies and gentlemen.
This is happening by itself.
It transforms through the magic of lighting.
It's all about sensuality. It's all about touch.
Rosa Mexicano restaurant, where he transports us to the shores of Acapulco, up on the Upper West Side, with this wall of cliff divers who -- there you go, like that.
Let's see it one more time.
Okay, just to make sure that you've enjoyed it.
And finally, it's about comfort, it's about making you feel good in places that you wouldn't have felt good before.
It's about bringing nature to the inside.
In the Guardian Tower of New York, converted to a W Union Square -- I'm sorry I'm rushing -- where we had to bring in the best horticulturists in the world to make sure that the interior of this dragged the garden space of the court garden of the Union Square into the building itself.
It's about stimulation.
This is a wine-buying experience simplified by color and taste.
Fizzy, fresh, soft, luscious, juicy, smooth, big and sweet wines, all explained to you by color and texture on the wall.
And finally, it's about entertainment, as in his headquarters for the Cirque du Soleil, Orlando, Florida, where you're asked to enter the Greek theater, look under the tent and join the magic world of Cirque du Soleil.
And I think I'll probably leave it at that. Thank you very much.
[This talk contains mature content] I have a vagina.
(Laughter) Just thought you should know.
That might not come as a surprise to some of you.
I look like a woman.
I'm dressed like one, I guess.
The thing is, I also have balls.
And it does take a lot of nerve to come up here and talk to you about my genitalia.
Just a little.
But I'm not talking about bravery or courage.
I mean literally -- I have balls.
Right here, right where a lot of you have ovaries.
I'm not male or female.
I'm intersex.
Most people assume that you're biologically either a man or a woman, but it's actually a lot more complex than that.
There are so many ways somebody could be intersex.
In my case, it means I was born with XY chromosomes, which you probably know as male chromosomes.
And I was born with a vagina and balls inside my body.
I don't respond to testosterone, so during puberty, I grew breasts, but I never got acne or body hair, body oil.
You can be jealous of that.
(Laughter) But even though I don't actually have a uterus -- I was born without one, so I don't menstruate, I can't have biological children.
We put people in boxes based on their genitalia.
Before a baby's even born, we ask whether it's a boy or a girl, as if it actually matters; as if you're going to be less excited about having a baby if it doesn't have the genitals you wanted; as if what's between somebody's legs tells you anything about that person.
Are they kind, generous, funny?
Smart?
Who do they want to be when they grow up?
Genitals don't actually tell you anything.
Yet, we define ourselves by them.
In this society, we love putting people into boxes and labeling each other.
It kind of gives us a sense of belonging and teaches us how to interact with one another.
But there's one really big problem: biological sex is not black or white.
It's on a spectrum.
Besides your genitalia, you also have your chromosomes, your gonads, like ovaries or testicles.
You have your internal sex organs, your hormone production, your hormone response and your secondary sex characteristics, like breast development, body hair, etc.
Those seven areas of biological sex all have so much variation, yet we only get two options: male or female.
Which is kind of absurd to me, because I can't think of a single other human trait that there's only two options for: skin color, hair, height, eyes.
You can either have nose A or nose B, that's it, no other options.
If there are infinite ways for our bodies to look, our minds to think, personalities to act, wouldn't it make sense that there's that much variety in biological sex, too?
Did you know that besides XX or XY chromosomes, you could have XX and XY chromosomes?
Or you could have an extra X -- XXY.
Or two extra -- XXXY.
Goes on from there.
And for those "normal" people with XX or XY, what does that mean?
I have XY chromosomes.
If my DNA is found at the scene of a crime -- not saying it will, but, you know, we'll see.
(Laughter) If my skeleton is discovered thousands of years from now, I'll be labeled male.
Is that the truth?
My balls would say so.
But what about the rest of me?
And what if a woman has ovarian cancer and has to have her ovaries removed?
Does she still qualify as a woman?
What about other intersex people who are born without balls or ovaries or with just one or a combination of the two?
Where do they go?
Do you have to have a uterus to be a woman?
There's a lot of us who are born without one.
And everyone's favorite part, genitalia: you either have one or the other, right?
You either have a six-inch-long penis that's exactly this thick, jutting straight out of the body at a 90-degree angle, or you have a vagina that's this wide internally and a clitoris that's half an inch above the vaginal opening and labia that look exactly like they're supposed to look like, according to that one porn video you watched that one time.
You know the one.
If you've been with more than one sexual partner in your lifetime, and you line them up, one by one, I guarantee you can identify them just by their genitalia.
(Laughter) Think about it.
Go on.
(Laughter) I see you.
No judging.
Just notice.
All different, right?
The sex and gender binary are both so ingrained in our society, that we never stop to think about it.
We just automatically place each other into one box or the other, as if it actually matters.
Until somebody comes along to make you question it.
And if you're thinking that I'm the exception, an anomaly, an outlier: intersex people represent around two percent of the population.
That's the same percentage as genetic redheads.
It's about 150 million people, roughly, which is more than the entire population of Russia.
So there's a lot of us, needless to say.
We're not new or rare.
We're just invisible.
We've existed throughout every culture in history.
Yet, we never talk about it.
In fact, a lot of people might not know that they're intersex.
Have you had a karyotype test to determine your chromosomes?
What about a full blood panel for all of your hormone levels?
A friend of mine found out last year, in his 50s.
The executive director of interACT, which is the leading organization for intersex human rights here in the US, she found out she was intersex at age 41.
Her doctors found out when she was 15, but they didn't tell her.
They lied and said that she had cancer, because that seemed like an easier option than finding out she wasn't "fully" a woman.
This kind of thing happens a lot, where intersex people are lied to or kept in the dark about our bodies, which comes as a surprise to a lot of people.
But we live in a society that doesn't talk about sex or bodies at all, unless it's to mock or shame each other.
I found out I was intersex at age 10, and for the most part, I was fine with that information.
It didn't really faze me; I was still developing my understanding of the world.
It wasn't until I got older and realized I didn't fit society's expectations of me, that I didn't belong, that I was abnormal.
And that's when the shame started.
How many times have you seen kids play with the "wrong" toys for their gender?
Or try on the "wrong" clothes?
All the time, right?
Kids don't have these ideas about gender norm, they don't have shame about who they're supposed to be or what they're supposed to like or love.
They don't care about any of this stuff.
They don't have shame until we put it on them.
I also had doctors lie to me.
At age 10, they told me that I would also get cancer unless I removed my balls.
Then they proceeded to tell me that every year.
Until today, there are still doctors who want me to remove them.
But there's literally no reason.
If a typical XY male, like yourself, has testicles, and one is undescended, there's a high chance of it becoming cancerous -- or a higher chance of it becoming cancerous.
They need to thermoregulated.
So they drop down away from the body to cool off, or they shrink back up to get warm.
Mine don't need to do that.
They're not responding to testosterone, they're not producing sperm.
They're fine right here inside my body.
Yet, because there's such a lack of information about intersex people, my doctors never understood the difference.
They never really understood my body.
As I got older, I had another doctor tell me that I needed to have surgery on my vagina.
She said that until I had an operation, until she operated, I would not be able to have "normal sex" with my husband one day.
Her words.
I didn't end up going through with the operation, and I'm incredibly grateful for that.
I'm not here to talk about my sex life.
(Laughter) But let's just say it's fine.
(Laughter) I'm fine, my body is fine.
You actually wouldn’t be able to tell the difference between me and another person unless I told you; you wouldn't be able to tell that I was intersex unless I told you.
But again, because of the lack of understanding about bodies, my doctor didn't understand the difference.
And for the most part, my sex life is fine.
The only issue that really comes up is that sometimes, sexual situations bring up memories of doctors touching me, over and over again since I was 10.
I've been really lucky to escape -- I didn't think I would get emotional -- I've been really lucky to escape the physical harm that comes from these unnecessary surgeries.
But no intersex person is free from the emotional harm that comes from living in a society that tries to cover up your existence.
Most of my intersex friends have had operations like these.
Oftentimes, they will remove testes like mine, even though my risk of testicular cancer is lower than the risk of breast cancer in a typical woman with no predisposition, no family history.
But we don't tell her to remove her breasts, do we?
It's rare to meet an intersex person that hasn't been operated on.
Oftentimes, these surgeries are done to improve intersex kids' lives, but they usually end up doing the opposite, causing more harm and complications, both physical and emotional.
I'm not saying that doctors are bad or evil.
It's just that we live in a society that causes some doctors to "fix" those of us who don't fit their definition of normal.
We're not problems that need to be fixed.
We just live in a society that needs to be enlightened.
One of the ways I'm doing that is by creating a genderless puberty guidebook that can teach kids about their bodies as they grow up.
Not their girl bodies or their boy bodies -- just their bodies.
We often place unrealistic expectations on the things that our bodies do that are outside of our control.
I mean, if one man can grow a full, luxurious, hipster beard, and the other can only grow a few mustache hairs, what does that mean about who they are as men?
Nothing.
It literally, most likely, just means that their hair follicles respond to testosterone in different ways.
Yet, how many times have you heard a man ashamed about something like this?
Imagine a world where we could live in a society that teaches us not to have shame about the things that our bodies do or do not do.
I want to change the way that we think about biological sex in this society -- which is a lot to ask for.
You could say it's ballsy, I guess.
(Laughter) But eventually we accepted the world as round, right?
We no longer diagnose gay people with mental disorders or women with hysteria.
We don't think epilepsy is caused by the devil anymore, so that's cool.
(Laughter) We constantly change and evolve, the more we understand as a society.
And biological sex is on a spectrum.
It's not black or white.
Not only could that knowledge save intersex kids from physical and emotional harm, I think it would help everyone else, too.
Who here has ever felt inadequate or ashamed because you weren't girly enough, you were too girly, you weren't manly enough, or too manly?
We constantly shame people for not fitting into a box, but the reality is, I think we shame others because it prevents them from seeing that we don't fit inside our boxes, either.
And the truth is that nobody actually fits in a box, because they don't exist.
This binary, this false male-female facade is something we constructed, we built ourselves.
But it doesn't have to exist.
We can break it down.
And that's what I want to do.
Will you join me?
Thanks.
(Applause)
Architecture is a profession with many rules, some written, some not, some relevant and others not.
As architects, we're constantly gravitating between following these rules by the book or making a space for imagination -- for experimentation.
This is a difficult balance.
Especially through architecture, you're trying to challenge preconceptions and push boundaries and innovate, even if just using what we have around and we overlook all the time.
And this is what I've been doing along with my team, Ensamble Studio, and from our very early works that happened in strict historic contexts, like the city of Santiago de Compostela.
Here we built the General Society of Authors and Editors, a cultural building.
And on top of all the regulations, we had to use stone by code and our experience was limited, but we had incredible references to learn from, some coming from the city itself or from nearby landscapes or other remote places that had impacted our education as architects, and maybe you recognize here.
But somehow the finished products that industry made available for us as architects to use in our buildings seemed to have lost their soul.
And so we decided to go to the nearby quarries to better understand the process that transforms a mountain into a perfectly square tile that you buy from a supplier.
And we were taken by the monumental scale of the material and the actions to extract it.
And looking carefully, we noticed hundreds of irregular blocks piling up everywhere.
They are the leftovers of an extraction sequence: the ugly parts that nobody wants.
But we wanted them.
We were inspired.
And it was a win-win situation where we could get this residual material of great quality, doomed to be crushed, at a very low cost.
Now, we had to convince our clients that this was a good idea; but foremost, we had to come up with a design process to reuse these randomly shaped rocks, and we had not done this before.
Today everything would be much easier because we would go to the quarry with our smartphones equipped with 3-D scanners and we would document each rock, turn that into a digital model -- highly engineer the whole process.
But more than a decade ago, we had to embrace uncertainty and put on our boots, roll up our sleeves and move to the quarry for a hands-on experience.
And we also had to become the contractors because we failed at finding somebody willing to share the risk with us.
Now, luckily, we convinced the quarry team to help us build a few prototypes to resolve some of the technical details.
And we agreed on a few mock-ups, but we got excited, and one stone led to another until we succeeded to build an 18-meter-long by eight-meter-high structure that recycled all the amorphous material of the quarry, just supported by gravity -- no mortar and no ties.
And once built and tested, moving it to the final site in the city center to unite it with the rest of the building was a piece of cake, because by having isolated uncertainty and managed risk in the controlled environment of the quarry, we were able to complete the whole building in time and on budget, even if using nonconventional means and methods.
And I still get goosebumps when I see this big chunk of the industrial landscape in the city, in a building, experienced by the visitors and the neighbors.
This building gave us quite a few headaches, and so it could have well been an exception in our work, but instead it started to inform a modus operandi where every project becomes this opportunity to test the limits of a discipline we believe has to be urgently reimagined.
So what you see here are four homes that we have designed, built and inhabited.
Four manifestos where we are using the small scale to ask ourselves big questions.
And we are trying to discover the architectures that result from unconventional applications of pretty mundane materials and technologies, like concrete in different forms in the top row, or steel and foam in the bottom row.
Take, for instance, these precast concrete beams.
You have probably seen them building bridges, highways, water channels -- we found them on one of our visits to a precast concrete factory.
And they might not seem especially homey or beautiful, but we decided to use them to build our first house.
And this was an incredible moment because we got to be architects as always, builders once more and, for the first time, we could be our own clients.
So, here we are trying to figure out how we can take these huge catalogue beams of about 20 tons each and stack them progressively around a courtyard space ...
the heart of the house.
And due to the dimensions and their material quality, these big parts are the structure that carry the loads to the ground, but they are much more than that.
They are the swimming pool; they are the walls that divide interior from exterior; they are the windows that frame the views; they are the finishes; they are the very spirit of this house.
A house that is for us a laboratory where we are testing how we can use standard elements in nonstandard ways.
And we are observing that the results are intriguing.
And we are learning by doing that prefabrication can be much more than stacking boxes or that heavy parts can be airy and transparent.
And on top of designing and building this house, we get invaluable feedback, sharing it with our family and our friends because this is our life and our work in progress.
The lessons that we learn here get translated into other projects and other programs and other scales as well, and they inspire new work.
Here again we are looking at very standard products: galvanized steel studs that can be easily cut and screwed, insulating foams, cement boards -- all materials that you can find hidden in partition walls and that we are exposing; and we are using them to build a very lightweight construction system that can be built almost by anyone.
And we are doing it ourselves with our hands in our shop, and we are architects. We're not professional builders but we want to make sure it's possible.
And it's so nice that Antón can move it with his hands and Javier can put it in a container, and we can ship it like you would ship your belongings if you were moving abroad ...
which is what we did five years ago.
We moved our gravity center from Madrid and the house of the concrete beams to Brookline.
And we found the ugly duckling of a very nice neighborhood: a one-story garage and the only thing we could afford.
But it was OK because we wanted to transform it into a swan, installing on top our just-delivered kit of parts, once more becoming the scientists and the guinea pigs.
So this is a house that uses some of the cheapest and most normal materials that you can find in the market that applies the ubiquitous four-by-eight modulation that governs the construction industry.
And yet a different organization of the spaces and a different assembly of the parts is able to transform an economically built home into a luxurious space.
And now, we're dreaming and we're actively working with developers, with builders, with communities to try to make this a reality for many more homes and many more families.
And you see, the world around us is an infinite source of inspiration if we are curious enough to see beneath the surface of things.
Now I'm going to take you to the other side of the moon: to the sublime landscape of Montana, where a few years ago we joined Cathy and Peter Halstead to imagine Tippet Rise Art Center on a 10,000-acre working ranch.
And when we first visited the site, we realized that all we knew about what an art center is was absolutely pointless for that client, for that community, for that landscape.
The kind of white-box museum type had no fit here.
So we decided to explode the center into a constellation of fragments, of spaces spread across the vast territory that would immerse the visitors into the wilderness of this amazing place.
So back in the office, we are thinking through making, using the land both as support and as material, learning from its geological processes of sedimentation, erosion, fragmentation, crystallization -- explosion -- to discover architectures that are born from the land, that are visceral extensions of the landscape, like this bridge that crosses Murphy Canyon.
Or this fountain.
Like this space topping a hill ...
or this theatre that brings to us the space of the mountains and its sound.
And in order to realize this idea, construction cannot be perfectly planned.
We need to embrace the drastic weather and the local craft.
We need to control just those aspects that are critical, like the structural, the thermal, the acoustical properties embedded in the form.
But otherwise, improvisation is welcome and is provoked.
And the moment of construction is still a moment of design and a moment of celebration where different hands, hearts, minds come together to perform a final dance.
And the result then cannot be anticipated.
It comes as a surprise.
And we unwrap architecture like you would unwrap a birthday gift.
Architecture isn't uncovered: it's discovered.
It's extracted from the guts of the earth to build a shelter, one of the most basic human needs.
Architecture, art, landscape, archaeology, geology -- all made one.
And by using the resources at our disposal in radical ways, by making a space for experimentation, we are able to bring to light architectures that find the beauty latent in the raw and imperfect things that surround us, that elevate them and let them speak their own language.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The greatest challenge a vampire hunter can take on is to bring sunlight into a vampire's lair.
You’ve stealthily descended into the darkness of a vampire cave, setting a sequence of mirrors as you go.
When the sun reaches the right angle in the sky, a focused beam of light will ricochet along the mirrors, strike your diffuser, and illuminate the great chamber where the vampires sleep.
You set the final mirror and sneak through an opening in the corner of the great chamber.
The diffuser must be wall-mounted, but the walls are crowded with coffins, which you don’t dare disturb.
The only open spots are in the other three corners of the room.
The light will enter through the southwest corner at a 45 degree angle and bounce off the perfectly smooth metallic walls until it hits one of the other three corners.
But which corner will it hit?
You know the room is a rectangle 49 meters wide and 78 meters long.
You could probably find the answer by drawing a scale model of the room and tracing the path of the light, but the sun will be in its place in just minutes, and you’ve got no time to spare.
Fortunately, there’s a different way to solve this puzzle that’s both simple and elegant.
So in which corner should you place the diffuser to flood the vampire lair with sunlight?
Pause the video if you want to figure it out for yourself.
Answer in 2 Answer in 1 You could tackle this problem by examining smaller rooms, and you’d find a lot of interesting patterns.
But there’s one insight that can unravel this riddle in almost no time at all.
Let’s draw the chamber on a coordinate grid, with the Southwest corner at the point (0,0).
The light passes through grid points with coordinates that are either both even or both odd.
This is true even after it bounces off one or more walls.
Another way of thinking about it is this: since the light travels at a 45 degree angle, it always crosses the diagonal of a unit square.
Traveling 1 meter horizontally changes the x coordinate from even to odd or vice versa.
Traveling 1 meter vertically changes the y coordinate from even to odd or vice versa.
Traveling diagonally – as the light does here – does both at once, so the x and y coordinates of any points the light passes through must be both even, or both odd.
This observation is more powerful than it seems.
In particular, it means that we have a way to identify the kinds of points the light won’t ever go through If one of the coordinates is even and the other is odd, the light will miss them.
That means it’ll miss the top two corners of the room, since those points have one even and one odd coordinate.
The Southeast corner is the only option for the diffuser.
And indeed, when that precious beam of sunlight enters the hall, it bounces between the walls and strikes the Southeast corner, spot on.
The vampires, sensing the intrusion, burst from their coffins and turn to dust in the light.
It was a “high stakes” test, and you passed with flying colors.
A garrulous grandmother and a roaming bandit face off on a dirt road.
A Bible salesman lures a one-legged philosopher into a barn.
A traveling handyman teaches a deaf woman her first word on an old plantation.
From her farm in rural Georgia, surrounded by a flock of pet birds, Flannery O’Connor scribbled tales of outcasts, intruders and misfits staged in the world she knew best: the American South.
She published two novels, but is perhaps best known for her short stories, which explored small-town life with stinging language, offbeat humor, and delightfully unsavory scenarios.
In her spare time O’Connor drew cartoons, and her writing is also brimming with caricature.
In her stories, a mother has a face “as broad and innocent as a cabbage,” a man has as much drive as a “floor mop,” and one woman’s body is shaped like “a funeral urn.” The names of her characters are equally sly.
Take the story “The Life You Save May be Your Own,” where the one-handed drifter Tom Shiftlet wanders into the lives of an old woman named Lucynell Crater and her deaf and mute daughter.
Though Mrs. Crater is self-assured, her isolated home is falling apart.
At first, we may be suspicious of Shiftlet’s motives when he offers to help around the house, but O’Connor soon reveals the old woman to be just as scheming as her unexpected guest– and rattles the reader’s presumptions about who has the upper hand.
For O’Connor, no subject was off limits.
Though she was a devout Catholic, she wasn’t afraid to explore the possibility of pious thought and unpious behavior co-existing in the same person.
In her novel The Violent Bear it Away, the main character grapples with the choice to become a man of God – but also sets fires and commits murder.
The book opens with the reluctant prophet in a particularly compromising position: “Francis Marion Tarwater’s uncle had been dead for only half a day when the boy got too drunk to finish digging his grave.” This leaves a passerby to “drag the body from the breakfast table where it was still sitting and bury it […] with enough dirt on top to keep the dogs from digging it up.” Though her own politics are still debated, O’Connor’s fiction could also be attuned to the racism of the South.
In “Everything that Rises Must Converge,” she depicts a son raging at his mother’s bigotry.
But the story reveals that he has his own blind spots and suggests that simply recognizing evil doesn’t exempt his character from scrutiny.
Even as O’Connor probes the most unsavory aspects of humanity, she leaves the door to redemption open a crack.
In “A Good Man is Hard to Find,” she redeems an insufferable grandmother for forgiving a hardened criminal, even as he closes in on her family.
Though we might balk at the price the woman pays for this redemption, we’re forced to confront the nuance in moments we might otherwise consider purely violent or evil.
O’Connor’s mastery of the grotesque and her explorations of the insularity and superstition of the South led her to be classified as a Southern Gothic writer.
But her work pushed beyond the purely ridiculous and frightening characteristics associated with the genre to reveal the variety and nuance of human character.
She knew some of this variety was uncomfortable, and that her stories could be an acquired taste – but she took pleasure in challenging her readers.
O’Connor died of lupus at the age of 39, after the disease had mostly confined her to her farm in Georgia for twelve years.
During those years, she penned much of her most imaginative work.
Her ability to flit between revulsion and revelation continues to draw readers to her endlessly surprising fictional worlds.
As her character Tom Shiftlet notes, the body is “like a house: it don’t go anywhere, but the spirit, lady, is like an automobile: always on the move.”
The Internet, the Web as we know it, the kind of Web -- the things we're all talking about -- is already less than 5,000 days old.
So all of the things that we've seen come about, starting, say, with satellite images of the whole Earth, which we couldn't even imagine happening before, all these things rolling into our lives, just this abundance of things that are right before us, sitting in front of our laptop, or our desktop.
This kind of cornucopia of stuff just coming and never ending is amazing, and we're not amazed.
It's really amazing that all this stuff is here.
(Laughter) It's in 5,000 days, all this stuff has come.
And I know that 10 years ago, if I had told you that this was all coming, you would have said that that's impossible.
There's simply no economic model that that would be possible.
And if I told you it was all coming for free, you would say, this is simply -- you're dreaming.
You're a Californian utopian. You're a wild-eyed optimist.
And yet it's here.
The other thing that we know about it was that 10 years ago, as I looked at what even Wired was talking about, we thought it was going to be TV, but better.
That was the model. That was what everybody was suggesting was going to be coming.
And it turns out that that's not what it was.
First of all, it was impossible, and it's not what it was.
And so one of the things that I think we're learning -- if you think about, like, Wikipedia, it's something that was simply impossible.
It's impossible in theory, but possible in practice.
And if you take all these things that are impossible, I think one of the things that we're learning from this era, from this last decade, is that we have to get good at believing in the impossible, because we're unprepared for it.
So, I'm curious about what's going to happen in the next 5,000 days.
But if that's happened in the last 5,000 days, what's going to happen in the next 5,000 days?
So, I have a kind of a simple story, and it suggests that what we want to think about is this thing that we're making, this thing that has happened in 5,000 days -- that's all these computers, all these handhelds, all these cell phones, all these laptops, all these servers -- basically what we're getting out of all these connections is we're getting one machine.
If there is only one machine, and our little handhelds and devices are actually just little windows into those machines, but that we're basically constructing a single, global machine.
And so I began to think about that.
And it turned out that this machine happens to be the most reliable machine that we've ever made.
It has not crashed; it's running uninterrupted.
And there's almost no other machine that we've ever made that runs the number of hours, the number of days.
5,000 days without interruption -- that's just unbelievable.
And of course, the Internet is longer than just 5,000 days; the Web is only 5,000 days.
So, I was trying to basically make measurements.
What are the dimensions of this machine?
And I started off by calculating how many billions of clicks there are all around the globe on all the computers.
And there is a 100 billion clicks per day.
And there's 55 trillion links between all the Web pages of the world.
And so I began thinking more about other kinds of dimensions, and I made a quick list. Was it Chris Jordan, the photographer, talking about numbers being so large that they're meaningless?
Well, here's a list of them. They're hard to tell, but there's one billion PC chips on the Internet, if you count all the chips in all the computers on the Internet.
There's two million emails per second.
So it's a very big number.
It's just a huge machine, and it uses five percent of the global electricity on the planet.
So here's the specifications, just as if you were to make up a spec sheet for it: 170 quadrillion transistors, 55 trillion links, emails running at two megahertz itself, 31 kilohertz text messaging, 246 exabyte storage. That's a big disk.
That's a lot of storage, memory. Nine exabyte RAM.
And the total traffic on this is running at seven terabytes per second.
Brewster was saying the Library of Congress is about twenty terabytes.
So every second, half of the Library of Congress is swooshing around in this machine. It's a big machine.
So I did something else. I figured out 100 billion clicks per day, 55 trillion links is almost the same as the number of synapses in your brain.
A quadrillion transistors is almost the same as the number of neurons in your brain.
So to a first approximation, we have these things -- twenty petahertz synapse firings.
Of course, the memory is really huge.
But to a first approximation, the size of this machine is the size -- and its complexity, kind of -- to your brain.
Because in fact, that's how your brain works -- in kind of the same way that the Web works.
However, your brain isn't doubling every two years.
So if we say this machine right now that we've made is about one HB, one human brain, if we look at the rate that this is increasing, 30 years from now, there'll be six billion HBs.
So by the year 2040, the total processing of this machine will exceed a total processing power of humanity, in raw bits and stuff. And this is, I think, where Ray Kurzweil and others get this little chart saying that we're going to cross.
So, what about that? Well, here's a couple of things.
I have three kind of general things I would like to say, three consequences of this.
First, that basically what this machine is doing is embodying.
We're giving it a body. And that's what we're going to do in the next 5,000 days -- we're going to give this machine a body.
And the second thing is, we're going to restructure its architecture.
And thirdly, we're going to become completely codependent upon it.
So let me go through those three things.
First of all, we have all these things in our hands.
We think they're all separate devices, but in fact, every screen in the world is looking into the one machine.
These are all basically portals into that one machine.
The second thing is that -- some people call this the cloud, and you're kind of touching the cloud with this.
And so in some ways, all you really need is a cloudbook.
And the cloudbook doesn't have any storage.
It's wireless. It's always connected.
There's many things about it. It becomes very simple, and basically what you're doing is you're just touching the machine, you're touching the cloud and you're going to compute that way.
So the machine is computing.
And in some ways, it's sort of back to the kind of old idea of centralized computing.
But everything, all the cameras, and the microphones, and the sensors in cars and everything is connected to this machine.
And everything will go through the Web.
And we're seeing that already with, say, phones.
Right now, phones don't go through the Web, but they are beginning to, and they will.
And if you imagine what, say, just as an example, what Google Labs has in terms of experiments with Google Docs, Google Spreadsheets, blah, blah, blah -- all these things are going to become Web based.
They're going through the machine.
And I am suggesting that every bit will be owned by the Web.
Right now, it's not. If you do spreadsheets and things at work, a Word document, they aren't on the Web, but they are going to be. They're going to be part of this machine.
They're going to speak the Web language.
They're going to talk to the machine.
The Web, in some sense, is kind of like a black hole that's sucking up everything into it.
And so every thing will be part of the Web.
So every item, every artifact that we make, will have embedded in it some little sliver of Web-ness and connection, and it will be part of this machine, so that our environment -- kind of in that ubiquitous computing sense -- our environment becomes the Web. Everything is connected.
Now, with RFIDs and other things -- whatever technology it is, it doesn't really matter. The point is that everything will have embedded in it some sensor connecting it to the machine, and so we have, basically, an Internet of things.
So you begin to think of a shoe as a chip with heels, and a car as a chip with wheels, because basically most of the cost of manufacturing cars is the embedded intelligence and electronics in it, and not the materials.
A lot of people think about the new economy as something that was going to be a disembodied, alternative, virtual existence, and that we would have the old economy of atoms.
But in fact, what the new economy really is is the marriage of those two, where we embed the information, and the digital nature of things into the material world.
That's what we're looking forward to. That is where we're going -- this union, this convergence of the atomic and the digital.
And so one of the consequences of that, I believe, is that where we have this sort of spectrum of media right now -- TV, film, video -- that basically becomes one media platform.
And while there's many differences in some senses, they will share more and more in common with each other.
So that the laws of media, such as the fact that copies have no value, the value's in the uncopiable things, the immediacy, the authentication, the personalization.
The media wants to be liquid.
The reason why things are free is so that you can manipulate them, not so that they are "free" as in "beer," but "free" as in "freedom."
And the network effects rule, meaning that the more you have, the more you get.
The first fax machine -- the person who bought the first fax machine was an idiot, because there was nobody to fax to.
But here she became an evangelist, recruiting others to get the fax machines because it made their purchase more valuable.
Those are the effects that we're going to see.
Attention is the currency.
So those laws are going to kind of spread throughout all media.
And the other thing about this embodiment is that there's kind of what I call the McLuhan reversal.
McLuhan was saying, "Machines are the extensions of the human senses."
And I'm saying, "Humans are now going to be the extended senses of the machine," in a certain sense.
So we have a trillion eyes, and ears, and touches, through all our digital photographs and cameras.
And we see that in things like Flickr, or Photosynth, this program from Microsoft that will allow you to assemble a view of a touristy place from the thousands of tourist snapshots of it.
In a certain sense, the machine is seeing through the pixels of individual cameras.
Now, the second thing that I want to talk about was this idea of restructuring, that what the Web is doing is restructuring.
And I have to warn you, that what we'll talk about is -- I'm going to give my explanation of a term you're hearing, which is a "semantic Web."
So first of all, the first stage that we've seen of the Internet was that it was going to link computers.
And that's what we called the Net; that was the Internet of nets.
And we saw that, where you have all the computers of the world.
And if you remember, it was a kind of green screen with cursors, and there was really not much to do, and if you wanted to connect it, you connected it from one computer to another computer.
And what you had to do was -- if you wanted to participate in this, you had to share packets of information.
So you were forwarding on. You didn't have control.
It wasn't like a telephone system where you had control of a line: you had to share packets.
The second stage that we're in now is the idea of linking pages.
So in the old one, if I wanted to go on to an airline Web page, I went from my computer, to an FTP site, to another airline computer.
Now we have pages -- the unit has been resolved into pages, so one page links to another page.
And if I want to go in to book a flight, I go into the airline's flight page, the website of the airline, and I'm linking to that page.
And what we're sharing were links, so you had to be kind of open with links.
You couldn't deny -- if someone wanted to link to you, you couldn't stop them. You had to participate in this idea of opening up your pages to be linked by anybody.
So that's what we were doing.
We're now entering to the third stage, which is what I'm talking about, and that is where we link the data.
So, I don't know what the name of this thing is.
I'm calling it the one machine. But we're linking data.
So we're going from machine to machine, from page to page, and now data to data.
So the difference is, is that rather than linking from page to page, we're actually going to link from one idea on a page to another idea, rather than to the other page.
So every idea is basically being supported -- or every item, or every noun -- is being supported by the entire Web.
It's being resolved at the level of items, or ideas, or words, if you want.
So besides physically coming out again into this idea that it's not just virtual, it's actually going out to things.
So something will resolve down to the information about a particular person, so every person will have a unique ID.
Every person, every item will have a something that will be very specific, and will link to a specific representation of that idea or item.
So now, in this new one, when I link to it, I would link to my particular flight, my particular seat.
And so, giving an example of this thing, I live in Pacifica, rather than -- right now Pacifica is just sort of a name on the Web somewhere.
The Web doesn't know that that is actually a town, and that it's a specific town that I live in, but that's what we're going to be talking about.
It's going to link directly to -- it will know, the Web will be able to read itself and know that that actually is a place, and that whenever it sees that word, "Pacifica," it knows that it actually has a place, latitude, longitude, a certain population.
So here are some of the technical terms, all three-letter things, that you'll see a lot more of.
All these things are about enabling this idea of linking to the data.
So I'll give you one kind of an example.
There's like a billion social sites on the Web.
Each time you go into there, you have to tell it again who you are and all your friends are.
Why should you be doing that? You should just do that once, and it should know who all your friends are.
So that's what you want, is all your friends are identified, and you should just carry these relationships around.
All this data about you should just be conveyed, and you should do it once and that's all that should happen.
And you should have all the networks of all the relationships between those pieces of data.
That's what we're moving into -- where it sort of knows these things down to that level.
A semantic Web, Web 3.0, giant global graph -- we're kind of trying out what we want to call this thing.
But what's it's doing is sharing data.
So you have to be open to having your data shared, which is a much bigger step than just sharing your Web page, or your computer.
And all these things that are going to be on this are not just pages, they are things.
Everything we've described, every artifact or place, will be a specific representation, will have a specific character that can be linked to directly.
So we have this database of things.
And so there's actually a fourth thing that we have not get to, that we won't see in the next 10 years, or 5,000 days, but I think that's where we're going to. And as the Internet of things -- where I'm linking directly to the particular things of my seat on the plane -- that that physical thing becomes part of the Web.
And so we are in the middle of this thing that's completely linked, down to every object in the little sliver of a connection that it has.
So, the last thing I want to talk about is this idea that we're going to be codependent.
It's always going to be there, and the closer it is, the better.
If you allow Google to, it will tell you your search history.
And I found out by looking at it that I search most at 11 o'clock in the morning.
So I am open, and being transparent to that.
And I think total personalization in this new world will require total transparency.
That is going to be the price.
If you want to have total personalization, you have to be totally transparent.
Google. I can't remember my phone number, I'll just ask Google.
We're so dependent on this that I have now gotten to the point where I don't even try to remember things -- I'll just Google it. It's easier to do that.
And we kind of object at first, saying, "Oh, that's awful."
But if we think about the dependency that we have on this other technology, called the alphabet, and writing, we're totally dependent on it, and it's transformed culture.
We cannot imagine ourselves without the alphabet and writing.
And so in the same way, we're going to not imagine ourselves without this other machine being there.
And what is happening with this is some kind of AI, but it's not the AI in conscious AI, as being an expert, Larry Page told me that that's what they're trying to do, and that's what they're trying to do.
But when six billion humans are Googling, who's searching who? It goes both ways.
So we are the Web, that's what this thing is.
We are going to be the machine.
So the next 5,000 days, it's not going to be the Web and only better.
Just like it wasn't TV and only better.
The next 5,000 days, it's not just going to be the Web but only better -- it's going to be something different.
And I think it's going to be smarter.
It'll have an intelligence in there, that's not, again, conscious.
But it'll anticipate what we're doing, in a good sense.
Secondly, it's become much more personalized.
It will know us, and that's good.
And again, the price of that will be transparency.
And thirdly, it's going to become more ubiquitous in terms of filling your entire environment, and we will be in the middle of it.
And all these devices will be portals into that.
So the single idea that I wanted to leave with you is that we have to begin to think about this as not just "the Web, only better," but a new kind of stage in this development.
It looks more global. If you take this whole thing, it is a very big machine, very reliable machine, more reliable than its parts.
But we can also think about it as kind of a large organism.
So we might respond to it more as if this was a whole system, more as if this wasn't a large organism that we are going to be interacting with. It's a "One."
And I don't know what else to call it, than the One.
We'll have a better word for it.
But there's a unity of some sort that's starting to emerge.
And again, I don't want to talk about consciousness, I want to talk about it just as if it was a little bacteria, or a volvox, which is what that organism is.
So, to do, action, take-away. So, here's what I would say: there's only one machine, and the Web is its OS.
All screens look into the One. No bits will live outside the Web.
To share is to gain. Let the One read it.
It's going to be machine-readable.
You want to make something that the machine can read.
And the One is us. We are in the One.
I appreciate your time.
(Applause)
I was asked to come here and speak about creation.
And I only have 15 minutes, and I see they're counting already.
And I can -- in 15 minutes, I think I can touch only a very rather janitorial branch of creation, which I call "creativity."
Creativity is how we cope with creation.
While creation sometimes seems a bit un-graspable, or even pointless, creativity is always meaningful.
See, for instance, in this picture.
You know, creation is what put that dog in that picture, and creativity is what makes us see a chicken on his hindquarters.
When you think about -- you know, creativity has a lot to do with causality too.
You know, when I was a teenager, I was a creator.
I just did things.
Then I became an adult and started knowing who I was, and tried to maintain that persona -- I became creative.
It wasn't until I actually did a book and a retrospective exhibition, that I could track exactly -- looks like all the craziest things that I had done, all my drinking, all my parties -- they followed a straight line that brings me to the point that actually I'm talking to you at this moment.
Though it's actually true, you know, the reason I'm talking to you right now is because I was born in Brazil.
If I was born in Monterey, probably would be in Brazil.
You know, I was born in Brazil and grew up in the '70s under a climate of political distress, and I was forced to learn to communicate in a very specific way -- in a sort of a semiotic black market.
You couldn't really say what you wanted to say; you had to invent ways of doing it.
You didn't trust information very much.
That led me to another step of why I'm here today, is because I really liked media of all kinds.
I was a media junkie, and eventually got involved with advertising.
My first job in Brazil was actually to develop a way to improve the readability of billboards, and based on speed, angle of approach and actually blocks of text.
It was very -- actually, it was a very good study, and got me a job in an ad agency.
And they also decided that I had to -- to give me a very ugly Plexiglas trophy for it.
And another point -- why I'm here -- is that the day I went to pick up the Plexiglas trophy, I rented a tuxedo for the first time in my life, picked the thing -- didn't have any friends.
On my way out, I had to break a fight apart.
Somebody was hitting somebody else with brass knuckles.
They were in tuxedos, and fighting. It was very ugly.
And also -- advertising people do that all the time -- (Laughter) -- and I -- well, what happened is when I went back, it was on the way back to my car, the guy who got hit decided to grab a gun -- I don't know why he had a gun -- and shoot the first person he decided to be his aggressor.
The first person was wearing a black tie, a tuxedo. It was me.
Luckily, it wasn't fatal, as you can all see.
And, even more luckily, the guy said that he was sorry and I bribed him for compensation money, otherwise I press charges.
And that's how -- with this money I paid for a ticket to come to the United States in 1983, and that's very -- the basic reason I'm talking to you here today: because I got shot. (Laughter) (Applause) Well, when I started working with my own work, I decided that I shouldn't do images.
You know, I became -- I took this very iconoclastic approach.
Because when I decided to go into advertising, I wanted to do -- I wanted to airbrush naked people on ice, for whiskey commercials, that's what I really wanted to do. (Laughter) But I -- they didn't let me do it, so I just -- you know, they would only let me do other things.
But I wasn't into selling whiskey; I was into selling ice.
The first works were actually objects.
It was kind of a mixture of found object, product design and advertising.
And I called them relics.
They were displayed first at Stux Gallery in 1983.
This is the clown skull.
Is a remnant of a race of -- a very evolved race of entertainers.
They lived in Brazil, long time ago. (Laughter) This is the Ashanti joystick.
Unfortunately, it has become obsolete because it was designed for Atari platform.
A Playstation II is in the works, maybe for the next TED I'll bring it.
The rocking podium. (Laughter) This is the pre-Columbian coffeemaker. (Laughter) Actually, the idea came out of an argument that I had at Starbucks, that I insisted that I wasn't having Colombian coffee; the coffee was actually pre-Columbian.
The Bonsai table.
The entire Encyclopedia Britannica bound in a single volume, for travel purposes.
And the half tombstone, for people who are not dead yet.
I wanted to take that into the realm of images, and I decided to make things that had the same identity conflicts.
So I decided to do work with clouds.
Because clouds can mean anything you want.
But now I wanted to work in a very low-tech way, so something that would mean at the same time a lump of cotton, a cloud and Durer's praying hands -- although this looks a lot more like Mickey Mouse's praying hands.
But I was still, you know -- this is a kitty cloud.
They're called "Equivalents," after Alfred Stieglitz's work.
"The Snail."
But I was still working with sculpture, and I was really trying to go flatter and flatter.
"The Teapot."
I had a chance to go to Florence, in -- I think it was '94, and I saw Ghiberti's "Door of Paradise."
And he did something that was very tricky.
He put together two different media from different periods of time.
First, he got an age-old way of making it, which was relief, and he worked this with three-point perspective, which was brand-new technology at the time.
And it's totally overkill.
And your eye doesn't know which level to read.
And you become trapped into this kind of representation.
So I decided to make these very simple renderings, that at first they are taken as a line drawing -- you know, something that's very -- and then I did it with wire.
The idea was to -- because everybody overlooks white -- like pencil drawings, you know?
And they would look at it -- "Ah, it's a pencil drawing."
Then you have this double take and see that it's actually something that existed in time.
It had a physicality, and you start going deeper and deeper into sort of narrative that goes this way, towards the image. So this is "Monkey with Leica."
"Relaxation."
"Fiat Lux."
And the same way the history of representation evolved from line drawings to shaded drawings.
And I wanted to deal with other subjects.
I started taking that into the realm of landscape, which is something that's almost a picture of nothing.
I made these pictures called "Pictures of Thread," and I named them after the amount of yards that I used to represent each picture.
These always end up being a photograph at the end, or more like an etching in this case.
So this is a lighthouse.
This is "6,500 Yards," after Corot. "9,000 Yards," after Gerhard Richter.
And I don't know how many yards, after John Constable.
Departing from the lines, I decided to tackle the idea of points, like which is more similar to the type of representation that we find in photographs themselves.
I had met a group of children in the Caribbean island of Saint Kitts, and I did work and play with them.
I got some photographs from them.
Upon my arrival in New York, I decided -- they were children of sugar plantation workers.
And by manipulating sugar over a black paper, I made portraits of them.
These are -- (Applause) -- Thank you. This is "Valentina, the Fastest."
It was just the name of the child, with the little thing you get to know of somebody that you meet very briefly.
"Valicia."
"Jacynthe."
But another layer of representation was still introduced.
Because I was doing this while I was making these pictures, I realized that I could add still another thing I was trying to make a subject -- something that would interfere with the themes, so chocolate is very good, because it has -- it brings to mind ideas that go from scatology to romance.
And so I decided to make these pictures, and they were very large, so you had to walk away from it to be able to see them.
So they're called "Pictures of Chocolate."
Freud probably could explain chocolate better than I. He was the first subject.
And Jackson Pollock also.
Pictures of crowds are particularly interesting, because, you know, you go to that -- you try to figure out the threshold with something you can define very easily, like a face, goes into becoming just a texture.
"Paparazzi."
I used the dust at the Whitney Museum to render some pieces of their collection.
And I picked minimalist pieces because they're about specificity.
And you render this with the most non-specific material, which is dust itself.
Like, you know, you have the skin particles of every single museum visitor.
They do a DNA scan of this, they will come up with a great mailing list.
This is Richard Serra.
I bought a computer, and [they] told me it had millions of colors in it.
You know an artist's first response to this is, who counted it? You know?
And I realized that I never worked with color, because I had a hard time controlling the idea of single colors.
But once they're applied to numeric structure, then you can feel more comfortable.
So the first time I worked with colors was by making these mosaics of Pantone swatches.
They end up being very large pictures, and I photographed with a very large camera -- an 8x10 camera.
So you can see the surface of every single swatch -- like in this picture of Chuck Close.
And you have to walk very far to be able to see it.
Also, the reference to Gerhard Richter's use of color charts -- and the idea also entering another realm of representation that's very common to us today, which is the bit map.
I ended up narrowing the subject to Monet's "Haystacks."
This is something I used to do as a joke -- you know, make -- the same like -- Robert Smithson's "Spiral Jetty" -- and then leaving traces, as if it was done on a tabletop.
I tried to prove that he didn't do that thing in the Salt Lake.
But then, just doing the models, I was trying to explore the relationship between the model and the original.
And I felt that I would have to actually go there and make some earthworks myself.
I opt for very simple line drawings -- kind of stupid looking.
And at the same time, I was doing these very large constructions, being 150 meters away.
Now I would do very small ones, which would be like -- but under the same light, and I would show them together, so the viewer would have to really figure it out what one he was looking.
I wasn't interested in the very large things, or in the small things.
I was more interested in the things in between, you know, because you can leave an enormous range for ambiguity there.
This is like you see -- the size of a person over there.
This is a pipe.
A hanger.
And this is another thing that I did -- you know working -- everybody loves to watch somebody draw, but not many people have a chance to watch somebody draw in -- a lot of people at the same time, to evidence a single drawing.
And I love this work, because I did these cartoonish clouds over Manhattan for a period of two months.
And it was quite wonderful, because I had an interest -- an early interest -- in theater, that's justified on this thing.
In theater, you have the character and the actor in the same place, trying to negotiate each other in front of an audience.
And in this, you'd have like a -- something that looks like a cloud, and it is a cloud at the same time.
So they're like perfect actors.
My interest in acting, especially bad acting, goes a long way.
Actually, I once paid like 60 dollars to see a very great actor to do a version of "King Lear," and I felt really robbed, because by the time the actor started being King Lear, he stopped being the great actor that I had paid money to see.
On the other hand, you know, I paid like three dollars, I think -- and I went to a warehouse in Queens to see a version of "Othello" by an amateur group.
And it was quite fascinating, because you know the guy -- his name was Joey Grimaldi -- he impersonated the Moorish general -- you know, for the first three minutes he was really that general, and then he went back into plumber, he worked as a plumber, so -- plumber, general, plumber, general -- so for three dollars, I saw two tragedies for the price of one.
See, I think it's not really about impression, making people fall for a really perfect illusion, as much as it is to make -- I usually work at the lowest threshold of visual illusion.
Because it's not about fooling somebody, it's actually giving somebody a measure of their own belief: how much you want to be fooled.
That's why we pay to go to magic shows and things like that.
Well, I think that's it.
My time is nearly up.
Thank you very much.
I got my first computer when I was a teenager growing up in Accra, and it was a really cool device.
You could play games with it. You could program it in BASIC.
And I was fascinated.
So I went into the library to figure out how did this thing work.
I read about how the CPU is constantly shuffling data back and forth between the memory, the RAM and the ALU, the arithmetic and logic unit.
And I thought to myself, this CPU really has to work like crazy just to keep all this data moving through the system.
But nobody was really worried about this.
When computers were first introduced, they were said to be a million times faster than neurons.
People were really excited. They thought they would soon outstrip the capacity of the brain.
This is a quote, actually, from Alan Turing: "In 30 years, it will be as easy to ask a computer a question as to ask a person."
This was in 1946. And now, in 2007, it's still not true.
And so, the question is, why aren't we really seeing this kind of power in computers that we see in the brain?
What people didn't realize, and I'm just beginning to realize right now, is that we pay a huge price for the speed that we claim is a big advantage of these computers.
Let's take a look at some numbers.
This is Blue Gene, the fastest computer in the world.
It's got 120,000 processors; they can basically process 10 quadrillion bits of information per second.
That's 10 to the sixteenth. And they consume one and a half megawatts of power.
So that would be really great, if you could add that to the production capacity in Tanzania.
It would really boost the economy.
Just to go back to the States, if you translate the amount of power or electricity this computer uses to the amount of households in the States, you get 1,200 households in the U.S.
That's how much power this computer uses.
Now, let's compare this with the brain.
This is a picture of, actually Rory Sayres' girlfriend's brain.
Rory is a graduate student at Stanford.
He studies the brain using MRI, and he claims that this is the most beautiful brain that he has ever scanned.
(Laughter) So that's true love, right there.
Now, how much computation does the brain do?
I estimate 10 to the 16 bits per second, which is actually about very similar to what Blue Gene does.
So that's the question. The question is, how much -- they are doing a similar amount of processing, similar amount of data -- the question is how much energy or electricity does the brain use?
And it's actually as much as your laptop computer: it's just 10 watts.
So what we are doing right now with computers with the energy consumed by 1,200 houses, the brain is doing with the energy consumed by your laptop.
So the question is, how is the brain able to achieve this kind of efficiency?
And let me just summarize. So the bottom line: the brain processes information using 100,000 times less energy than we do right now with this computer technology that we have.
How is the brain able to do this?
Let's just take a look about how the brain works, and then I'll compare that with how computers work.
So, this clip is from the PBS series, "The Secret Life of the Brain."
It shows you these cells that process information.
They are called neurons.
They send little pulses of electricity down their processes to each other, and where they contact each other, those little pulses of electricity can jump from one neuron to the other.
That process is called a synapse.
You've got this huge network of cells interacting with each other -- about 100 million of them, sending about 10 quadrillion of these pulses around every second.
And that's basically what's going on in your brain right now as you're watching this.
How does that compare with the way computers work?
In the computer, you have all the data going through the central processing unit, and any piece of data basically has to go through that bottleneck, whereas in the brain, what you have is these neurons, and the data just really flows through a network of connections among the neurons. There's no bottleneck here.
It's really a network in the literal sense of the word.
The net is doing the work in the brain.
If you just look at these two pictures, these kind of words pop into your mind.
This is serial and it's rigid -- it's like cars on a freeway, everything has to happen in lockstep -- whereas this is parallel and it's fluid.
Information processing is very dynamic and adaptive.
So I'm not the first to figure this out. This is a quote from Brian Eno: "the problem with computers is that there is not enough Africa in them."
(Laughter) Brian actually said this in 1995.
And nobody was listening then, but now people are beginning to listen because there's a pressing, technological problem that we face.
And I'll just take you through that a little bit in the next few slides.
This is -- it's actually really this remarkable convergence between the devices that we use to compute in computers, and the devices that our brains use to compute.
The devices that computers use are what's called a transistor.
This electrode here, called the gate, controls the flow of current from the source to the drain -- these two electrodes.
And that current, electrical current, is carried by electrons, just like in your house and so on.
And what you have here is, when you actually turn on the gate, you get an increase in the amount of current, and you get a steady flow of current.
And when you turn off the gate, there's no current flowing through the device.
Your computer uses this presence of current to represent a one, and the absence of current to represent a zero.
Now, what's happening is that as transistors are getting smaller and smaller and smaller, they no longer behave like this.
In fact, they are starting to behave like the device that neurons use to compute, which is called an ion channel.
And this is a little protein molecule.
I mean, neurons have thousands of these.
And it sits in the membrane of the cell and it's got a pore in it.
And these are individual potassium ions that are flowing through that pore.
Now, this pore can open and close.
But, when it's open, because these ions have to line up and flow through, one at a time, you get a kind of sporadic, not steady -- it's a sporadic flow of current.
And even when you close the pore -- which neurons can do, they can open and close these pores to generate electrical activity -- even when it's closed, because these ions are so small, they can actually sneak through, a few can sneak through at a time.
So, what you have is that when the pore is open, you get some current sometimes.
These are your ones, but you've got a few zeros thrown in.
And when it's closed, you have a zero, but you have a few ones thrown in.
Now, this is starting to happen in transistors.
And the reason why that's happening is that, right now, in 2007 -- the technology that we are using -- a transistor is big enough that several electrons can flow through the channel simultaneously, side by side.
In fact, there's about 12 electrons can all be flowing this way.
And that means that a transistor corresponds to about 12 ion channels in parallel.
Now, in a few years time, by 2015, we will shrink transistors so much.
This is what Intel does to keep adding more cores onto the chip.
Or your memory sticks that you have now can carry one gigabyte of stuff on them -- before, it was 256.
Transistors are getting smaller to allow this to happen, and technology has really benefitted from that.
But what's happening now is that in 2015, the transistor is going to become so small, that it corresponds to only one electron at a time can flow through that channel, and that corresponds to a single ion channel.
And you start having the same kind of traffic jams that you have in the ion channel.
The current will turn on and off at random, even when it's supposed to be on.
And that means your computer is going to get its ones and zeros mixed up, and that's going to crash your machine.
So, we are at the stage where we don't really know how to compute with these kinds of devices.
And the only kind of thing -- the only thing we know right now that can compute with these kinds of devices are the brain.
OK, so a computer picks a specific item of data from memory, it sends it into the processor or the ALU, and then it puts the result back into memory.
That's the red path that's highlighted.
The way brains work, I told you all, you have got all these neurons.
And the way they represent information is they break up that data into little pieces that are represented by pulses and different neurons.
So you have all these pieces of data distributed throughout the network.
And then the way that you process that data to get a result is that you translate this pattern of activity into a new pattern of activity, just by it flowing through the network.
So you set up these connections such that the input pattern just flows and generates the output pattern.
What you see here is that there's these redundant connections.
So if this piece of data or this piece of the data gets clobbered, it doesn't show up over here, these two pieces can activate the missing part with these redundant connections.
So even when you go to these crappy devices where sometimes you want a one and you get a zero, and it doesn't show up, there's redundancy in the network that can actually recover the missing information.
It makes the brain inherently robust.
What you have here is a system where you store data locally.
And it's brittle, because each of these steps has to be flawless, otherwise you lose that data, whereas in the brain, you have a system that stores data in a distributed way, and it's robust.
What I want to basically talk about is my dream, which is to build a computer that works like the brain.
This is something that we've been working on for the last couple of years.
And I'm going to show you a system that we designed to model the retina, which is a piece of brain that lines the inside of your eyeball.
We didn't do this by actually writing code, like you do in a computer.
In fact, the processing that happens in that little piece of brain is very similar to the kind of processing that computers do when they stream video over the Internet.
They want to compress the information -- they just want to send the changes, what's new in the image, and so on -- and that is how your eyeball is able to squeeze all that information down to your optic nerve, to send to the rest of the brain.
Instead of doing this in software, or doing those kinds of algorithms, we went and talked to neurobiologists who have actually reverse engineered that piece of brain that's called the retina.
And they figured out all the different cells, and they figured out the network, and we just took that network and we used it as the blueprint for the design of a silicon chip.
So now the neurons are represented by little nodes or circuits on the chip, and the connections among the neurons are represented, actually modeled by transistors.
And these transistors are behaving essentially just like ion channels behave in the brain.
It will give you the same kind of robust architecture that I described.
Here is actually what our artificial eye looks like.
The retina chip that we designed sits behind this lens here.
And the chip -- I'm going to show you a video that the silicon retina put out of its output when it was looking at Kareem Zaghloul, who's the student who designed this chip.
Let me explain what you're going to see, OK, because it's putting out different kinds of information, it's not as straightforward as a camera.
The retina chip extracts four different kinds of information.
It extracts regions with dark contrast, which will show up on the video as red.
And it extracts regions with white or light contrast, which will show up on the video as green.
This is Kareem's dark eyes and that's the white background that you see here.
And then it also extracts movement.
When Kareem moves his head to the right, you will see this blue activity there; it represents regions where the contrast is increasing in the image, that's where it's going from dark to light.
And you also see this yellow activity, which represents regions where contrast is decreasing; it's going from light to dark.
And these four types of information -- your optic nerve has about a million fibers in it, and 900,000 of those fibers send these four types of information.
So we are really duplicating the kind of signals that you have on the optic nerve.
What you notice here is that these snapshots taken from the output of the retina chip are very sparse, right?
It doesn't light up green everywhere in the background, only on the edges, and then in the hair, and so on.
And this is the same thing you see when people compress video to send: they want to make it very sparse, because that file is smaller. And this is what the retina is doing, and it's doing it just with the circuitry, and how this network of neurons that are interacting in there, which we've captured on the chip.
But the point that I want to make -- I'll show you up here.
So this image here is going to look like these ones, but here I'll show you that we can reconstruct the image, so, you know, you can almost recognize Kareem in that top part there.
And so, here you go.
Yes, so that's the idea.
When you stand still, you just see the light and dark contrasts.
But when it's moving back and forth, the retina picks up these changes.
And that's why, you know, when you're sitting here and something happens in your background, you merely move your eyes to it.
There are these cells that detect change and you move your attention to it.
So those are very important for catching somebody who's trying to sneak up on you.
Let me just end by saying that this is what happens when you put Africa in a piano, OK.
This is a steel drum here that has been modified, and that's what happens when you put Africa in a piano.
And what I would like us to do is put Africa in the computer, and come up with a new kind of computer that will generate thought, imagination, be creative and things like that.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Question for you, Kwabena.
Do you put together in your mind the work you're doing, the future of Africa, this conference -- what connections can we make, if any, between them?
Kwabena Boahen: Yes, like I said at the beginning, I got my first computer when I was a teenager, growing up in Accra.
And I had this gut reaction that this was the wrong way to do it.
It was very brute force; it was very inelegant.
I don't think that I would've had that reaction, if I'd grown up reading all this science fiction, hearing about RD2D2, whatever it was called, and just -- you know, buying into this hype about computers.
I was coming at it from a different perspective, where I was bringing that different perspective to bear on the problem.
And I think a lot of people in Africa have this different perspective, and I think that's going to impact technology.
And that's going to impact how it's going to evolve.
And I think you're going to be able to see, use that infusion, to come up with new things, because you're coming from a different perspective.
I think we can contribute. We can dream like everybody else.
CA: Thanks Kwabena, that was really interesting.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Applying for jobs online is one of the worst digital experiences of our time.
And applying for jobs in person really isn't much better.
[The Way We Work] Hiring as we know it is broken on many fronts.
It's a terrible experience for people.
About 75 percent of people who applied to jobs using various methods in the past year said they never heard anything back from the employer.
And at the company level it's not much better.
46 percent of people get fired or quit within the first year of starting their jobs.
It's pretty mind-blowing.
It's also bad for the economy.
For the first time in history, we have more open jobs than we have unemployed people, and to me that screams that we have a problem.
I believe that at the crux of all of this is a single piece of paper: the résumé.
A résumé definitely has some useful pieces in it: what roles people have had, computer skills, what languages they speak, but what it misses is what they have the potential to do that they might not have had the opportunity to do in the past.
And with such a quickly changing economy where jobs are coming online that might require skills that nobody has, if we only look at what someone has done in the past, we're not going to be able to match people to the jobs of the future.
So this is where I think technology can be really helpful.
You've probably seen that algorithms have gotten pretty good at matching people to things, but what if we could use that same technology to actually help us find jobs that we're really well-suited for?
But I know what you're thinking.
Algorithms picking your next job sounds a little bit scary, but there is one thing that has been shown to be really predictive of someone's future success in a job, and that's what's called a multimeasure test.
Multimeasure tests really aren't anything new, but they used to be really expensive and required a PhD sitting across from you and answering lots of questions and writing reports.
Multimeasure tests are a way to understand someone's inherent traits -- your memory, your attentiveness.
What if we could take multimeasure tests and make them scalable and accessible, and provide data to employers about really what the traits are of someone who can make them a good fit for a job?
This all sounds abstract.
Let's try one of the games together.
You're about to see a flashing circle, and your job is going to be to clap when the circle is red and do nothing when it's green.
[Ready?] [Begin!] [Green circle] [Green circle] [Red circle] [Green circle] [Red circle] Maybe you're the type of person who claps the millisecond after a red circle appears.
Or maybe you're the type of person who takes just a little bit longer to be 100 percent sure.
Or maybe you clap on green even though you're not supposed to.
The cool thing here is that this isn't like a standardized test where some people are employable and some people aren't.
Instead it's about understanding the fit between your characteristics and what would make you good a certain job.
We found that if you clap late on red and you never clap on the green, you might be high in attentiveness and high in restraint.
People in that quadrant tend to be great students, great test-takers, great at project management or accounting.
But if you clap immediately on red and sometimes clap on green, that might mean that you're more impulsive and creative, and we've found that top-performing salespeople often embody these traits.
The way we actually use this in hiring is we have top performers in a role go through neuroscience exercises like this one.
Then we develop an algorithm that understands what makes those top performers unique.
And then when people apply to the job, we're able to surface the candidates who might be best suited for that job.
So you might be thinking there's a danger in this.
The work world today is not the most diverse and if we're building algorithms based on current top performers, how do we make sure that we're not just perpetuating the biases that already exist?
For example, if we were building an algorithm based on top performing CEOs and use the S&amp;P 500 as a training set, you would actually find that you're more likely to hire a white man named John than any woman.
And that's the reality of who's in those roles right now.
But technology actually poses a really interesting opportunity.
We can create algorithms that are more equitable and more fair than human beings have ever been.
Every algorithm that we put into production has been pretested to ensure that it doesn't favor any gender or ethnicity.
And if there's any population that's being overfavored, we can actually alter the algorithm until that's no longer true.
When we focus on the inherent characteristics that can make somebody a good fit for a job, we can transcend racism, classism, sexism, ageism -- even good schoolism.
Our best technology and algorithms shouldn't just be used for helping us find our next movie binge or new favorite Justin Bieber song.
Imagine if we could harness the power of technology to get real guidance on what we should be doing based on who we are at a deeper level.
From Shakespeare’s plays to modern TV dramas, the unscrupulous schemer for whom the ends always justify the means has become a familiar character type we love to hate.
So familiar, in fact, that for centuries we’ve had a single word to describe such characters: Machiavellian.
But is it possible that we’ve been using that word wrong this whole time?
The early 16th century statesman Niccoló Machiavelli wrote many works of history, philosophy, and drama.
But his lasting notoriety comes from a brief political essay known as The Prince, framed as advice to current and future monarchs.
Machiavelli wasn’t the first to do this– in fact there was an entire tradition of works known as “mirrors for princes” going back to antiquity.
But unlike his predecessors, Machiavelli didn’t try to describe an ideal government or exhort his audience to rule justly and virtuously.
Instead, he focused on the question of power– how to acquire it, and how to keep it.
And in the decades after it was published, The Prince gained a diabolical reputation.
During the European Wars of Religion, both Catholics and Protestants blamed Machiavelli for inspiring acts of violence and tyranny committed by their opponents.
By the end of the century, Shakespeare was using “Machiavel” to denote an amoral opportunist, leading directly to our popular use of “Machiavellian” as a synonym for manipulative villainy.
At first glance, The Prince’s reputation as a manual for tyranny seems well-deserved.
Throughout, Machiavelli appears entirely unconcerned with morality, except insofar as it’s helpful or harmful to maintaining power.
For instance, princes are told to consider all the atrocities necessary to seize power, and to commit them in a single stroke to ensure future stability.
Attacking neighboring territories and oppressing religious minorities are mentioned as effective ways of occupying the public.
Regarding a prince’s personal behavior, Machiavelli advises keeping up the appearance of virtues such as honesty or generosity, but being ready to abandon them as soon as one’s interests are threatened.
Most famously, he notes that for a ruler, “it is much safer to be feared than loved.” The tract even ends with an appeal to Lorenzo de’ Medici, the recently installed ruler of Florence, urging him to unite the fragmented city-states of Italy under his rule.
Many have justified Machiavelli as motivated by unsentimental realism and a desire for peace in an Italy torn by internal and external conflict.
According to this view, Machiavelli was the first to understand a difficult truth: the greater good of political stability is worth whatever unsavory tactics are needed to attain it.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin suggested that rather than being amoral, The Prince hearkens back to ancient Greek morality, placing the glory of the state above the Christian ideal of individual salvation.
But what we know about Machiavelli might not fit this picture.
The author had served in his native Florence for 14 years as a diplomat, staunchly defending its elected republican government against would-be monarchs.
When the Medici family seized power, he not only lost his position, but was even tortured and banished.
With this in mind, it’s possible to read the pamphlet he wrote from exile not as a defense of princely rule, but a scathing description of how it operates.
Indeed, Enlightenment figures like Spinoza saw it as warning free citizens of the various ways in which they can be subjugated by aspiring rulers.
In fact, both readings might be true.
Machiavelli may have written a manual for tyrannical rulers, but by sharing it, he also revealed the cards to those who would be ruled.
In doing so, he revolutionized political philosophy, laying the foundations for Hobbes and future thinkers to study human affairs based on their concrete realities rather than preconceived ideals.
Through his brutal and shocking honesty, Machiavelli sought to shatter popular delusions about what power really entails.
And as he wrote to a friend shortly before his death, he hoped that people would “learn the way to Hell in order to flee from it."
(Beatboxing) Yo, what up?
My name is Tom Thum, and I've got to say it's a pleasure to be back at TEDx.
When I first stepped upon the Sydney stage in 2013 as a starry-eyed boy from Brisbane, I had no idea that I was about to deliver the most watched TEDx presentation ever.
(Laughter) (Applause) But you know, I was stoked because it was completely unexpected.
However, standing before you today as a slightly inflated, time-battered version of myself five years later, I'm very confident.
(Laughter) Confident that I'm about deliver the most instantly switched off and walked-out-on, vomit-inducing talk of all time.
I'm about to show you things that I think you'll find hard to unsee, but all in the name of science.
First, for those unfamiliar with what I do, I guess if you distilled it right down to its essence, you would call me a beatboxer.
(Beatboxing) Yo, for example ...
here's a sample: (Beatboxing) (Rhythm changes) (Hums a tune) (Applause and cheers) Thank you.
(Applause) And being a beatboxer, it means that professionally, I am 100 percent reliant on the -- (Beatboxing) flexibility of the unfiltered human voice.
And for years, my contemporaries and I have been fielding questions like, "Oh my God, that's so cool.
When did you figure out you could do that?"
After I practiced for thousands and thousands of hours -- (Laughter) "And what do you do for a real job?"
"I'm a full-time beatboxer, Your Honor."
But there is one question that I get quite a lot that's a little bit more difficult to answer, and that is how are you doing it -- how are you making those noises?
And I mean, I know muscle memory dictates where I position my lips in order to -- (Beatboxing) but I have no idea about the inner mechanics of everything.
You know, all the flappy bits and kind of dangly things and how they interact in -- (Laughter) in a way that allows me to -- (Beatboxing) To put it metaphorically, I know how to drive, I just don't know what's under the hood.
So I decided to find out and invite 5,000 captive strangers, a few uncomfortable cameras, everybody watching online and their browser history into a place where not even the most intimate of encounters have been ...
my throat.
And to help me do that, I'd like to introduce to the stage a very specialist guest from the Queensland Voice Center, a man that's been in my mouth more times than I'd care to admit, a legend of the larynx, ENT doctor and laryngeal surgeon, Matthew Broadhurst.
(Applause and cheers) MB: Thank you, Tom, thank you.
And a very good evening everyone.
It is a pleasure to be here on the TEDx stage tonight.
(Laughter) Whoo.
(Laughter) TT: He's not warming up his hands.
It doesn't get that intimate.
MB: We set out a little while ago to try to go deep into the world -- and the throat -- of this beatboxer extraordinaire to try to understand how such a vast array of sounds are humanly possible.
And what we found -- these are going in the mouth by the way -- and what we found was something absolutely amazing.
Even after my two years of laryngeal surgery in Harvard Medical School with world-renowned professor Steven Zeitels, we never saw anything as extraordinary or fascinating as this, and that's what we're going to show you tonight.
(Laughter) Alright, so for those of you who might be a little squeamish, the next 10 minutes or so will get incrementally more graphic and stomach-churning, so let's get into it -- TT: Feel free to use the bucket.
(Laughter) MB: So when we make sound, we use the vocal cords to take air from the lungs and then turn it into a vibrating air column in the throat.
If you think of it like a trumpet, we've got the mouthpiece -- that's the vocal folds -- and then the horn section is the throat.
If we took your head off, took a bit of your neck off and left you as a torso with just your vocal folds vibrating, this is what you'd sound like.
(Flatulent sound) TT: (High pitch) MB: Pretty hard to communicate, but fortunately we've got a throat.
We've got all the soft tissues, and that actually gives you all the incredible dynamics of sound that you'll hear tonight.
Now, this is a rigid laryngoscope.
TT: Hmm, spicy boy.
(Laughter) MB: I know, I know.
(Laughter) 10 millimeters in diameter, it gives us the highest resolution image of the larynx we can get.
And we teed up with a stroboscope here and a trigger microphone.
The mic will pick up the frequency and that will allow us to show you how this all works.
So, if we can have the lights down?
TT: (Low pitch) MB: Turn the light on here.
TT: (High and low pitches) MB: So I've got the frequency of sound matched with the stroboscope.
That's the light you're seeing flickering in the cup.
TT: (Low pitch) MB: And that's at about 80 hertz or so.
So what we can do then is we can take that and put the phase of the strobe and the sound just out of sync.
That lets us capture real-time, slow-motion activity of vibrating tissues.
When we apply that to the larynx, we get this fluid, slow-motion of the vibrating vocal folds.
So that's what we're going to get on and do.
Alright, you ready?
TT: Yup.
(Laughter) MB: OK, so here we go.
We're going to have a look at the voice box.
(Laughter) It's very hard not to gag with this.
Say, "e."
TT: (Singing) E -- MB: So down the bottom you see the vocal cords, the little cord-like structures.
(Laughter) And now just look at the skin on the neck and you'll see how strong the light is to penetrate the skin.
Alright, so if you'll have the lights back on?
(Laughter) (Applause) Alright, so just give us a comfortable "e."
TT: (Singing) E.
(Laughter) TT: (Singing) E.
(Audience gasps) MB: So that's the vibrating vocal folds; about 120 hertz.
Means they've collided 120 times a second just to make that sound.
And we can also see that they're absolutely, perfectly normal.
So all his beatboxing, all those sounds for years with Tom's way of doing it -- absolutely no damage whatsoever.
That's really remarkable.
Well done.
OK.
TT: (High pitch) We've got this.
MB: So watch now as the vocal cords go from high pitch to low pitch.
You'll see them go from long and skinny to short and fat.
Really think "e."
TT: (High to low pitch) E.
MB: Right.
TT: (High to low pitch) E.
MB: And what you can see is that his vocal range is so extreme -- much more extreme than any other performer I've worked with -- the machine actually can't capture the really high pitches.
TT: (High pitch) MB: So we know that whistle register is somewhere around 2,092 hertz.
That means the vocal cords, well over 2,000 times a second, are banging together just to make that sound.
That's really extraordinary.
If you think about them, they're only 15 millimeters long, so that's barely the width of your thumb.
That's incred -- (Laughter) That's amazing this organ can do such a thing.
So now we're going to swap over to the flexible laryngoscope.
This is a little more graphic.
TT: He bought it at SEXPO.
(Laughter) MB: That wasn't in the script.
(Laughter) (Applause) TT: Secondhand.
(Laughter) MB: Now, we've had to time this bit perfectly because of the requirement for local anesthetic.
You've got to numb the nose, get the camera in.
It doesn't help for producing a lot of the sounds, but it gives us a really cool view of what's happening.
So hold onto the stomachs, and let's see what we can do.
(Audience gasps) So we're going to the back of the nose.
And there you can see the soft palate.
A lot of the sounds we make from day to day, even the simple ones, are incredibly complex.
The sound "kh" for example.
It's the soft palate sealing up precisely against the back of the nose.
So if you say it loudly five times, feel your own soft palate snapping against the back of the throat.
Kh, kh, kh, kh, kh, kh.
Alright, so this is what it looks like when Tom does it.
TT: Kh, kh, kh, kh, kh.
A cacophony of cackling kookaburras and cockatoos in Kakadu couldn't quite quit ketamine.
(Laughter) (Applause) MB: Alright, now in the beatboxing world, of course, they can use that for all sorts of different effects.
I can help you.
TT: This is fine, we're professionals.
(Laughter) (Beatboxing) MB: Alright.
(Applause and cheers) Now we're going to slide down a little further.
If you'll just have the lights off and just see if you can see the light in the mouth somewhere.
You'll be able to see exactly where the camera is at.
(Laughter) TT: (Singing) Surprise.
(Laughter) MB: Alright.
(Audience gasps) So what you can see there, that's the base of the tongue.
The side walls of the screen, that's the pharynx.
All muscle walls, and in the deep, dark decks is the larynx.
TT: Oh, should we have the lights back on?
I think it's a good idea.
It's getting a bit creepy with them off.
MB: Turn the lights on, thanks.
Good.
Now having examined over 15,000 larynxes and throats in my time, I can tell you that Tom's is as anatomically normal as anyone else's.
It's just his unique use of all the muscles and soft tissues which lets him do all these amazing sounds that you're going to hear.
So we will dissect some of these sounds for you now.
TT: It's in there really. Definitely.
(Laughter) OK.
(High-pitched sounds) (High-pitched sounds) (Hooting) MB: So what he's doing is he's changing the shape and the length of the vibrating air column using rhythmic contractions of all the muscles to generate all those sounds that you're hearing.
(Beatboxing) (Laughter) (Low pitch) MB: And now there's rhythmic movements of the -- they're the arytenoid cartilages way down there, rocking back and forth to create that different sound.
TT: (Low pitch) MB: And we like to call this "sphincter bass."
(Laughter) And what you can see is that collapsing all the tissue down -- (Laughter) allows a different kind of really deep bass note.
Alright, so with local anesthetic on board, a big black hose in the nose, we're going to let loose a sliver of his repertoire and see all this in play.
And we'll move -- careful.
TT: Can you pull it up just a smidgeon.
(Laughter) TT: (Beatboxing) Maybe just a little more -- (Laughter) Alright, cool, I think we're good.
(Beatboxing) To all my peeps who came to get deep, deep as the abyss -- check this.
(Beatboxing) (Cheers) (Applause) (Beatboxing) We start from the basics and build from scratch.
(Record scratch) Yeah, like that.
(Beatboxing) (Trumpet sound) (Beatboxing) (Beatboxing) Back to basics.
(Beatboxing) (Beatboxing) You know the sound.
(Beatboxing) Make some noise.
(Applause and cheers) (Whistling) (Applause and cheers) TT: Thank you so much.
My talk is "Flapping Birds and Space Telescopes."
And you would think that should have nothing to do with one another, but I hope by the end of these 18 minutes, you'll see a little bit of a relation.
It ties to origami. So let me start.
What is origami?
Most people think they know what origami is. It's this: flapping birds, toys, cootie catchers, that sort of thing.
And that is what origami used to be.
But it's become something else.
It's become an art form, a form of sculpture.
The common theme -- what makes it origami -- is folding is how we create the form.
You know, it's very old. This is a plate from 1797.
It shows these women playing with these toys.
If you look close, it's this shape, called a crane.
Every Japanese kid learns how to fold that crane.
So this art has been around for hundreds of years, and you would think something that's been around that long -- so restrictive, folding only -- everything that could be done has been done a long time ago.
And that might have been the case.
But in the twentieth century, a Japanese folder named Yoshizawa came along, and he created tens of thousands of new designs.
But even more importantly, he created a language, a way we could communicate, a code of dots, dashes and arrows.
Harkening back to Susan Blackmore's talk, we now have a means of transmitting information with heredity and selection, and we know where that leads.
And where it has led in origami is to things like this.
This is an origami figure -- one sheet, no cuts, folding only, hundreds of folds.
This, too, is origami, and this shows where we've gone in the modern world.
Naturalism. Detail.
You can get horns, antlers -- even, if you look close, cloven hooves.
And it raises a question: what changed?
And what changed is something you might not have expected in an art, which is math.
That is, people applied mathematical principles to the art, to discover the underlying laws.
And that leads to a very powerful tool.
The secret to productivity in so many fields -- and in origami -- is letting dead people do your work for you.
(Laughter) Because what you can do is take your problem, and turn it into a problem that someone else has solved, and use their solutions.
And I want to tell you how we did that in origami.
Origami revolves around crease patterns.
The crease pattern shown here is the underlying blueprint for an origami figure.
And you can't just draw them arbitrarily.
They have to obey four simple laws.
And they're very simple, easy to understand.
The first law is two-colorability. You can color any crease pattern with just two colors without ever having the same color meeting.
The directions of the folds at any vertex -- the number of mountain folds, the number of valley folds -- always differs by two. Two more or two less.
Nothing else.
If you look at the angles around the fold, you find that if you number the angles in a circle, all the even-numbered angles add up to a straight line, all the odd-numbered angles add up to a straight line.
And if you look at how the layers stack, you'll find that no matter how you stack folds and sheets, a sheet can never penetrate a fold.
So that's four simple laws. That's all you need in origami.
All of origami comes from that.
And you'd think, "Can four simple laws give rise to that kind of complexity?"
But indeed, the laws of quantum mechanics can be written down on a napkin, and yet they govern all of chemistry, all of life, all of history.
If we obey these laws, we can do amazing things.
So in origami, to obey these laws, we can take simple patterns -- like this repeating pattern of folds, called textures -- and by itself it's nothing.
But if we follow the laws of origami, we can put these patterns into another fold that itself might be something very, very simple, but when we put it together, we get something a little different.
This fish, 400 scales -- again, it is one uncut square, only folding.
And if you don't want to fold 400 scales, you can back off and just do a few things, and add plates to the back of a turtle, or toes.
Or you can ramp up and go up to 50 stars on a flag, with 13 stripes.
And if you want to go really crazy, 1,000 scales on a rattlesnake.
And this guy's on display downstairs, so take a look if you get a chance.
The most powerful tools in origami have related to how we get parts of creatures.
And I can put it in this simple equation.
We take an idea, combine it with a square, and you get an origami figure.
(Laughter) What matters is what we mean by those symbols.
And you might say, "Can you really be that specific?
I mean, a stag beetle -- it's got two points for jaws, it's got antennae. Can you be that specific in the detail?"
And yeah, you really can.
So how do we do that? Well, we break it down into a few smaller steps.
So let me stretch out that equation.
I start with my idea. I abstract it.
What's the most abstract form? It's a stick figure.
And from that stick figure, I somehow have to get to a folded shape that has a part for every bit of the subject, a flap for every leg.
And then once I have that folded shape that we call the base, you can make the legs narrower, you can bend them, you can turn it into the finished shape.
Now the first step, pretty easy.
Take an idea, draw a stick figure.
The last step is not so hard, but that middle step -- going from the abstract description to the folded shape -- that's hard.
But that's the place where the mathematical ideas can get us over the hump.
And I'm going to show you all how to do that so you can go out of here and fold something.
But we're going to start small.
This base has a lot of flaps in it.
We're going to learn how to make one flap.
How would you make a single flap?
Take a square. Fold it in half, fold it in half, fold it again, until it gets long and narrow, and then we'll say at the end of that, that's a flap.
I could use that for a leg, an arm, anything like that.
What paper went into that flap?
Well, if I unfold it and go back to the crease pattern, you can see that the upper left corner of that shape is the paper that went into the flap.
So that's the flap, and all the rest of the paper's left over.
I can use it for something else.
Well, there are other ways of making a flap.
There are other dimensions for flaps.
If I make the flaps skinnier, I can use a bit less paper.
If I make the flap as skinny as possible, I get to the limit of the minimum amount of paper needed.
And you can see there, it needs a quarter-circle of paper to make a flap.
There's other ways of making flaps.
If I put the flap on the edge, it uses a half circle of paper.
And if I make the flap from the middle, it uses a full circle.
So, no matter how I make a flap, it needs some part of a circular region of paper.
So now we're ready to scale up.
What if I want to make something that has a lot of flaps?
What do I need? I need a lot of circles.
And in the 1990s, origami artists discovered these principles and realized we could make arbitrarily complicated figures just by packing circles.
And here's where the dead people start to help us out, because lots of people have studied the problem of packing circles.
I can rely on that vast history of mathematicians and artists looking at disc packings and arrangements.
And I can use those patterns now to create origami shapes.
So we figured out these rules whereby you pack circles, you decorate the patterns of circles with lines according to more rules. That gives you the folds.
Those folds fold into a base. You shape the base.
You get a folded shape -- in this case, a cockroach.
And it's so simple.
(Laughter) It's so simple that a computer could do it.
And you say, "Well, you know, how simple is that?"
But computers -- you need to be able to describe things in very basic terms, and with this, we could.
So I wrote a computer program a bunch of years ago called TreeMaker, and you can download it from my website.
It's free. It runs on all the major platforms -- even Windows.
(Laughter) And you just draw a stick figure, and it calculates the crease pattern.
It does the circle packing, calculates the crease pattern, and if you use that stick figure that I just showed -- which you can kind of tell, it's a deer, it's got antlers -- you'll get this crease pattern.
And if you take this crease pattern, you fold on the dotted lines, you'll get a base that you can then shape into a deer, with exactly the crease pattern that you wanted.
And if you want a different deer, not a white-tailed deer, but you want a mule deer, or an elk, you change the packing, and you can do an elk.
Or you could do a moose.
Or, really, any other kind of deer.
These techniques revolutionized this art.
We found we could do insects, spiders, which are close, things with legs, things with legs and wings, things with legs and antennae.
And if folding a single praying mantis from a single uncut square wasn't interesting enough, then you could do two praying mantises from a single uncut square.
She's eating him.
I call it "Snack Time."
And you can do more than just insects.
This -- you can put details, toes and claws. A grizzly bear has claws.
This tree frog has toes.
Actually, lots of people in origami now put toes into their models.
Toes have become an origami meme, because everyone's doing it.
You can make multiple subjects.
So these are a couple of instrumentalists.
The guitar player from a single square, the bass player from a single square.
And if you say, "Well, but the guitar, bass -- that's not so hot.
Do a little more complicated instrument."
Well, then you could do an organ.
(Laughter) And what this has allowed is the creation of origami-on-demand.
So now people can say, "I want exactly this and this and this," and you can go out and fold it.
And sometimes you create high art, and sometimes you pay the bills by doing some commercial work.
But I want to show you some examples.
Everything you'll see here, except the car, is origami.
(Video) (Applause) Just to show you, this really was folded paper.
Computers made things move, but these were all real, folded objects that we made.
And we can use this not just for visuals, but it turns out to be useful even in the real world.
Surprisingly, origami and the structures that we've developed in origami turn out to have applications in medicine, in science, in space, in the body, consumer electronics and more.
And I want to show you some of these examples.
One of the earliest was this pattern, this folded pattern, studied by Koryo Miura, a Japanese engineer.
He studied a folding pattern, and realized this could fold down into an extremely compact package that had a very simple opening and closing structure.
And he used it to design this solar array.
It's an artist's rendition, but it flew in a Japanese telescope in 1995.
Now, there is actually a little origami in the James Webb Space Telescope, but it's very simple.
The telescope, going up in space, it unfolds in two places.
It folds in thirds. It's a very simple pattern -- you wouldn't even call that origami.
They certainly didn't need to talk to origami artists.
But if you want to go higher and go larger than this, then you might need some origami.
Engineers at Lawrence Livermore National Lab had an idea for a telescope much larger.
They called it the Eyeglass.
The design called for geosynchronous orbit 25,000 miles up, 100-meter diameter lens.
So, imagine a lens the size of a football field.
There were two groups of people who were interested in this: planetary scientists, who want to look up, and then other people, who wanted to look down.
Whether you look up or look down, how do you get it up in space? You've got to get it up there in a rocket.
And rockets are small. So you have to make it smaller.
How do you make a large sheet of glass smaller?
Well, about the only way is to fold it up somehow.
So you have to do something like this.
This was a small model.
Folded lens, you divide up the panels, you add flexures.
But this pattern's not going to work to get something 100 meters down to a few meters.
So the Livermore engineers, wanting to make use of the work of dead people, or perhaps live origamists, said, "Let's see if someone else is doing this sort of thing."
So they looked into the origami community, we got in touch with them, and I started working with them.
And we developed a pattern together that scales to arbitrarily large size, but that allows any flat ring or disc to fold down into a very neat, compact cylinder.
And they adopted that for their first generation, which was not 100 meters -- it was a five-meter.
But this is a five-meter telescope -- has about a quarter-mile focal length.
And it works perfectly on its test range, and it indeed folds up into a neat little bundle.
Now, there is other origami in space.
Japan Aerospace [Exploration] Agency flew a solar sail, and you can see here that the sail expands out, and you can still see the fold lines.
The problem that's being solved here is something that needs to be big and sheet-like at its destination, but needs to be small for the journey.
And that works whether you're going into space, or whether you're just going into a body.
And this example is the latter.
This is a heart stent developed by Zhong You at Oxford University.
It holds open a blocked artery when it gets to its destination, but it needs to be much smaller for the trip there, through your blood vessels.
And this stent folds down using an origami pattern, based on a model called the water bomb base.
Airbag designers also have the problem of getting flat sheets into a small space.
And they want to do their design by simulation.
So they need to figure out how, in a computer, to flatten an airbag.
And the algorithms that we developed to do insects turned out to be the solution for airbags to do their simulation.
And so they can do a simulation like this.
Those are the origami creases forming, and now you can see the airbag inflate and find out, does it work?
And that leads to a really interesting idea.
You know, where did these things come from?
Well, the heart stent came from that little blow-up box that you might have learned in elementary school.
It's the same pattern, called the water bomb base.
The airbag-flattening algorithm came from all the developments of circle packing and the mathematical theory that was really developed just to create insects -- things with legs.
The thing is, that this often happens in math and science.
When you get math involved, problems that you solve for aesthetic value only, or to create something beautiful, turn around and turn out to have an application in the real world.
And as weird and surprising as it may sound, origami may someday even save a life.
Thanks.
(Applause)
It’s 6:30 in the morning, and Kristen is wheeling her prostate patient into the OR.
She's a resident, a surgeon in training.
It’s her job to learn.
Today, she’s really hoping to do some of the nerve-sparing, extremely delicate dissection that can preserve erectile function.
That'll be up to the attending surgeon, though, but he's not there yet.
She and the team put the patient under, and she leads the initial eight-inch incision in the lower abdomen.
Once she’s got that clamped back, she tells the nurse to call the attending.
He arrives, gowns up, And from there on in, their four hands are mostly in that patient -- with him guiding but Kristin leading the way.
When the prostates out (and, yes, he let Kristen do a little nerve sparing), he rips off his scrubs.
He starts to do paperwork.
Kristen closes the patient by 8:15, with a junior resident looking over her shoulder.
And she lets him do the final line of sutures.
Kristen feels great.
Patient’s going to be fine, and no doubt she’s a better surgeon than she was at 6:30.
Now this is extreme work.
But Kristin’s learning to do her job the way that most of us do: watching an expert for a bit, getting involved in easy, safe parts of the work and progressing to riskier and harder tasks as they guide and decide she’s ready.
My whole life I’ve been fascinated by this kind of learning.
It feels elemental, part of what makes us human.
It has different names: apprenticeship, coaching, mentorship, on the job training.
In surgery, it’s called “see one, do one, teach one.” But the process is the same, and it’s been the main path to skill around the globe for thousands of years.
Right now, we’re handling AI in a way that blocks that path.
We’re sacrificing learning in our quest for productivity.
I found this first in surgery while I was at MIT, but now I’ve got evidence it’s happening all over, in very different industries and with very different kinds of AI.
If we do nothing, millions of us are going to hit a brick wall as we try to learn to deal with AI.
Let’s go back to surgery to see how.
Fast forward six months.
It’s 6:30am again, and Kristen is wheeling another prostate patient in, but this time to the robotic OR.
The attending leads attaching a four-armed, thousand-pound robot to the patient.
They both rip off their scrubs, head to control consoles 10 or 15 feet away, and Kristen just watches.
The robot allows the attending to do the whole procedure himself, so he basically does.
He knows she needs practice.
He wants to give her control.
But he also knows she’d be slower and make more mistakes, and his patient comes first.
So Kristin has no hope of getting anywhere near those nerves during this rotation.
She’ll be lucky if she operates more than 15 minutes during a four-hour procedure.
And she knows that when she slips up, he’ll tap a touch screen, and she’ll be watching again, feeling like a kid in the corner with a dunce cap.
Like all the studies of robots and work I’ve done in the last eight years, I started this one with a big, open question: How do we learn to work with intelligent machines?
To find out, I spent two and a half years observing dozens of residents and surgeons doing traditional and robotic surgery, interviewing them and in general hanging out with the residents as they tried to learn.
I covered 18 of the top US teaching hospitals, and the story was the same.
Most residents were in Kristen's shoes.
They got to “see one” plenty, but the “do one” was barely available.
So they couldn’t struggle, and they weren’t learning.
This was important news for surgeons, but I needed to know how widespread it was: Where else was using AI blocking learning on the job?
To find out, I’ve connected with a small but growing group of young researchers who’ve done boots-on-the-ground studies of work involving AI in very diverse settings like start-ups, policing, investment banking and online education.
Like me, they spent at least a year and many hundreds of hours observing, interviewing and often working side-by-side with the people they studied.
We shared data, and I looked for patterns.
No matter the industry, the work, the AI, the story was the same.
Organizations were trying harder and harder to get results from AI, and they were peeling learners away from expert work as they did it.
Start-up managers were outsourcing their customer contact.
Cops had to learn to deal with crime forecasts without experts support.
Junior bankers were getting cut out of complex analysis, and professors had to build online courses without help.
And the effect of all of this was the same as in surgery.
Learning on the job was getting much harder.
This can’t last.
McKinsey estimates that between half a billion and a billion of us are going to have to adapt to AI in our daily work by 2030.
And we’re assuming that on-the-job learning will be there for us as we try.
Accenture’s latest workers survey showed that most workers learned key skills on the job, not in formal training.
So while we talk a lot about its potential future impact, the aspect of AI that may matter most right now is that we’re handling it in a way that blocks learning on the job just when we need it most.
Now across all our sites, a small minority found a way to learn.
They did it by breaking and bending rules.
Approved methods weren’t working, so they bent and broke rules to get hands-on practice with experts.
In my setting, residents got involved in robotic surgery in medical school at the expense of their generalist education.
And they spent hundreds of extra hours with simulators and recordings of surgery, when you were supposed to learn in the OR.
And maybe most importantly, they found ways to struggle in live procedures with limited expert supervision.
I call all this “shadow learning,” because it bends the rules and learner’s do it out of the limelight.
And everyone turns a blind eye because it gets results.
Remember, these are the star pupils of the bunch.
Now, obviously, this is not OK, and it’s not sustainable.
No one should have to risk getting fired to learn the skills they need to do their job.
But we do need to learn from these people.
They took serious risks to learn.
They understood they needed to protect struggle and challenge in their work so that they could push themselves to tackle hard problems right near the edge of their capacity.
They also made sure there was an expert nearby to offer pointers and to backstop against catastrophe.
Let’s build this combination of struggle and expert support into each AI implementation.
Here’s one clear example I could get of this on the ground.
Before robots, if you were a bomb disposal technician, you dealt with an IED by walking up to it.
A junior officer was hundreds of feet away, so could only watch and help if you decided it was safe and invited them downrange.
Now you sit side-by-side in a bomb-proof truck.
You both watched the video feed.
They control a distant robot, and you guide the work out loud.
Trainees learn better than they did before robots.
We can scale this to surgery, start-ups, policing, investment banking, online education and beyond.
The good news is we’ve got new tools to do it.
The internet and the cloud mean we don’t always need one expert for every trainee, for them to be physically near each other or even to be in the same organization.
And we can build AI to help: to coach learners as they struggle, to coach experts as they coach and to connect those two groups in smart ways.
There are people at work on systems like this, but they’ve been mostly focused on formal training.
And the deeper crisis is in on-the-job learning.
We must do better.
Today’s problems demand we do better to create work that takes full advantage of AI’s amazing capabilities while enhancing our skills as we do it.
That’s the kind of future I dreamed of as a kid.
And the time to create it is now.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Do you remember your first kiss?
Or that time you burned the roof of your mouth on a hot slice of pizza?
What about playing tag or duck, duck, goose as a child?
These are all instances where we're using touch to understand something.
And it's the basis of haptic design.
"Haptic" means of or relating to the sense of touch.
And we've all been using that our entire lives.
I was working on my computer when my friend, seeing me hunched over typing, walked over behind me.
She put her left thumb into the left side of my lower back, while reaching her right index finger around to the front of my right shoulder.
Instinctively, I sat up straight.
In one quick and gentle gesture, she had communicated how to improve my posture.
The paper I was working on at that very moment centered around developing new ways to teach movement using technology.
I wanted to create a suit that could teach a person kung fu.
(Laughter) But I had no idea how to communicate movement without an instructor being in the room.
And in that moment, it became crystal clear: touch.
If I had vibrating motors where she had placed each of her fingers, paired with motion-capture data of my current and optimal posture, I could simulate the entire experience without an instructor needing to be in the room.
But there was still one important part of the puzzle that was missing.
If I want you to raise your wrist two inches off of your lap, using vibration, how do I tell you to do that?
Do I put a motor at the top of your wrist, so you know to lift up?
Or do I put one at the bottom of your wrist, so it feels like you're being pushed up?
There were no readily available answers because there was no commonly agreed-upon haptic language to communicate information with.
So my cofounders and I set out to create that language.
And the first device we built was not a kung fu suit.
(Laughter) But in a way, it was even more impressive because of its simplicity and usefulness.
We started with the use case of navigation, which is a simplified form of movement.
We then created Wayband, a wrist-wearable device that could orient a user toward a destination, using vibrating cues.
We would ask people to spin around and to stop in a way that they felt was the right way to go.
Informally, we tried this with hundreds of people, and most could figure it out within about 15 seconds.
It was that intuitive.
Initially, we were just trying to get people out of their phones and back into the real world.
But the more we experimented, the more we realized that those who stood to benefit most from our work were people who had little or no sight.
When we first approached a blind organization, they told us, "Don't build a blind device.
Build a device that everyone can use but that's optimized for the blind experience."
We created our company WearWorks with three guiding principles: make cool stuff, create the greatest impact we can in our lifetimes and reimagine an entire world designed for touch.
And on November 5, 2017, Wayband helped a person who was blind run the first 15 miles of the New York City Marathon without any sighted assistance.
(Applause) It didn't get him through the entire race due to the heavy rain, but that didn't matter.
(Laughter) We had proved the point: that it was possible to navigate a complex route using only touch.
So, why touch?
The skin has an innate sensitivity akin to the eyes' ability to recognize millions of colors or the ears' ability to recognize complex pitch and tone.
Yet, as a communications channel, it's been largely relegated to Morse code-like cell phone notifications.
If you were to suddenly receive a kiss or a punch, your reaction would be instinctive and immediate.
Meanwhile, your brain would be playing catch-up on the back end to understand the details of what just occurred.
And compared to instincts, conscious thought is pretty slow.
But it's a lightning bolt compared to the snail's pace of language acquisition.
I spent a considerable amount of time learning Spanish, Japanese, German and currently Swedish, with varying degrees of failure.
(Laughter) But within those failures were kernels of how different languages are organized.
That gave our team insight into how to use the linguistic order of well-established languages as inspiration for an entirely new haptic language, one based purely on touch.
It also showed us when using language mechanics wasn't the best way to deliver information.
In the same way a smile is a smile across every culture, what if there was some underlying mechanism of touch that transcended linguistic and cultural boundaries?
A universal language, of sorts.
You see, I could give you buzz-buzz-buzz, buzz-buzz, and you would eventually learn that that particular vibration means "stop."
But as haptic designers, we challenged ourselves.
What would it be like to design "stop?"
Well, based on context, most of us have the experience of being in a vehicle and having that vehicle stop suddenly, along with our body's reaction to it.
So if I wanted you to stop, I could send you a vibration pattern, sure.
Or, I could design a haptic experience that just made stopping feel like it was the right thing to do.
And that takes more than an arbitrary assignment of haptic cues to meanings.
It takes a deep empathy.
It also takes the ability to distill human experience into meaningful insights and then into haptic gestures and products.
Haptic design is going to expand the human ability to sense and respond to our environments, both physical and virtual.
There's a new frontier: touch.
And it has the power to change how we all see the world around us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hello everyone.
And so the two of us are here to give you an example of creation.
And I'm going to be folding one of Robert Lang's models.
And this is the piece of paper it will be made from, and you can see all of the folds that are needed for it.
And Rufus is going to be doing some improvisation on his custom, five-string electric cello, and it's very exciting to listen to him.
Are you ready to go? OK.
Just to make it a little bit more exciting.
All right. Take it away, Rufus.
(Music) All right. There you go.
(Laughter) (Applause)
Claps of thunder and flashes of lightning illuminate a swelling sea, as a ship buckles beneath the waves.
This is no ordinary storm, but a violent and vengeful tempest, and it sets the stage for Shakespeare’s most enigmatic play.
As the skies clear, we are invited into a world that seems far removed from our own, but is rife with familiar concerns about freedom, power, and control.
The Tempest is set on a desert island, exposed to the elements and ruled with magic and might by Prospero, the exiled Duke of Milan.
Betrayed by his brother Antonio, Prospero has been marooned on the island for twelve years with his daughter Miranda and his beloved books.
In this time he’s learned the magic of the island and uses it to harness its elementary spirits.
He also rules over the island’s only earthly inhabitant, the dejected and demonized Caliban.
But after years of plotting revenge, Prospero’s foe is finally in sight.
With the help of the fluttering sprite Ariel, the magician destroys his brother’s ship and washes its sailors ashore.
Prospero’s plotting even extends to his daughter’s love life, whom he plans to fall for stranded prince Ferdinand.
And as Prospero and Ariel close in on Antonio, Caliban joins forces with some drunken sailors, who hatch a comic plot to take the island.
The play strips society down to its basest desires, with each faction in hot pursuit of power- be it over the land, other people, or their own destiny.
But Shakespeare knows that power is always a moving target; and as he reveals these characters’ dark histories, we begin to wonder if this vicious cycle will ever end.
Although Prospero was wronged by Antonio, he has long inflicted his own abuses on the island, hoarding its magical properties and natural re-sources for himself.
Caliban especially resents this takeover.
The son of Sycorax, a witch who previously ruled the island, he initially helped the exiles find their footing.
But he’s since become their slave, and rants with furious regret: “And then I loved thee,/ And showed thee all the qualities o’ th’ isle/ The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile./ Cursed be I that did so!” With his thunderous language and seething anger, Caliban constantly reminds Prospero of what came before: this island’s mine by Sycorax my mother, Which thou takest from me.
Yet Sycorax also abused the island, and imprisoned Ariel until Prospero released him.
Now Ariel spends the play hoping to repay his debt and earn his freedom, while Caliban is enslaved indefinitely, or at least as long as Prospero is in charge.
For these reasons and many more, The Tempest has often been read as an exploration of colonialism, and the moral dilemmas that come with en-counters of “brave new world(s)."
Questions of agency and justice hang over the play: is Caliban the rightful master of the land?
Will Ariel flutter free?
And is Prospero the mighty overseer- or is there some deeper magic at work, beyond any one character's grasp?
Throughout the play, Ariel constantly reminds Prospero of the freedom he is owed.
But the question lingers of whether the invader will be able to relinquish his grip.
The question of ending one’s reign is particularly potent given that The Tempest is believed to be Shakespeare’s final play.
In many ways Prospero’s actions echo that of the great entertainer him-self, who hatched elaborate plots, maneuvered those around him, and cast a spell over characters and audience alike.
But by the end of his grand performance of power and control, Prospero’s final lines see him humbled by his audience - and the power that they hold over his creations.
"With the help of your good hands./ Gentle breath of yours my sails/ Must fill or else my project fails,/ Which was to please."
This evokes Shakespeare’s own role as the great entertainer who surrenders himself, ultimately, to our applause.
In 1956, architect Frank Lloyd Wright proposed a mile-high skyscraper.
It was going to be the world’s tallest building, by a lot — five times as high as the Eiffel Tower.
But many critics laughed at the architect, arguing that people would have to wait hours for an elevator, or worse, that the tower would collapse under its own weight.
Most engineers agreed, and despite the publicity around the proposal, the titanic tower was never built.
But today, bigger and bigger buildings are going up around the world.
Firms are even planning skyscrapers more than a kilometer tall, like the Jeddah Tower in Saudi Arabia, three times the size of the Eiffel Tower.
Very soon, Wright’s mile-high miracle may be a reality.
So what exactly was stopping us from building these megastructures 70 years ago, and how do we build something a mile high today?
In any construction project, each story of the structure needs to be able to support the stories on top of it.
The higher we build, the higher the gravitational pressure from the upper stories on the lower ones.
This principle has long dictated the shape of our buildings, leading ancient architects to favor pyramids with wide foundations that support lighter upper levels.
But this solution doesn’t quite translate to a city skyline– a pyramid that tall would be roughly one-and-a-half miles wide, tough to squeeze into a city center.
Fortunately, strong materials like concrete can avoid this impractical shape.
And modern concrete blends are reinforced with steel-fibers for strength and water-reducing polymers to prevent cracking.
The concrete in the world’s tallest tower, Dubai’s Burj Khalifa, can withstand about 8,000 tons of pressure per square meter– the weight of over 1,200 African elephants!
Of course, even if a building supports itself, it still needs support from the ground.
Without a foundation, buildings this heavy would sink, fall, or lean over.
To prevent the roughly half a million ton tower from sinking, 192 concrete and steel supports called piles were buried over 50 meters deep.
The friction between the piles and the ground keeps this sizable structure standing.
Besides defeating gravity, which pushes the building down, a skyscraper also needs to overcome the blowing wind, which pushes from the side.
On average days, wind can exert up to 17 pounds of force per square meter on a high-rise building– as heavy as a gust of bowling balls.
Designing structures to be aerodynamic, like China’s sleek Shanghai Tower, can reduce that force by up to a quarter.
And wind-bearing frames inside or outside the building can absorb the remaining wind force, such as in Seoul’s Lotte Tower.
But even after all these measures, you could still find yourself swaying back and forth more than a meter on top floors during a hurricane.
To prevent the wind from rocking tower tops, many skyscrapers employ a counterweight weighing hundreds of tons called a “tuned mass damper.” The Taipei 101, for instance, has suspended a giant metal orb above the 87th floor.
When wind moves the building, this orb sways into action, absorbing the building’s kinetic energy.
As its movements trail the tower’s, hydraulic cylinders between the ball and the building convert that kinetic energy into heat, and stabilize the swaying structure.
With all these technologies in place, our mega-structures can stay standing and stable.
But quickly traveling through buildings this large is a challenge in itself.
In Wright’s age, the fastest elevators moved a mere 22 kilometers per hour.
Thankfully, today’s elevators are much faster, traveling over 70 km per hour with future cabins potentially using frictionless magnetic rails for even higher speeds.
And traffic management algorithms group riders by destination to get passengers and empty cabins where they need to be.
Skyscrapers have come a long way since Wright proposed his mile-high tower.
What were once considered impossible ideas have become architectural opportunities.
Today it may just be a matter of time until one building goes the extra mile.
It was a Thursday, June the 23rd, 1994.
(Sighs) "Collect your belongings. You are free to go.
When escorted outside, go directly to your car.
Do not talk to reporters."
My head is spinning, my heart is racing, I can't get a breath.
I just want out of there.
When I get to my car, I throw everything on the back, and I just collapse into the driver's seat.
"I can't do this.
I can't go home to my family that I haven't seen in a week and pretend to be happy."
Not even their love and support could help me at this particular time.
We had just sentenced a man to death.
Now what?
Just go home and wash dishes?
You see, in Mississippi, the death penalty is like a part of our unspoken culture.
The basic logic is, if you murder someone, then you're going to receive the death penalty.
So when the jury selection process took place, they asked me, "Could you, if the evidence presented justified the death penalty, could you deliver, rationally and without reservations, a penalty of death?"
My answer was an astounding "yes," and I was selected as Juror Number 2.
The trial started.
From the evidence being presented and from the pictures of the victim, my first response was, "Yes, this man is a monster, and he deserves the death penalty."
For days, I sat and looked at his hands, the ones that yielded the knife, and against his pasty white skin, his eyes ...
Well, he spent endless days in his cell, no sunlight, so his eyes were as black as his hair and his mustache.
He was very intimidating, and there was absolutely no doubt in his guilt.
But regardless of his guilt, as the days passed, I began to see this monster as a human being.
Something inside of me was changing that I just didn't understand.
I was beginning to question myself as to whether or not I wanted to give this man the death penalty.
Jury deliberations began, and the judge gave us jury instructions and it was to be used as a tool in how to reach a verdict.
Well, using this tool only led to one decision, and that was the death penalty.
I felt backed into a corner.
My head and my heart were in conflict with each other, and the thought of the death penalty made me sick.
However, following the judge's instructions, being a law-abiding person, I gave up.
I gave up and voted along with the other 11 jurors.
And there it was: our broken judicial system at work.
So here I am in my car, and I'm wondering: How is my life ever going to be the same?
My life was kids, work, church, ball games -- just your average, normal, everyday life.
Now everything felt trivial.
I was going down this rabbit hole.
The anger, the anxiety, the guilt, the depression ...
it just clung to me.
I knew that my life had to resume, so I sought counseling.
The counselor diagnosed me with PTSD and told me that the best way to overcome the PTSD was to talk about the trauma.
However, if I talked or tried to talk about the trauma outside her office, I was shut down.
No one wanted to hear about it.
He was just a murderer. Get over it.
It was then that I decided to become a silent survivor.
Twelve years later, 2006, I learned that Bobby Wilcher had dropped all of his appeals, and his execution date was approaching.
That was like a punch in the stomach.
All of those buried feelings just started coming back.
To try and find peace, I called Bobby's attorney, and I said, "Can I see Bobby before he's executed?"
Driving to the penitentiary on the day of his execution, in my mind, Bobby was going to be manic.
But, surprisingly, he was very calm.
And for two hours, he and I sat there and talked about life, and I got to ask him to forgive me for my hand in his death.
His words to me were: "You don't have to apologize.
You didn't put me here.
I did this myself.
But if it'll make you feel better, I forgive you."
On my way home, I stopped by a restaurant and bought a margarita.
(Laughter) I don't think I could get one big enough -- (Laughter) to try and calm down.
My phone rang.
It was Bobby's attorney.
Within two minutes of his execution, they had given him a stay.
This stay gave me time to reach out to Bobby.
And as crazy as it may sound, we became friends.
Three months later, he was executed by the State of Mississippi.
I'm here to tell you my story, because it was precisely 22 years later that I even wanted to open up enough to talk about it, when a friend encouraged me.
"Hey, perhaps you need to talk to the other jurors.
You've been through the same experience."
Uncertain of what I was after, I did need to talk to them.
So I set out on my quest, and I actually found most of them.
The first juror I met thought that Bobby got what he deserved.
Another juror -- well, they just kind of regretted that it took so long to carry the sentence out.
Then one juror, and I don't know what was wrong with him, but he didn't remember anything about the trial.
(Laughter) Well, I'm thinking in my mind, "Jeez, is this the response I'm gonna get from everybody else?"
Well, thank God for Allen.
Allen was a gentle soul.
And when I talked to him, he was genuinely upset about our decision.
And he told me about the day that the devastation really set in on him and hit him.
He was listening to the radio, and the radio had a list of names of men to be executed at Parchman Penitentiary.
He heard Bobby's name, and he then truly realized what he had done.
And he said, "You know, I had a responsibility in that man's death."
Now here it is, 20-something years later, and Allen is still dealing with that issue.
And he's never told anyone about it, not even his wife.
He also told me that if the State of Mississippi wanted to keep the death penalty, then hey, they needed to provide counseling for the jurors.
Then the next juror I met was Jane.
Jane is now totally against the death penalty, And there was Bill.
Bill said he had this crushing depression for weeks, and when he went back to work, his colleagues would say things to him like, "Hey, did you fry him?"
To them, it was just a joke.
Then there was Jon.
Jon said his decision weighed on him, and it burdened him daily.
The final juror that I spoke to was Ken.
Ken was the foreman of the jury.
When we sat down to talk, it was apparent that he was deeply saddened by what we were required to do.
He relived the day that he left the courthouse and he drove home and he went to put his key in his door and unlock it, and he said he literally broke down.
He said he knew that Bobby was guilty, but the decision he made, he did not know if it was the right decision.
And he said that he played it over and over in his head.
Did we do the right thing?
Did we do the right thing?
Did we do the right thing?
(Sighs) All those years, and I finally realized that I was not the only disillusioned juror.
And we talked about sharing our experience with potential jurors to give them some insight into what to expect, and to tell them do not be complacent; to know what you believe; to know where you stand and be prepared, because you don't want to walk in one morning as a juror and leave at the end of the trial feeling like a murderer.
Now, through this storm in my life, I did find some inspiration, and it came in the form of my granddaughters.
My 14-year-old granddaughter, Maddie, was writing an essay on the death penalty for school, and she was asking me questions.
Well, it dawned on me that this child was being raised in the same eye-for-an-eye culture as I was, or had been.
And so I explained my experience to her this way: that I had sentenced someone to death as I served on a jury.
And I asked her, "Did that make me a murderer?"
She couldn't answer.
I knew then that this topic needed to be open for discussion.
And guess what happened?
I got invited to speak, just recently, in an abolitionist community.
While I was there, I got a T-shirt.
It says, "Stop Executions."
Well, when I get home, my 16-year-old granddaughter was there, Anna, and she says, "Can I have that shirt?"
Well, I looked at her dad -- her dad is my son -- and I knew that he is still dealing with this death penalty issue.
So I turned around and I looked at her, and I said, "Are you gonna wear this?"
So she turned and she looked at her dad, and she said, "Dad, I know how you feel, but I don't believe in the death penalty."
My son looked at me, shook his head, and said, "Thanks, Mom."
And I knew it wasn't a nice "Thanks, Mom."
(Laughter) So I learned that life had taught me some lessons.
It taught me, if I had not served on that jury, that I would still be of the same mindset.
It also gave me confidence to be able to see through the eyes of my granddaughters, that this younger generation, they're capable and they're willing to tackle these difficult social issues.
And because of my experience, my granddaughters, they're now more equipped to stand on their own and to think for themselves than to rely on cultural beliefs.
So: being from a conservative, Christian family from a very conservative state in the United States, I am here to tell you that the death penalty has new opponents.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Is it just me, or are there other people here that are a little bit disappointed with democracy?
(Applause) So let's look at a few numbers.
If we look across the world, the median turnout in presidential elections over the last 30 years has been just 67 percent.
Now, if we go to Europe and we look at people that participated in EU parliamentary elections, the median turnout in those elections is just 42 percent.
Now let's go to New York, and let's see how many people voted in the last election for mayor.
We will find that only 24 percent of people showed up to vote.
What that means is that, if "Friends" was still running, Joey and maybe Phoebe would have shown up to vote.
(Laughter) And you cannot blame them because people are tired of politicians.
And people are tired of other people using the data that they have generated to communicate with their friends and family, to target political propaganda at them.
But the thing about this is that this is not new.
Nowadays, people use likes to target propaganda at you before they use your zip code or your gender or your age, because the idea of targeting people with propaganda for political purposes is as old as politics.
And the reason why that idea is there is because democracy has a basic vulnerability.
This is the idea of a representative.
In principle, democracy is the ability of people to exert power.
But in practice, we have to delegate that power to a representative that can exert that power for us.
That representative is a bottleneck, or a weak spot.
It is the place that you want to target if you want to attack democracy because you can capture democracy by either capturing that representative or capturing the way that people choose it.
So the big question is: Is this the end of history?
Is this the best that we can do or, actually, are there alternatives?
Some people have been thinking about alternatives, and one of the ideas that is out there is the idea of direct democracy.
This is the idea of bypassing politicians completely and having people vote directly on issues, having people vote directly on bills.
But this idea is naive because there's too many things that we would need to choose.
If you look at the 114th US Congress, you will have seen that the House of Representatives considered more than 6,000 bills, the Senate considered more than 3,000 bills and they approved more than 300 laws.
Those would be many decisions that each person would have to make a week on topics that they know little about.
So there's a big cognitive bandwidth problem if we're going to try to think about direct democracy as a viable alternative.
So some people think about the idea of liquid democracy, or fluid democracy, which is the idea that you endorse your political power to someone, who can endorse it to someone else, and, eventually, you create a large follower network in which, at the end, there's a few people that are making decisions on behalf of all of their followers and their followers.
But this idea also doesn't solve the problem of the cognitive bandwidth and, to be honest, it's also quite similar to the idea of having a representative.
So what I'm going to do today is I'm going to be a little bit provocative, and I'm going to ask you, well: What if, instead of trying to bypass politicians, we tried to automate them?
The idea of automation is not new.
It was started more than 300 years ago, when French weavers decided to automate the loom.
The winner of that industrial war was Joseph-Marie Jacquard.
He was a French weaver and merchant that married the loom with the steam engine to create autonomous looms.
And in those autonomous looms, he gained control.
He could now make fabrics that were more complex and more sophisticated than the ones they were able to do by hand.
But also, by winning that industrial war, he laid out what has become the blueprint of automation.
The way that we automate things for the last 300 years has always been the same: we first identify a need, then we create a tool to satisfy that need, like the loom, in this case, and then we study how people use that tool to automate that user.
That's how we came from the mechanical loom to the autonomous loom, and that took us a thousand years.
Now, it's taken us only a hundred years to use the same script to automate the car.
But the thing is that, this time around, automation is kind of for real.
This is a video that a colleague of mine from Toshiba shared with me that shows the factory that manufactures solid state drives.
The entire factory is a robot.
There are no humans in that factory.
And the robots are soon to leave the factories and become part of our world, become part of our workforce.
So what I do in my day job is actually create tools that integrate data for entire countries so that we can ultimately have the foundations that we need for a future in which we need to also manage those machines.
But today, I'm not here to talk to you about these tools that integrate data for countries.
But I'm here to talk to you about another idea that might help us think about how to use artificial intelligence in democracy.
Because the tools that I build are designed for executive decisions.
These are decisions that can be cast in some sort of term of objectivity -- public investment decisions.
But there are decisions that are legislative, and these decisions that are legislative require communication among people that have different points of view, require participation, require debate, require deliberation.
And for a long time, we have thought that, well, what we need to improve democracy is actually more communication.
So all of the technologies that we have advanced in the context of democracy, whether they are newspapers or whether it is social media, have tried to provide us with more communication.
But we've been down that rabbit hole, and we know that's not what's going to solve the problem.
Because it's not a communication problem, it's a cognitive bandwidth problem.
So if the problem is one of cognitive bandwidth, well, adding more communication to people is not going to be what's going to solve it.
What we are going to need instead is to have other technologies that help us deal with some of the communication that we are overloaded with.
Think of, like, a little avatar, a software agent, a digital Jiminy Cricket -- (Laughter) that basically is able to answer things on your behalf.
And if we had that technology, we would be able to offload some of the communication and help, maybe, make better decisions or decisions at a larger scale.
And the thing is that the idea of software agents is also not new.
We already use them all the time.
We use software agents to choose the way that we're going to drive to a certain location, the music that we're going to listen to or to get suggestions for the next books that we should read.
So there is an obvious idea in the 21st century that was as obvious as the idea of putting together a steam engine with a loom at the time of Jacquard.
And that idea is combining direct democracy with software agents.
Imagine, for a second, a world in which, instead of having a representative that represents you and millions of other people, you can have a representative that represents only you, with your nuanced political views -- that weird combination of libertarian and liberal and maybe a little bit conservative on some issues and maybe very progressive on others.
Politicians nowadays are packages, and they're full of compromises.
But you might have someone that can represent only you, if you are willing to give up the idea that that representative is a human.
If that representative is a software agent, we could have a senate that has as many senators as we have citizens.
And those senators are going to be able to read every bill and they're going to be able to vote on each one of them.
So there's an obvious idea that maybe we want to consider.
But I understand that in this day and age, this idea might be quite scary.
In fact, thinking of a robot coming from the future to help us run our governments sounds terrifying.
But we've been there before.
(Laughter) And actually he was quite a nice guy.
So what would the Jacquard loom version of this idea look like?
It would be a very simple system.
Imagine a system that you log in and you create your avatar, and then you're going to start training your avatar.
So you can provide your avatar with your reading habits, or connect it to your social media, or you can connect it to other data, for example by taking psychological tests.
And the nice thing about this is that there's no deception.
You are not providing data to communicate with your friends and family that then gets used in a political system.
You are providing data to a system that is designed to be used to make political decisions on your behalf.
Then you take that data and you choose a training algorithm, because it's an open marketplace in which different people can submit different algorithms to predict how you're going to vote, based on the data you have provided.
And the system is open, so nobody controls the algorithms; there are algorithms that become more popular and others that become less popular.
Eventually, you can audit the system.
You can see how your avatar is working.
If you like it, you can leave it on autopilot.
If you want to be a little more controlling, you can actually choose that they ask you every time they're going to make a decision, or you can be anywhere in between.
One of the reasons why we use democracy so little may be because democracy has a very bad user interface.
And if we improve the user interface of democracy, we might be able to use it more.
Of course, there's a lot of questions that you might have.
Well, how do you train these avatars?
How do you keep the data secure?
How do you keep the systems distributed and auditable?
How about my grandmother, who's 80 years old and doesn't know how to use the internet?
Trust me, I've heard them all.
So when you think about an idea like this, you have to beware of pessimists because they are known to have a problem for every solution.
(Laughter) So I want to invite you to think about the bigger ideas.
The questions I just showed you are little ideas because they are questions about how this would not work.
The big ideas are ideas of: What else can you do with this if this would happen to work?
And one of those ideas is, well, who writes the laws?
In the beginning, we could have the avatars that we already have, voting on laws that are written by the senators or politicians that we already have.
But if this were to work, you could write an algorithm that could try to write a law that would get a certain percentage of approval, and you could reverse the process.
Now, you might think that this idea is ludicrous and we should not do it, but you cannot deny that it's an idea that is only possible in a world in which direct democracy and software agents are a viable form of participation.
So how do we start the revolution?
We don't start this revolution with picket fences or protests or by demanding our current politicians to be changed into robots.
That's not going to work.
This is much more simple, much slower and much more humble.
We start this revolution by creating simple systems like this in grad schools, in libraries, in nonprofits.
And we try to figure out all of those little questions and those little problems that we're going to have to figure out to make this idea something viable, to make this idea something that we can trust.
And as we create those systems that have a hundred people, a thousand people, a hundred thousand people voting in ways that are not politically binding, we're going to develop trust in this idea, the world is going to change, and those that are as little as my daughter is right now are going to grow up.
And by the time my daughter is my age, maybe this idea, that I know today is very crazy, might not be crazy to her and to her friends.
And at that point, we will be at the end of our history, but they will be at the beginning of theirs.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In our culture we tend to see sex as something that's more important to men than it is to women.
But that's not true.
What is true is that women often feel more shame in talking about it.
Over half of women quietly suffer from some kind of sexual dysfunction.
We've been hearing more about the orgasm gap.
It's kind of like the wage gap but stickier ...
(Laughter) Straight women tend to reach climax less than 60 percent of the time they have sex.
Men reach climax 90 percent of the time they have sex.
To address these issues, women have been sold flawed medication, testosterone creams ...
even untested genital injections.
The thing is, female sexuality can't be fixed with a pill.
That's because it's not broken: it's misunderstood.
Our culture has had a skewed and medically incorrect picture of female sexuality going back centuries.
If over half of women have some kind of sexual problem, maybe our idea of sexuality doesn't work for women.
We need a clearer understanding of how women actually work.
I'm a journalist, and I recently wrote a book about how our understanding of female sexuality is evolving.
So sexuality itself was defined back when men dominated science.
Male scientists tended to see the female body through their own skewed lens.
They could've just asked women about their experience.
Instead they probed the female body like it was a foreign landscape.
Even today we debate the existence of female ejaculation and the G-spot like we're talking about aliens or UFOs.
"Are they really out there?"
(Laughter) All this goes double for LGBTQI women's sexuality, which has been hated and erased in specific ways.
Ignorance about the female body goes back centuries.
It goes back to the beginning of modern medicine.
Cast your mind back to the 16th century, a time of scientific revolution in Europe.
Men of ideas were challenging old dogmas.
They were building telescopes to gaze up at the stars.
We were making progress ...
sometimes.
You see, the fathers of anatomy -- and I say "fathers" because, let's face it, they were all dudes -- were poking about between women's legs and trying to classify what they saw.
They weren't quite sure what to do with the clitoris.
It didn't appear to have anything to do with making babies.
The leading anatomist at the time declared that it was probably some kind of abnormal growth -- (Laughter) and that any woman who had one was probably a hermaphrodite.
It got so bad that parents would sometimes have their daughter's clitoris cut off if it was deemed too large.
That's right.
Something we think of today as female genital mutilation was practiced in the West as late as the 20th century.
You have to wonder: if they were that confused about women's bodies, why didn't they just ask women for a little help?
But you must be thinking, "All that was history.
It's a different world now.
Women have everything.
They have the birth control pill, they have sexting and Tinder and vajazzling."
(Laughter) Things must be better now.
But medical ignorance of the female body continues.
How many of you recognize this?
It's the full structure of the clitoris.
We think of the clitoris as this little pea-sized nub, but actually it extends deep into the body.
Most of it lies under the skin.
It contains almost as much erectile tissue as the penis.
It's beautiful, isn't it?
It looks a little like a swan.
(Laughter) This sculpture is by an artist named Sophia Wallace as part of her "Cliteracy" project.
(Laughter) She believes we need more "cliteracy," and it's true, considering that this structure was only fully 3-D mapped by researchers in 2009.
That was after we finished mapping the entire human genome.
(Laughter) This ignorance has real-life consequences.
In a medical journal in 2005, Dr. Helen O'Connell, a urologist, warned her colleagues that this structure was still nowhere to be found in basic medical journals -- textbooks like "Gray's Anatomy."
This could have serious consequences for surgery.
Take this in.
Gentlemen: imagine if you were at risk of losing your penis because doctors weren't totally sure where it was or what it looked like.
Unsurprisingly, many women aren't too clear on their own genital anatomy either.
You can't really blame them.
The clitoris is often missing from many sex-ed diagrams, too.
Women can sense that their culture views their bodies with confusion at best, outright disdain and disgust at worst.
Many women still view their own genitals as dirty or inadequate.
They're increasingly comparing their vulvas with the neat and tiny ones they see in pornography.
It's one reason why labiaplasty is becoming a skyrocketing business among women and teen girls.
Some people feel that all this is a trivial issue.
I was writing my book when I was at a dinner party and someone said, "Isn't sexuality a first-world problem?
Aren't women dealing with more important issues all over the world?"
Of course they are.
But I think the impulse to trivialize sex is part of our problem.
We live in a culture that seems obsessed with sex.
We use it to sell everything.
We tell women that looking sexy is one of the most important things you can do.
But what we really do is we belittle sex.
We reduce it to a sad shadow of what it truly is.
Sex is more than just an act.
I spoke with Dr. Lori Brotto, a psychologist who treats sexual issues in women, including survivors of trauma.
She says the hundreds of women she sees all tend to repeat the same thing.
They say, "I don't feel whole."
They feel they've lost a connection with their partners and themselves.
So what is sex?
We've traditionally defined the act of sex as a linear, goal-oriented process.
It's something that starts with lust, continues to heavy petting and finishes with a happy ending.
Except many women don't experience it this way.
It's less linear for them and more circular.
This is a new model of women's arousal and desire developed by Dr. Rosemary Basson.
It says many things, including that women can begin an encounter for many different reasons that aren't desire, like curiosity.
They can finish with a climax or multiple climaxes, or satisfaction without a climax at all.
All options are normal.
Some people are starting to champion a richer definition of sexuality.
Whether you identify as male, female or neither gender, sex is about our relationship to the senses.
It's about slowing down, listening to the body, coming into the present moment.
It's about our whole health and well-being.
In other words, sex at its true breadth isn't profane, it's sacred.
That's one reason why women are redefining their sexuality today.
They're asking: What is sex for me?
So they're experimenting with practices that are less about the happy ending -- more about feeling whole.
So they're trying out spiritual sex classes, masturbation workshops -- even shooting their own porn that celebrates the diversity of real bodies.
For anyone who still feels this is a trivial issue, consider this: understanding your body is crucial to the huge issue of sex education and consent.
By deeply, intimately knowing what kind of touch feels right, what pressure, what speed, what context, you can better know what kind of touch feels wrong and have the confidence to say so.
This isn't ultimately about women having more or better sex.
It's not about making sure women have as many orgasms as men.
It's about accepting yourself and your own unique experience.
It's about you being the expert on your body.
It's about defining pleasure and satisfaction on your terms.
And if that means you're happiest having no sex at all, that's perfect, too.
If we define sex as part of our whole health and well-being, then empowering women and girls to fully own it is a crucial next step toward equality.
And I think it would be a better world not just for women but for everyone.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Jambo, bonjour, zdravstvujtye, dayo: these are a few of the languages that I've spoken little bits of over the course of the last six weeks, as I've been to 17 countries I think I'm up to, on this crazy tour I've been doing, checking out various aspects of the project that we're doing.
And I'm going to tell you a little bit about later on.
And visiting some pretty incredible places, places like Mongolia, Cambodia, New Guinea, South Africa, Tanzania twice -- I was here a month ago.
And the opportunity to make a whirlwind tour of the world like that is utterly amazing, for lots of reasons.
You see some incredible stuff.
And you get to make these spot comparisons between people all around the globe.
And the thing that you really take away from that, the kind of surface thing that you take away from it, is not that we're all one, although I'm going to tell you about that, but rather how different we are.
There is so much diversity around the globe.
6,000 different languages spoken by six and a half billion people, all different colors, shapes, sizes.
You walk down the street in any big city, you travel like that, and you are amazed at the diversity in the human species.
How do we explain that diversity?
Well, that's what I'm going to talk about today, is how we're using the tools of genetics, population genetics in particular, to tell us how we generated this diversity, and how long it took.
Now, the problem of human diversity, like all big scientific questions -- how do you explain something like that -- can be broken down into sub-questions.
And you can ferret away at those little sub-questions.
First one is really a question of origins.
Do we all share a common origin, in fact?
And given that we do -- and that's the assumption everybody, I think, in this room would make -- when was that?
When did we originate as a species?
How long have we been divergent from each other?
And the second question is related, but slightly different.
If we do spring from a common source, how did we come to occupy every corner of the globe, and in the process generate all of this diversity, the different ways of life, the different appearances, the different languages around the world?
Well, the question of origins, as with so many other questions in biology, seems to have been answered by Darwin over a century ago.
In "The Descent of Man," he wrote, "In each great region of the world, the living mammals are closely related to the extinct species of the same region.
It's therefore probable that Africa was formerly inhabited by extinct apes closely allied to the gorilla and chimpanzee, and as these two species are now man's nearest allies, it's somewhat more probable that our early progenitors lived on the African continent than elsewhere."
So we're done, we can go home -- finished the origin question.
Well, not quite. Because Darwin was talking about our distant ancestry, our common ancestry with apes.
And it is quite clear that apes originated on the African continent.
Around 23 million years ago, they appear in the fossil record.
Africa was actually disconnected from the other landmasses at that time, due to the vagaries of plate tectonics, floating around the Indian Ocean.
Bumped into Eurasia around 16 million years ago, and then we had the first African exodus, as we call it.
The apes that left at that time ended up in Southeast Asia, became the gibbons and the orangutans.
And the ones that stayed on in Africa evolved into the gorillas, the chimpanzees and us.
So, yes, if you're talking about our common ancestry with apes, it's very clear, by looking at the fossil record, we started off here.
But that's not really the question I'm asking.
I'm asking about our human ancestry, things that we would recognize as being like us if they were sitting here in the room.
If they were peering over your shoulder, you wouldn't leap back, like that. What about our human ancestry?
Because if we go far enough back, we share a common ancestry with every living thing on Earth.
DNA ties us all together, so we share ancestry with barracuda and bacteria and mushrooms, if you go far enough back -- over a billion years.
What we're asking about though is human ancestry.
How do we study that?
Well, historically, it has been studied using the science of paleoanthropology.
Digging things up out of the ground, and largely on the basis of morphology -- the way things are shaped, often skull shape -- saying, "This looks a little bit more like us than that, so this must be my ancestor.
This must be who I'm directly descended from."
The field of paleoanthropology, I'll argue, gives us lots of fascinating possibilities about our ancestry, but it doesn't give us the probabilities that we really want as scientists.
What do I mean by that?
You're looking at a great example here.
These are three extinct species of hominids, potential human ancestors.
All dug up just west of here in Olduvai Gorge, by the Leakey family.
And they're all dating to roughly the same time.
From left to right, we've got Homo erectus, Homo habilis, and Australopithecus -- now called Paranthropus boisei, the robust australopithecine. Three extinct species, same place, same time.
That means that not all three could be my direct ancestor.
Which one of these guys am I actually related to?
Possibilities about our ancestry, but not the probabilities that we're really looking for.
Well, a different approach has been to look at morphology in humans using the only data that people really had at hand until quite recently -- again, largely skull shape.
The first person to do this systematically was Linnaeus, Carl von Linne, a Swedish botanist, who in the eighteenth century took it upon himself to categorize every living organism on the planet.
You think you've got a tough job?
And he did a pretty good job.
He categorized about 12,000 species in "Systema Naturae."
He actually coined the term Homo sapiens -- it means wise man in Latin.
But looking around the world at the diversity of humans, he said, "Well, you know, we seem to come in discreet sub-species or categories."
And he talked about Africans and Americans and Asians and Europeans, and a blatantly racist category he termed "Monstrosus," which basically included all the people he didn't like, including imaginary folk like elves.
It's easy to dismiss this as the perhaps well-intentioned but ultimately benighted musings of an eighteenth century scientist working in the pre-Darwinian era.
Except, if you had taken physical anthropology as recently as 20 or 30 years ago, in many cases you would have learned basically that same classification of humanity.
Human races that according to physical anthropologists of 30, 40 years ago -- Carlton Coon is the best example -- had been diverging from each other -- this was in the post-Darwinian era -- for over a million years, since the time of Homo erectus.
But based on what data?
Very little. Very little. Morphology and a lot of guesswork.
Well, what I'm going to talk about today, what I'm going to talk about now is a new approach to this problem.
Instead of going out and guessing about our ancestry, digging things up out of the ground, possible ancestors, and saying it on the basis of morphology -- which we still don't completely understand, we don't know the genetic causes underlying this morphological variation -- what we need to do is turn the problem on its head.
Because what we're really asking is a genealogical problem, or a genealogical question.
What we're trying to do is construct a family tree for everybody alive today.
And as any genealogist will tell you -- anybody have a member of the family, or maybe you have tried to construct a family tree, trace back in time?
You start in the present, with relationships you're certain about.
You and your siblings, you have a parent in common.
You and your cousins share a grandparent in common.
You gradually trace further and further back into the past, adding these ever more distant relationships.
But eventually, no matter how good you are at digging up the church records, and all that stuff, you hit what the genealogists call a brick wall.
A point beyond which you don't know anything else about your ancestors, and you enter this dark and mysterious realm we call history that we have to feel our way through with whispered guidance.
Who were these people who came before?
We have no written record. Well, actually, we do.
Written in our DNA, in our genetic code -- we have a historical document that takes us back in time to the very earliest days of our species. And that's what we study.
Now, a quick primer on DNA.
I suspect that not everybody in the audience is a geneticist.
It is a very long, linear molecule, a coded version of how to make another copy of you. It's your blueprint.
It's composed of four subunits: A, C, G and T, we call them.
And it's the sequence of those subunits that defines that blueprint.
How long is it? Well, it's billions of these subunits in length.
A haploid genome -- we actually have two copies of all of our chromosomes -- a haploid genome is around 3.2 billion nucleotides in length.
And the whole thing, if you add it all together, is over six billion nucleotides long.
If you take all the DNA out of one cell in your body, and stretch it end to end, it's around two meters long.
If you take all the DNA out of every cell in your body, and you stretch it end to end, it would reach from here to the moon and back, thousands of times. It's a lot of information.
And so when you're copying this DNA molecule to pass it on, it's a pretty tough job.
Imagine the longest book you can think of, "War and Peace."
Now multiply it by 100.
And imagine copying that by hand.
And you're working away until late at night, and you're very, very careful, and you're drinking coffee and you're paying attention, but, occasionally, when you're copying this by hand, you're going to make a little typo, a spelling mistake -- substitute an I for an E, or a C for a T.
Same thing happens to our DNA as it's being passed on through the generations.
It doesn't happen very often. We have a proofreading mechanism built in.
But when it does happen, and these changes get transmitted down through the generations, they become markers of descent.
If you share a marker with someone, it means you share an ancestor at some point in the past, the person who first had that change in their DNA.
And it's by looking at the pattern of genetic variation, the pattern of these markers in people all over the world, and assessing the relative ages when they occurred throughout our history, that we've been able to construct a family tree for everybody alive today.
These are two pieces of DNA that we use quite widely in our work.
Mitochondrial DNA, tracing a purely maternal line of descent.
You get your mtDNA from your mother, and your mother's mother, all the way back to the very first woman.
The Y chromosome, the piece of DNA that makes men men, traces a purely paternal line of descent.
Everybody in this room, everybody in the world, falls into a lineage somewhere on these trees.
Now, even though these are simplified versions of the real trees, they're still kind of complicated, so let's simplify them.
Turn them on their sides, combine them so that they look like a tree with the root at the bottom and the branches going up.
What's the take-home message?
Well, the thing that jumps out at you first is that the deepest lineages in our family trees are found within Africa, among Africans.
That means that Africans have been accumulating this mutational diversity for longer.
And what that means is that we originated in Africa. It's written in our DNA.
Every piece of DNA we look at has greater diversity within Africa than outside of Africa.
And at some point in the past, a sub-group of Africans left the African continent to go out and populate the rest of the world.
Now, how recently do we share this ancestry?
Was it millions of years ago, which we might suspect by looking at all this incredible variation around the world?
No, the DNA tells a story that's very clear.
Within the last 200,000 years, we all share an ancestor, a single person -- Mitochondrial Eve, you might have heard about her -- in Africa, an African woman who gave rise to all the mitochondrial diversity in the world today.
But what's even more amazing is that if you look at the Y-chromosome side, the male side of the story, the Y-chromosome Adam only lived around 60,000 years ago.
That's only about 2,000 human generations, the blink of an eye in an evolutionary sense.
That tells us we were all still living in Africa at that time.
This was an African man who gave rise to all the Y chromosome diversity around the world.
It's only within the last 60,000 years that we have started to generate this incredible diversity we see around the world.
Such an amazing story.
We're all effectively part of an extended African family.
Now, that seems so recent. Why didn't we start to leave earlier?
Why didn't Homo erectus evolve into separate species, or sub-species rather, human races around the world?
Why was it that we seem to have come out of Africa so recently?
Well, that's a big question. These "why" questions, particularly in genetics and the study of history in general, are always the big ones, the ones that are tough to answer.
And so when all else fails, talk about the weather.
What was going on to the world's weather around 60,000 years ago?
Well, we were going into the worst part of the last ice age.
The last ice age started roughly 120,000 years ago.
It went up and down, and it really started to accelerate around 70,000 years ago.
Lots of evidence from sediment cores and the pollen types, oxygen isotopes and so on.
We hit the last glacial maximum around 16,000 years ago, but basically, from 70,000 years on, things were getting really tough, getting very cold. The Northern Hemisphere had massive growing ice sheets.
New York City, Chicago, Seattle, all under a sheet of ice.
Most of Britain, all of Scandinavia, covered by ice several kilometers thick.
Now, Africa is the most tropical continent on the planet -- about 85 percent of it lies between Cancer and Capricorn -- and there aren't a lot of glaciers here, except on the high mountains here in East Africa.
So what was going on here? We weren't covered in ice in Africa.
Rather, Africa was drying out at that time.
This is a paleo-climatological map of what Africa looked like between 60,000 and 70,000 years ago, reconstructed from all these pieces of evidence that I mentioned before.
The reason for that is that ice actually sucks moisture out of the atmosphere.
If you think about Antarctica, it's technically a desert, it gets so little precipitation.
So the whole world was drying out.
The sea levels were dropping. And Africa was turning to desert.
The Sahara was much bigger then than it is now.
And the human habitat was reduced to just a few small pockets, compared to what we have today.
The evidence from genetic data is that the human population around this time, roughly 70,000 years ago, crashed to fewer than 2,000 individuals.
We nearly went extinct. We were hanging on by our fingernails.
And then something happened. A great illustration of it.
Look at some stone tools.
The ones on the left are from Africa, from around a million years ago.
The ones on the right were made by Neanderthals, our distant cousins, not our direct ancestors, living in Europe, and they date from around 50,000 or 60,000 years ago.
Now, at the risk of offending any paleoanthropologists or physical anthropologists in the audience, basically there's not a lot of change between these two stone tool groups.
The ones on the left are pretty similar to the ones on the right.
We are in a period of long cultural stasis from a million years ago until around 60,000 to 70,000 years ago.
The tool styles don't change that much.
The evidence is that the human way of life didn't change that much during that period.
But then 50, 60, 70 thousand years ago, somewhere in that region, all hell breaks loose. Art makes its appearance.
The stone tools become much more finely crafted.
The evidence is that humans begin to specialize in particular prey species, at particular times of the year.
The population size started to expand.
Probably, according to what many linguists believe, fully modern language, syntactic language -- subject, verb, object -- that we use to convey complex ideas, like I'm doing now, appeared around that time.
We became much more social. The social networks expanded.
This change in behavior allowed us to survive these worsening conditions in Africa, and they allowed us to start to expand around the world.
We've been talking at this conference about African success stories.
Well, you want the ultimate African success story?
Look in the mirror. You're it. The reason you're alive today is because of those changes in our brains that took place in Africa -- probably somewhere in the region where we're sitting right now, around 60, 70 thousand years ago -- allowing us not only to survive in Africa, but to expand out of Africa.
An early coastal migration along the south coast of Asia, leaving Africa around 60,000 years ago, reaching Australia very rapidly, by 50,000 years ago.
A slightly later migration up into the Middle East.
These would have been savannah hunters.
So those of you who are going on one of the post-conference tours, you'll get to see what a real savannah is like.
And it's basically a meat locker.
People who would have specialized in killing the animals, hunting the animals on those meat locker savannahs, moving up, following the grasslands into the Middle East around 45,000 years ago, during one of the rare wet phases in the Sahara.
Migrating eastward, following the grasslands, because that's what they were adapted to live on.
And when they reached Central Asia, they reached what was effectively a steppe super-highway, a grassland super-highway.
The grasslands at that time -- this was during the last ice age -- stretched basically from Germany all the way over to Korea, and the entire continent was open to them.
Entering Europe around 35,000 years ago, and finally, a small group migrating up through the worst weather imaginable, Siberia, inside the Arctic Circle, during the last ice age -- temperature was at -70, -80, even -100, perhaps -- migrating into the Americas, ultimately reaching that final frontier.
An amazing story, and it happened first in Africa.
The changes that allowed us to do that, the evolution of this highly adaptable brain that we all carry around with us, allowing us to create novel cultures, allowing us to develop the diversity that we see on a whirlwind trip like the one I've just been on.
Now, that story I just told you is literally a whirlwind tour of how we populated the world, the great Paleolithic wanderings of our species.
And that's the story that I told a couple of years ago in my book, "The Journey of Man," and a film that we made with the same title.
And as we were finishing up that film -- it was co-produced with National Geographic -- I started talking to the folks at NG about this work.
And they got really excited about it. They liked the film, but they said, "You know, we really see this as kind of the next wave in the study of human origins, where we all came from, using the tools of DNA to map the migrations around the world.
You know, the study of human origins is kind of in our DNA, and we want to take it to the next level.
What do you want to do next?"
Which is a great question to be asked by National Geographic.
And I said, "Well, you know, what I've sketched out here is just that.
It is a very coarse sketch of how we migrated around the planet.
And it's based on a few thousand people we've sampled from, you know, a handful of populations around the world.
Studied a few genetic markers, and there are lots of gaps on this map.
We've just connected the dots. What we need to do is increase our sample size by an order of magnitude or more -- hundreds of thousands of DNA samples from people all over the world."
And that was the genesis of the Genographic Project.
The project launched in April 2005.
It has three core components. Obviously, science is a big part of it.
The field research that we're doing around the world with indigenous peoples.
People who have lived in the same location for a long period of time retain a connection to the place where they live that many of the rest of us have lost.
So my ancestors come from all over northern Europe.
I live in the Eastern Seaboard of North America when I'm not traveling.
Where am I indigenous to? Nowhere really. My genes are all jumbled up.
But there are people who retain that link to their ancestors that allows us to contextualize the DNA results.
That's the focus of the field research, the centers that we've set up all over the world -- 10 of them, top population geneticists.
But, in addition, we wanted to open up this study to anybody around the world.
How often do you get to participate in a big scientific project?
The Human Genome Project, or a Mars Rover mission.
In this case, you actually can.
You can go onto our website, Nationalgeographic.com/genographic.
You can order a kit. You can test your own DNA.
And you can actually submit those results to the database, and tell us a little about your genealogical background, have the data analyzed as part of the scientific effort.
Now, this is all a nonprofit enterprise, and so the money that we raise, after we cover the cost of doing the testing and making the kit components, gets plowed back into the project.
The majority going to something we call the Legacy Fund.
It's a charitable entity, basically a grant-giving entity that gives money back to indigenous groups around the world for educational, cultural projects initiated by them.
They apply to this fund in order to do various projects, and I'll show you a couple of examples.
So how are we doing on the project? We've got about 25,000 samples collected from indigenous people around the world.
The most amazing thing has been the interest on the part of the public; 210,000 people have ordered these participation kits since we launched two years ago, which has raised around five million dollars, the majority of which, at least half, is going back into the Legacy Fund.
We've just awarded the first Legacy Grants totaling around 500,000 dollars.
Projects around the world -- documenting oral poetry in Sierra Leone, preserving traditional weaving patterns in Gaza, language revitalization in Tajikistan, etc., etc.
So the project is going very, very well, and I urge you to check out the website and watch this space.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
After decades of research and billions of dollars spent in clinical trials, we still have a problem with cancer drug delivery.
We still give patients chemotherapy, which is so non-specific that even though it kills the cancer cells, it kind of kills the rest of your body, too.
And yes, we have developed more selective drugs, but it's still a challenge to get them into the tumor, and they end up accumulating in the other organs as well or passing through your urine, which is a total waste.
And fields like mine have emerged where we try to encapsulate these drugs to protect them as they travel through the body.
But these modifications cause problems that we make more modifications to fix.
So what I'm really trying to say is we need a better drug delivery system.
And I propose, rather than using solely human design, why not use nature's?
Immune cells are these versatile vehicles that travel throughout our body, patrolling for signs of disease and arriving at a wound mere minutes after injury.
So I ask you guys: If immune cells are already traveling to places of injury or disease in our bodies, why not add an extra passenger?
Why not use immune cells to deliver drugs to cure some of our biggest problems in disease?
I am a biomedical engineer, and I want to tell you guys a story about how I use immune cells to target one of the largest problems in cancer.
Did you know that over 90 percent of cancer deaths can be attributed to its spread?
So if we can stop these cancer cells from going from the primary tumor to a distant site, we can stop cancer right in its tracks and give people more of their lives back.
To do this special mission, we decided to deliver a nanoparticle made of lipids, which are the same materials that compose your cell membrane.
And we've added two special molecules.
One is called e-selectin, which acts as a glue that binds the nanoparticle to the immune cell.
And the second one is called trail.
Trail is a therapeutic drug that kills cancer cells but not normal cells.
Now, when you put both of these together, you have a mean killing machine on wheels.
To test this, we ran an experiment in a mouse.
So what we did was we injected the nanoparticles, and they bound almost immediately to the immune cells in the bloodstream.
And then we injected the cancer cells to mimic a process through which cancer cells spread throughout our bodies.
And we found something very exciting.
We found that in our treated group, over 75 percent of the cancer cells we initially injected were dead or dying, in comparison to only around 25 percent.
So just imagine: these fewer amount of cells were available to actually be able to spread to a different part of the body.
And this is only after two hours of treatment.
Our results were amazing, and we had some pretty interesting press.
My favorite title was actually, "Sticky balls may stop the spread of cancer."
(Laughter) I can't tell you just how smug my male colleagues were, knowing that their sticky balls might one day cure cancer.
(Laughter) But I can tell you they made some pretty, pretty, exciting, pretty ballsy t-shirts.
This was also my first experience talking to patients where they asked how soon our therapy would be available.
And I keep these stories with me to remind me of the importance of the science, the scientists and the patients.
Now, our fast-acting results were pretty interesting, but we still had one lingering question: Can our sticky balls, our particles actually attached to the immune cells, actually stop the spread of cancer?
So we went to our animal model, and we found three important parts.
Our primary tumors were smaller in our treated animals, there were fewer cells in circulation, and there was little to no tumor burden in the distant organs.
Now, this wasn't just a victory for us and our sticky balls.
This was also a victory to me in drug delivery, and it represents a paradigm shift, a revolution -- to go from just using drugs, just injecting them and hoping they go to the right places in the body, to using immune cells as special delivery drivers in your body.
For this example, we used two molecules, e-selectin and trail, but really, the possibility of drugs you can use are endless.
And I talked about cancer, but where disease goes, so do immune cells.
So this could be used for any disease.
Imagine using immune cells to deliver crucial wound-healing agents after a spinal cord injury, or using immune cells to deliver drugs past the blood-brain barrier to treat Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease.
These are the ideas that excite me about science the most.
And from where I stand, I see so much promise and opportunity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I can't think of anyone who just has one interest in life, and that's all they want to do for the rest of their life.
[The Way We Work] Around 15 percent of American workers don't have traditional full-time jobs.
They're half-time, part-time, contract workers or temps.
The term "side hustle" just seems to fit with this ethos where people are putting together a few different things to make a living.
The word "side hustle" has its roots in popular African American newspapers.
In the 1920s, these papers used the word "hustle" to refer to some kind of scam.
By the 1950s, they were using "side hustle" to refer to legitimate work, too.
A side hustle is a little different than a second job.
A second job is about necessity.
While a side hustle can certainly bring in extra income, it's a little more aspirational.
Side hustle captures a certain kind of scrappy, entrepreneurial spirit.
I've interviewed more than 100 women of color on Side Hustle Pro who started successful side hustles.
Nailah Ellis-Brown started Ellis Island Tea out of her trunk.
Arsha Jones started her famous Capital City Co Mambo Sauce with one product and a PayPal link.
All these women are running side hustles.
What exactly does this tell us?
First, that people are seeing opportunity within their communities.
The goal here isn't necessarily to be the next Coca-Cola or Google.
Scale is great, but there's also beauty in a successful business that's built for a specific audience.
Second, people are increasingly interested in being their own boss.
Being your own boss takes discipline.
Self-made millionaires tend to have one big trait in common: they make decisions, hold themselves accountable and push through in the face of challenges.
A side hustle is a great way to try out being your own boss and see if you have those skills before fully stepping out on your own.
Third, people are multipassionate.
I want to stress that not every side hustle is started because someone hates their job.
Many are started simply because people are interested in lots of different things.
Lisa Price, who started a hair and beauty company, Carol's Daughter, was working in television production when she started side-hustling.
She says she actually loved her job.
It was the fact that she came home every day feeling good that led her to start experimenting with making fragrances and hair oils in her kitchen.
We're always being taught that we're supposed to know what we want to do when we grow up.
But when you're multipassionate, you want to dip and dabble in those different things.
It doesn't mean that you're not committed to your job, it just means that you have other outlets that bring you joy.
And that brings me to the final thing the side hustle revolution shows us: people want to make a bet on themselves.
Side hustles are appealing because it's easier to take that chance when you have some kind of income coming in.
Even if a side hustle doesn't take off, it's still an investment in yourself.
Forty-one percent of millennials who have a side hustle say they've shared this information with their employers.
They're not worried about their managers reacting negatively.
They recognize all the learning and growth that comes with running a side hustle.
Everyone is looking to feel fulfilled.
Thirty-eight percent of baby boomers feel some kind of regret about their career.
No one wants that.
The truth is that there are many different ways to find happiness through what we do.
Side hustles are about embracing that hope that we can be the ones making the decisions in how we spend our work lives.
Let's just start by looking at some great photographs.
This is an icon of National Geographic, an Afghan refugee taken by Steve McCurry.
But the Harvard Lampoon is about to come out with a parody of National Geographic, and I shudder to think what they're going to do to this photograph.
Oh, the wrath of Photoshop.
This is a jet landing at San Francisco, by Bruce Dale.
He mounted a camera on the tail.
A poetic image for a story on Tolstoy, by Sam Abell.
Pygmies in the DRC, by Randy Olson.
I love this photograph because it reminds me of Degas' bronze sculptures of the little dancer.
A polar bear swimming in the Arctic, by Paul Nicklen.
Polar bears need ice to be able to move back and forth -- they're not very good swimmers -- and we know what's happening to the ice.
These are camels moving across the Rift Valley in Africa, photographed by Chris Johns.
Shot straight down, so these are the shadows of the camels.
This is a rancher in Texas, by William Albert Allard, a great portraitist.
And Jane Goodall, making her own special connection, photographed by Nick Nichols.
This is a soap disco in Spain, photographed by David Alan Harvey.
And David said that there was lot of weird stuff happening on the dance floor.
But, hey, at least it's hygienic.
(Laughter) These are sea lions in Australia doing their own dance, by David Doubilet.
And this is a comet, captured by Dr. Euan Mason.
And finally, the bow of the Titanic, without movie stars, photographed by Emory Kristof.
Photography carries a power that holds up under the relentless swirl of today's saturated, media world, because photographs emulate the way that our mind freezes a significant moment.
Here's an example.
Four years ago, I was at the beach with my son, and he was learning how to swim in this relatively soft surf of the Delaware beaches.
But I turned away for a moment, and he got caught into a riptide and started to be pulled out towards the jetty.
I can stand here right now and see, as I go tearing into the water after him, the moments slowing down and freezing into this arrangement.
I can see the rocks are over here.
There's a wave about to crash onto him.
I can see his hands reaching out, and I can see his face in terror, looking at me, saying, "Help me, Dad."
I got him. The wave broke over us.
We got back on shore; he was fine.
We were a little bit rattled.
But this flashbulb memory, as it's called, is when all the elements came together to define not just the event, but my emotional connection to it.
And this is what a photograph taps into when it makes its own powerful connection to a viewer.
Now I have to tell you, I was talking to Kyle last week about this, that I was going to tell this story.
And he said, "Oh, yeah, I remember that too!
I remember my image of you was that you were up on the shore yelling at me."
(Laughter) I thought I was a hero.
(Laughter) So, this represents -- this is a cross-sample of some remarkable images taken by some of the world's greatest photojournalists, working at the very top of their craft -- except one.
This photograph was taken by Dr. Euan Mason in New Zealand last year, and it was submitted and published in National Geographic.
Last year, we added a section to our website called "Your Shot," where anyone can submit photographs for possible publication.
And it has become a wild success, tapping into the enthusiast photography community.
The quality of these amateur photographs can, at times, be amazing.
And seeing this reinforces, for me, that every one of us has at least one or two great photographs in them.
But to be a great photojournalist, you have to have more than just one or two great photographs in you.
You've got to be able to make them all the time.
But even more importantly, you need to know how to create a visual narrative.
You need to know how to tell a story.
So I'm going to share with you some coverages that I feel demonstrate the storytelling power of photography.
Photographer Nick Nichols went to document a very small and relatively unknown wildlife sanctuary in Chad, called Zakouma.
The original intent was to travel there and bring back a classic story of diverse species, of an exotic locale.
And that is what Nick did, up to a point.
This is a serval cat.
He's actually taking his own picture, shot with what's called a camera trap.
There's an infrared beam that's going across, and he has stepped into the beam and taken his photograph.
These are baboons at a watering hole.
Nick -- the camera, again, an automatic camera took thousands of pictures of this.
And Nick ended up with a lot of pictures of the rear ends of baboons.
(Laughter) A lion having a late night snack -- notice he's got a broken tooth.
And a crocodile walks up a riverbank toward its den.
I love this little bit of water that comes off the back of his tail.
But the centerpiece species of Zakouma are the elephants.
It's one of the largest intact herds in this part of Africa.
Here's a photograph shot in moonlight, something that digital photography has made a big difference for.
It was with the elephants that this story pivoted.
Nick, along with researcher Dr. Michael Fay, collared the matriarch of the herd.
They named her Annie, and they began tracking her movements.
The herd was safe within the confines of the park, because of this dedicated group of park rangers.
But once the annual rains began, the herd would begin migrating to feeding grounds outside the park.
And that's when they ran into trouble.
For outside the safety of the park were poachers, who would hunt them down only for the value of their ivory tusks.
The matriarch that they were radio tracking, after weeks of moving back and forth, in and out of the park, came to a halt outside the park.
Annie had been killed, along with 20 members of her herd.
And they only came for the ivory.
This is actually one of the rangers.
They were able to chase off one of the poachers and recover this ivory, because they couldn't leave it there, because it's still valuable.
But what Nick did was he brought back a story that went beyond the old-school method of just straight, "Isn't this an amazing world?"
And instead, created a story that touched our audiences deeply.
Instead of just knowledge of this park, he created an understanding and an empathy for the elephants, the rangers and the many issues surrounding human-wildlife conflicts.
Now let's go over to India.
Sometimes you can tell a broad story in a focused way.
We were looking at the same issue that Richard Wurman touches upon in his new world population project.
For the first time in history, more people live in urban, rather than rural, environments.
And most of that growth is not in the cities, but in the slums that surround them.
Jonas Bendiksen, a very energetic photographer, came to me and said, "We need to document this, and here's my proposal.
Let's go all over the world and photograph every single slum around the world."
And I said, "Well, you know, that might be a bit ambitious for our budget."
So instead, what we did was we decided to, instead of going out and doing what would result in what we'd consider sort of a survey story -- where you just go in and see just a little bit of everything -- we put Jonas into Dharavi, which is part of Mumbai, India, and let him stay there, and really get into the heart and soul of this really major part of the city.
What Jonas did was not just go and do a surface look at the awful conditions that exist in such places.
He saw that this was a living and breathing and vital part of how the entire urban area functioned.
By staying tightly focused in one place, Jonas tapped into the soul and the enduring human spirit that underlies this community.
And he did it in a beautiful way.
Sometimes, though, the only way to tell a story is with a sweeping picture.
We teamed up underwater photographer Brian Skerry and photojournalist Randy Olson to document the depletion of the world's fisheries.
We weren't the only ones to tackle this subject, but the photographs that Brian and Randy created are among the best to capture both the human and natural devastation of overfishing.
Here, in a photo by Brian, a seemingly crucified shark is caught up in a gill net off of Baja.
I've seen sort of OK pictures of bycatch, the animals accidentally scooped up while fishing for a specific species.
But here, Brian captured a unique view by positioning himself underneath the boat when they threw the waste overboard.
And Brian then went on to even greater risk to get this never-before-made photograph of a trawl net scraping the ocean bottom.
Back on land, Randy Olson photographed a makeshift fish market in Africa, where the remains of filleted fish were sold to the locals, the main parts having already been sent to Europe.
And here in China, Randy shot a jellyfish market.
As prime food sources are depleted, the harvest goes deeper into the oceans and brings in more such sources of protein.
This is called fishing down the food chain.
But there are also glimmers of hope, and I think anytime we're doing a big, big story on this, we don't really want to go and just look at all the problems.
We also want to look for solutions.
Brian photographed a marine sanctuary in New Zealand, where commercial fishing had been banned -- the result being that the overfished species have been restored, and with them a possible solution for sustainable fisheries.
Photography can also compel us to confront issues that are potentially distressing and controversial.
James Nachtwey, who was honored at last year's TED, took a look at the sweep of the medical system that is utilized to handle the American wounded coming out of Iraq.
It is like a tube where a wounded soldier enters on one end and exits back home, on the other.
Jim started in the battlefield.
Here, a medical technician tends to a wounded soldier on the helicopter ride back to the field hospital.
Here is in the field hospital.
The soldier on the right has the name of his daughter tattooed across his chest, as a reminder of home.
From here, the more severely wounded are transported back to Germany, where they meet up with their families for the first time.
And then back to the States to recuperate at veterans' hospitals, such as here in Walter Reed.
And finally, often fitted with high-tech prosthesis, they exit the medical system and attempt to regain their pre-war lives.
Jim took what could have been a straight-up medical science story and gave it a human dimension that touched our readers deeply.
Now, these stories are great examples of how photography can be used to address some of our most important topics.
But there are also times when photographers simply encounter things that are, when it comes down to it, just plain fun.
Photographer Paul Nicklin traveled to Antarctica to shoot a story on leopard seals.
They have been rarely photographed, partly because they are considered one of the most dangerous predators in the ocean.
In fact, a year earlier, a researcher had been grabbed by one and pulled down to depth and killed.
So you can imagine Paul was maybe a little bit hesitant about getting into the water.
Now, what leopard seals do mostly is, they eat penguins.
You know of "The March of the Penguins."
This is sort of the munch of the penguins.
(Laughter) Here a penguin goes up to the edge and looks out to see if the coast is clear.
And then everybody kind of runs out and goes out.
But then Paul got in the water.
And he said he was never really afraid of this.
Well, this one female came up to him.
She's probably -- it's a shame you can't see it in the photograph, but she's 12 feet long.
So, she is pretty significant in size.
And Paul said he was never really afraid, because she was more curious about him than threatened.
This mouthing behavior, on the right, was really her way of saying to him, "Hey, look how big I am!"
Or you know, "My, what big teeth you have."
(Laughter) Then Paul thinks that she simply took pity on him.
To her, here was this big, goofy creature in the water that for some reason didn't seem to be interested in chasing penguins.
So what she did was she started to bring penguins to him, alive, and put them in front of him.
She dropped them off, and then they would swim away.
She'd kind of look at him, like "What are you doing?"
Go back and get them, and then bring them back and drop them in front of him.
And she did this over the course of a couple of days, until the point where she got so frustrated with him that she started putting them directly on top of his head.
(Laughter) Which just resulted in a fantastic photograph.
(Laughter) Eventually, though, Paul thinks that she just figured that he was never going to survive.
This is her just puffing out, you know, snorting out in disgust.
(Laughter) And lost interest with him, and went back to what she does best.
Paul set out to photograph a relatively mysterious and unknown creature, and came back with not just a collection of photographs, but an amazing experience and a great story.
It is these kinds of stories, ones that go beyond the immediate or just the superficial that demonstrate the power of photojournalism.
I believe that photography can make a real connection to people, and can be employed as a positive agent for understanding the challenges and opportunities facing our world today.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I’d like to dedicate this next song to Carmelo, who was put to sleep a couple of days ago, because he got too old.
But apparently he was a very nice dog and he always let the cat sleep in the dog bed.
♫ (Dog panting noise) Heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh. ♫ ♫ I'm just a'walking my dog, singing my song, strolling along. ♫ ♫ Yeah, it's just me and my dog, catching some sun. We can't go wrong. ♫ ♫ My life was lonely and blue. ♫ ♫ Yeah, I was sad as a sailor, ♫ ♫ I was an angry 'un too. ♫ ♫ Then there was you -- appeared when I was entangled with youth and fear, ♫ ♫ and nerves jingle jangled, vermouth and beer were getting me mangled up. ♫ ♫ But then I looked in your eyes ♫ ♫ and I was no more a failure. ♫ ♫ You looked so wacky and wise. ♫ ♫ And I said, "Lord, I'm happy, 'cause I'm just a'walking my dog, ♫ ♫ catching some sun. We can't go wrong." ♫ ♫ Yeah, it's just me and my dog, singing our song, strolling along. ♫ ♫ 'Cause I don't care about your hating and your doubt, ♫ ♫ and I don't care what the politicians spout. ♫ ♫ If you need a companion, why, just go out to the pound, ♫ ♫ and find yourself a hound, and make that doggie proud, ♫ ♫ 'cause that's what it's all about. ♫ ♫ (Dog panting noise) Heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh. ♫ ♫ My life was tragic and sad. ♫ ♫ I was the archetypal loser. ♫ ♫ I was a pageant gone bad. ♫ ♫ And then there was you -- on time, and wagging your tail ♫ ♫ in the cutest mime that you was in jail. ♫ ♫ I said, "Woof, be mine!" and you gave a wail and then ♫ ♫ I was no longer alone. ♫ ♫ And I was no more a boozer. ♫ ♫ We'll make the happiest home. ♫ ♫ And I said, "Lord, I'm happy, 'cause I’m just a'walking my dog, ♫ ♫ singing my song, strolling along." ♫ ♫ Yeah, it's just me and my dog, catching some sun. We can't go wrong, ♫ ♫ 'cause I don't care about your hating and your doubt, ♫ ♫ and I don’t care what the politicians spout. ♫ ♫ If you need a companion, why, just go out to the pound, ♫ ♫ and find yourself a hound, and make that doggie proud, ♫ ♫ 'cause that's what it's all about, ♫ ♫ that's what it's all about, ♫ ♫ that's what it's all abou-BOW-WOW-WOW-WOW ♫ ♫ that's what it's all about. ♫ ♫ (Dog panting noise) Heh, heh, heh, heh, heh. ♫ Good dog!
Thank you.
When I was about eight years old, I first heard about something called climate change or global warming.
Apparently, that was something humans had created by our way of living.
I was told to turn off the lights to save energy and to recycle paper to save resources.
I remember thinking that it was very strange that humans, who are an animal species among others, could be capable of changing the Earth's climate.
Because if we were, and if it was really happening, we wouldn't be talking about anything else.
As soon as you'd turn on the TV, everything would be about that.
Headlines, radio, newspapers, you would never read or hear about anything else, as if there was a world war going on.
But no one ever talked about it.
If burning fossil fuels was so bad that it threatened our very existence, how could we just continue like before?
Why were there no restrictions?
Why wasn't it made illegal?
To me, that did not add up.
It was too unreal.
So when I was 11, I became ill.
I fell into depression, I stopped talking, and I stopped eating.
In two months, I lost about 10 kilos of weight.
Later on, I was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome, OCD and selective mutism.
That basically means I only speak when I think it's necessary - now is one of those moments.
(Applause) For those of us who are on the spectrum, almost everything is black or white.
We aren't very good at lying, and we usually don't enjoy participating in this social game that the rest of you seem so fond of.
(Laughter) I think in many ways that we autistic are the normal ones, and the rest of the people are pretty strange, (Laughter) especially when it comes to the sustainability crisis, where everyone keeps saying climate change is an existential threat and the most important issue of all, and yet they just carry on like before.
I don't understand that, because if the emissions have to stop, then we must stop the emissions.
To me that is black or white.
There are no gray areas when it comes to survival.
Either we go on as a civilization or we don't.
We have to change.
Rich countries like Sweden need to start reducing emissions by at least 15 percent every year.
And that is so that we can stay below a two-degree warming target.
Yet, as the IPCC have recently demonstrated, aiming instead for 1.5 degrees Celsius would significantly reduce the climate impacts.
But we can only imagine what that means for reducing emissions.
You would think the media and every one of our leaders would be talking about nothing else, but they never even mention it.
Nor does anyone ever mention the greenhouse gases already locked in the system.
Nor that air pollution is hiding a warming so that when we stop burning fossil fuels, we already have an extra level of warming perhaps as high as 0.5 to 1.1 degrees Celsius.
Furthermore does hardly anyone speak about the fact that we are in the midst of the sixth mass extinction, with up to 200 species going extinct every single day, that the extinction rate today is between 1,000 and 10,000 times higher than what is seen as normal.
Nor does hardly anyone ever speak about the aspect of equity or climate justice, clearly stated everywhere in the Paris Agreement, which is absolutely necessary to make it work on a global scale.
That means that rich countries need to get down to zero emissions within 6 to 12 years, with today's emission speed.
And that is so that people in poorer countries can have a chance to heighten their standard of living by building some of the infrastructure that we have already built, such as roads, schools, hospitals, clean drinking water, electricity, and so on.
Because how can we expect countries like India or Nigeria to care about the climate crisis if we who already have everything don't care even a second about it or our actual commitments to the Paris Agreement?
So, why are we not reducing our emissions?
Why are they in fact still increasing?
Are we knowingly causing a mass extinction?
Are we evil?
No, of course not.
People keep doing what they do because the vast majority doesn't have a clue about the actual consequences of our everyday life, and they don't know that rapid change is required.
We all think we know, and we all think everybody knows, but we don't.
Because how could we?
If there really was a crisis, and if this crisis was caused by our emissions, you would at least see some signs.
Not just flooded cities, tens of thousands of dead people, and whole nations leveled to piles of torn down buildings.
You would see some restrictions.
But no.
And no one talks about it.
There are no emergency meetings, no headlines, no breaking news.
No one is acting as if we were in a crisis.
Even most climate scientists or green politicians keep on flying around the world, eating meat and dairy.
If I live to be 100, I will be alive in the year 2103.
When you think about the future today, you don't think beyond the year 2050.
By then, I will, in the best case, not even have lived half of my life.
What happens next?
The year 2078, I will celebrate my 75th birthday.
If I have children or grandchildren, maybe they will spend that day with me.
Maybe they will ask me about you, the people who were around, back in 2018.
Maybe they will ask why you didn't do anything while there still was time to act.
What we do or don't do right now will affect my entire life and the lives of my children and grandchildren.
What we do or don't do right now, me and my generation can't undo in the future.
So when school started in August of this year, I decided that this was enough.
I set myself down on the ground outside the Swedish parliament.
I school striked for the climate.
Some people say that I should be in school instead.
Some people say that I should study to become a climate scientist so that I can "solve the climate crisis."
But the climate crisis has already been solved.
We already have all the facts and solutions.
All we have to do is to wake up and change.
And why should I be studying for a future that soon will be no more when no one is doing anything whatsoever to save that future?
And what is the point of learning facts in the school system when the most important facts given by the finest science of that same school system clearly means nothing to our politicians and our society.
Some people say that Sweden is just a small country, and that it doesn't matter what we do, but I think that if a few children can get headlines all over the world just by not coming to school for a few weeks, imagine what we could all do together if you wanted to.
(Applause) Now we're almost at the end of my talk, and this is where people usually start talking about hope, solar panels, wind power, circular economy, and so on, but I'm not going to do that.
We've had 30 years of pep-talking and selling positive ideas.
And I'm sorry, but it doesn't work.
Because if it would have, the emissions would have gone down by now.
They haven't.
And yes, we do need hope, of course we do.
But the one thing we need more than hope is action.
Once we start to act, hope is everywhere.
So instead of looking for hope, look for action.
Then, and only then, hope will come.
Today, we use 100 million barrels of oil every single day.
There are no politics to change that.
There are no rules to keep that oil in the ground.
So we can't save the world by playing by the rules, because the rules have to be changed.
Everything needs to change -- and it has to start today.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm often asked why I do art, what do I want to say with my art photography, and what is the use of it?
Once in a while I start to worry how to actually measure the impact from the art like we do with medicine or technology, where we can see the results and calculate it.
Then I would finally be able to explain to my mother my art with real numbers.
But my art is so far from metrics, and moreover, my photography is widely exposing the theme of escapism.
My theory is that all of us struggle sometimes to escape in order to analyze our reality, appreciate it or change.
I don't work with daily life as it is, and I'm not a documentary photographer in the common sense.
But I am a documentary photographer in a different sense.
I document dreams.
I work with daily life as it could be, as I imagine it.
I am a daydreamer, but at the same time I love things that are authentic and deal with our innermost nature, which I would never want to escape from.
I adore complicated personalities, and real life inspires me to create my images.
Real life inspires our escape, and sometimes that escape is very needed.
I believe heroes are not created easily, and I choose to work with individuals who are survivors and facing everyday routines that are not always full of color, people who are on their way to a better life, fighting against life circumstances.
Why do I choose people like that for my models?
Because I've been in that position myself, when I had to learn how to survive in real life.
I was a student living abroad in London.
I was working at two places at the same time as a waitress.
Obviously that wasn't my dream job, but I decided to play a game where I imagined that I am taking a role in a film, and in the film I am a waitress, and I need to act great.
I used to dye my hair and brows to gingerette, I changed my hair to curly perm, I lost weight and made myself believe I am just a character acting in a film.
That isn't forever, that is all just temporary.
That helped me a lot.
It motivated me to change my life and take a hard time as a game.
Now, as an artist, I am creating different lives for my models in order to give them the experience of being someone else in reality.
Through the photographic process, all of my models become like silent movie actors.
They are captured at the moment when they believe in being someone else entirely.
In order to create a new reality in its entirety, I physically create every single thing in my work, sometimes from outfits to the stage.
Because I work with analogues, and I don't make any digital manipulations to my photographs, I need everything to take place in reality, in spite of the fact that nowadays, digitally, you can create pretty much everything.
I don't like this path.
Even if that reaches perfection, I see the beauty in authenticity of making, and that's impossible without flaws.
A digitally manipulated photograph is not true for me.
It doesn't capture anything real.
It's not experienced, not motivating.
It's like, instead of going traveling, you look at someone else's travel photographs.
What I find so exciting is the ability to make people's dreams of being someone else a reality.
That's like a drug which pushes me to keep working, even without metrics.
One of my models had always dreamed of being seen as a warrior, but she wasn't able to do sports because of her health problems.
Half a year ago, she passed away from heart disease at the age of 22.
But two days before her death, the images we spent months working on together of her as a warrior she dreamed of becoming were published at a large exhibition in Milan by Vogue Magazine.
All her life was about overcoming.
Before she died, she had known that thousands of people saw her image from the land of escapism and believed in her as a brave and fearless warrior.
For my work, I invite people to play a game like we all used to as children when we pretend to be someone else and that process made us really happy.
To my mind it is important for grown-ups.
We need these transformations to enact this in the name of art.
It gives us the very real feeling of being important and powerful in order to influence our reality.
I know this from my own personal experience.
I have had so many versions of myself through my self-portraits that I've been many different characters.
Being someone else in the land of escapism doesn't exactly give us numbers that we can gauge, but it's like a real lost form of magic which exists but can't be measured.
There is a unique power in art to transform and lift our limits.
Art creates what I call a conjured life, which helps our existence and pushes, motivates and inspires us to dwell and express ourselves without metrics or calculations.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As a particle physicist, I study the elementary particles and how they interact on the most fundamental level.
For most of my research career, I've been using accelerators, such as the electron accelerator at Stanford University, just up the road, to study things on the smallest scale.
But more recently, I've been turning my attention to the universe on the largest scale.
Because, as I'll explain to you, the questions on the smallest and the largest scale are actually very connected.
So I'm going to tell you about our twenty-first-century view of the universe, what it's made of and what the big questions in the physical sciences are -- at least some of the big questions.
So, recently, we have realized that the ordinary matter in the universe -- and by ordinary matter, I mean you, me, the planets, the stars, the galaxies -- the ordinary matter makes up only a few percent of the content of the universe.
Almost a quarter, or approximately a quarter of the matter in the universe, is stuff that's invisible.
By invisible, I mean it doesn't absorb in the electromagnetic spectrum.
It doesn't emit in the electromagnetic spectrum. It doesn't reflect.
It doesn't interact with the electromagnetic spectrum, which is what we use to detect things.
It doesn't interact at all. So how do we know it's there?
We know it's there by its gravitational effects.
In fact, this dark matter dominates the gravitational effects in the universe on a large scale, and I'll be telling you about the evidence for that.
What about the rest of the pie?
The rest of the pie is a very mysterious substance called dark energy.
More about that later, OK.
So for now, let's turn to the evidence for dark matter.
In these galaxies, especially in a spiral galaxy like this, most of the mass of the stars is concentrated in the middle of the galaxy.
This huge mass of all these stars keeps stars in circular orbits in the galaxy.
So we have these stars going around in circles like this.
As you can imagine, even if you know physics, this should be intuitive, OK -- that stars that are closer to the mass in the middle will be rotating at a higher speed than those that are further out here, OK.
So what you would expect is that if you measured the orbital speed of the stars, that they should be slower on the edges than on the inside.
In other words, if we measured speed as a function of distance -- this is the only time I'm going to show a graph, OK -- we would expect that it goes down as the distance increases from the center of the galaxy.
When those measurements are made, instead what we find is that the speed is basically constant, as a function of distance.
If it's constant, that means that the stars out here are feeling the gravitational effects of matter that we do not see.
In fact, this galaxy and every other galaxy appears to be embedded in a cloud of this invisible dark matter.
And this cloud of matter is much more spherical than the galaxy themselves, and it extends over a much wider range than the galaxy.
So we see the galaxy and fixate on that, but it's actually a cloud of dark matter that's dominating the structure and the dynamics of this galaxy.
Galaxies themselves are not strewn randomly in space; they tend to cluster.
And this is an example of a very, actually, famous cluster, the Coma cluster.
And there are thousands of galaxies in this cluster.
They're the white, fuzzy, elliptical things here.
So these galaxy clusters -- we take a snapshot now, we take a snapshot in a decade, it'll look identical.
But these galaxies are actually moving at extremely high speeds.
They're moving around in this gravitational potential well of this cluster, OK.
So all of these galaxies are moving.
We can measure the speeds of these galaxies, their orbital velocities, and figure out how much mass is in this cluster.
And again, what we find is that there is much more mass there than can be accounted for by the galaxies that we see.
Or if we look in other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, we see that there's a lot of gas in this cluster, as well.
But that cannot account for the mass either.
In fact, there appears to be about ten times as much mass here in the form of this invisible or dark matter as there is in the ordinary matter, OK.
It would be nice if we could see this dark matter a little bit more directly.
I'm just putting this big, blue blob on there, OK, to try to remind you that it's there.
Can we see it more visually? Yes, we can.
And so let me lead you through how we can do this.
So here's an observer: it could be an eye; it could be a telescope.
And suppose there's a galaxy out here in the universe.
How do we see that galaxy?
A ray of light leaves the galaxy and travels through the universe for perhaps billions of years before it enters the telescope or your eye.
Now, how do we deduce where the galaxy is?
Well, we deduce it by the direction that the ray is traveling as it enters our eye, right?
We say, the ray of light came this way; the galaxy must be there, OK.
Now, suppose I put in the middle a cluster of galaxies -- and don't forget the dark matter, OK.
Now, if we consider a different ray of light, one going off like this, we now need to take into account what Einstein predicted when he developed general relativity.
And that was that the gravitational field, due to mass, will deflect not only the trajectory of particles, but will deflect light itself.
So this light ray will not continue in a straight line, but would rather bend and could end up going into our eye.
Where will this observer see the galaxy?
You can respond. Up, right?
We extrapolate backwards and say the galaxy is up here.
Is there any other ray of light that could make into the observer's eye from that galaxy?
Yes, great. I see people going down like this.
So a ray of light could go down, be bent up into the observer's eye, and the observer sees a ray of light here.
Now, take into account the fact that we live in a three-dimensional universe, OK, a three-dimensional space.
Are there any other rays of light that could make it into the eye?
Yes! The rays would lie on a -- I'd like to see -- yeah, on a cone.
So there's a whole ray of light -- rays of light on a cone -- that will all be bent by that cluster and make it into the observer's eye.
If there is a cone of light coming into my eye, what do I see?
A circle, a ring. It's called an Einstein ring. Einstein predicted that, OK.
Now, it will only be a perfect ring if the source, the deflector and the eyeball, in this case, are all in a perfectly straight line.
If they're slightly skewed, we'll see a different image.
Now, you can do an experiment tonight over the reception, OK, to figure out what that image will look like.
Because it turns out that there is a kind of lens that we can devise, that has the right shape to produce this kind of effect.
We call this gravitational lensing.
And so, this is your instrument, OK.
(Laughter).
But ignore the top part.
It's the base that I want you to concentrate, OK.
So, actually, at home, whenever we break a wineglass, I save the bottom, take it over to the machine shop.
We shave it off, and I have a little gravitational lens, OK.
So it's got the right shape to produce the lensing.
And so the next thing you need to do in your experiment is grab a napkin. I grabbed a piece of graph paper -- I'm a physicist. (Laughter) So, a napkin. Draw a little model galaxy in the middle.
And now put the lens over the galaxy, and what you'll find is that you'll see a ring, an Einstein ring.
Now, move the base off to the side, and the ring will split up into arcs, OK.
And you can put it on top of any image.
On the graph paper, you can see how all the lines on the graph paper have been distorted.
And again, this is a kind of an accurate model of what happens with the gravitational lensing.
OK, so the question is: do we see this in the sky?
Do we see arcs in the sky when we look at, say, a cluster of galaxies?
And the answer is yes.
And so, here's an image from the Hubble Space Telescope.
Many of the images you are seeing are earlier from the Hubble Space Telescope.
Well, first of all, for the golden shape galaxies -- those are the galaxies in the cluster.
They're the ones that are embedded in that sea of dark matter that are causing the bending of the light to cause these optical illusions, or mirages, practically, of the background galaxies.
So the streaks that you see, all these streaks, are actually distorted images of galaxies that are much further away.
So what we can do, then, is based on how much distortion we see in those images, we can calculate how much mass there must be in this cluster.
And it's an enormous amount of mass.
And also, you can tell by eye, by looking at this, that these arcs are not centered on individual galaxies.
They are centered on some more spread out structure, and that is the dark matter in which the cluster is embedded, OK.
So this is the closest you can get to kind of seeing at least the effects of the dark matter with your naked eye.
OK, so, a quick review then, to see that you're following.
So the evidence that we have that a quarter of the universe is dark matter -- this gravitationally attracting stuff -- is that galaxies, the speed with which stars orbiting galaxies is much too large; it must be embedded in dark matter.
The speed with which galaxies within clusters are orbiting is much too large; it must be embedded in dark matter.
And we see these gravitational lensing effects, these distortions that say that, again, clusters are embedded in dark matter.
OK. So now, let's turn to dark energy.
So to understand the evidence for dark energy, we need to discuss something that Stephen Hawking referred to in the previous session.
And that is the fact that space itself is expanding.
So if we imagine a section of our infinite universe -- and so I've put down four spiral galaxies, OK -- and imagine that you put down a set of tape measures, so every line on here corresponds to a tape measure, horizontal or vertical, for measuring where things are.
If you could do this, what you would find that with each passing day, each passing year, each passing billions of years, OK, the distance between galaxies is getting greater.
And it's not because galaxies are moving away from each other through space.
They're not necessarily moving through space.
They're moving away from each other because space itself is getting bigger, OK.
That's what the expansion of the universe or space means.
So they're moving further apart.
Now, what Stephen Hawking mentioned, as well, is that after the Big Bang, space expanded at a very rapid rate.
But because gravitationally attracting matter is embedded in this space, it tends to slow down the expansion of the space, OK.
So the expansion slows down with time.
So, in the last century, OK, people debated about whether this expansion of space would continue forever; whether it would slow down, you know, will be slowing down, but continue forever; slow down and stop, asymptotically stop; or slow down, stop, and then reverse, so it starts to contract again.
So a little over a decade ago, two groups of physicists and astronomers set out to measure the rate at which the expansion of space was slowing down, OK.
By how much less is it expanding today, compared to, say, a couple of billion years ago?
The startling answer to this question, OK, from these experiments, was that space is expanding at a faster rate today than it was a few billion years ago, OK.
So the expansion of space is actually speeding up.
This was a completely surprising result.
There is no persuasive theoretical argument for why this should happen, OK.
No one was predicting ahead of time this is what's going to be found.
It was the opposite of what was expected.
So we need something to be able to explain that.
Now it turns out, in the mathematics, you can put it in as a term that's an energy, but it's a completely different type of energy from anything we've ever seen before.
We call it dark energy, and it has this effect of causing space to expand.
But we don't have a good motivation for putting it in there at this point, OK.
So it's really unexplained as to why we need to put it in.
Now, so at this point, then, what I want to really emphasize to you, is that, first of all, dark matter and dark energy are completely different things, OK.
There are really two mysteries out there as to what makes up most of the universe, and they have very different effects.
Dark matter, because it gravitationally attracts, it tends to encourage the growth of structure, OK.
So clusters of galaxies will tend to form, because of all this gravitational attraction.
Dark energy, on the other hand, is putting more and more space between the galaxies, makes it, the gravitational attraction between them decrease, and so it impedes the growth of structure.
So by looking at things like clusters of galaxies, and how they -- their number density, how many there are as a function of time -- we can learn about how dark matter and dark energy compete against each other in structure forming.
In terms of dark matter, I said that we don't have any, you know, really persuasive argument for dark energy.
Do we have anything for dark matter? And the answer is yes.
We have well-motivated candidates for the dark matter.
Now, what do I mean by well motivated?
I mean that we have mathematically consistent theories that were actually introduced to explain a completely different phenomenon, OK, things that I haven't even talked about, that each predict the existence of a very weakly interacting, new particle.
So, this is exactly what you want in physics: where a prediction comes out of a mathematically consistent theory that was actually developed for something else.
But we don't know if either of those are actually the dark matter candidate, OK.
One or both, who knows? Or it could be something completely different.
Now, we look for these dark matter particles because, after all, they are here in the room, OK, and they didn't come in the door.
They just pass through anything.
They can come through the building, through the Earth -- they're so non-interacting.
So one way to look for them is to build detectors that are extremely sensitive to a dark matter particle coming through and bumping it.
So a crystal that will ring if that happens.
So one of my colleagues up the road and his collaborators have built such a detector.
And they've put it deep down in an iron mine in Minnesota, OK, deep under the ground, and in fact, in the last couple of days announced the most sensitive results so far.
They haven't seen anything, OK, but it puts limits on what the mass and the interaction strength of these dark matter particles are.
There's going to be a satellite telescope launched later this year and it will look towards the middle of the galaxy, to see if we can see dark matter particles annihilating and producing gamma rays that could be detected with this.
The Large Hadron Collider, a particle physics accelerator, that we'll be turning on later this year.
It is possible that dark matter particles might be produced at the Large Hadron Collider.
Now, because they are so non-interactive, they will actually escape the detector, so their signature will be missing energy, OK.
Now, unfortunately, there is a lot of new physics whose signature could be missing energy, so it will be hard to tell the difference.
And finally, for future endeavors, there are telescopes being designed specifically to address the questions of dark matter and dark energy -- ground-based telescopes, and there are three space-based telescopes that are in competition right now to be launched to investigate dark matter and dark energy.
So in terms of the big questions: what is dark matter? What is dark energy?
The big questions facing physics.
And I'm sure you have lots of questions, which I very much look forward to addressing over the next 72 hours, while I'm here. Thank you.
(Applause)
Whether she’s describing bickering families, quiet declarations of love, or juicy gossip, Jane Austen’s writing often feels as though it was written just for you.
Her dry wit and cheeky playfulness informs her heroines, whose conversational tone welcomes readers with a conspiratorial wink.
It’s even been said that some readers feel like the author’s secret confidante, trading letters with their delightfully wicked friend Jane.
But this unique brand of tongue-in-cheek humor is just one of the many feats found in her sly satires of society, civility, and sweeping romance.
Written in the early nineteenth century, Austen's novels decode the sheltered lives of the upper classes in rural England.
From resentment couched in pleasantries to arguing that masks attraction, her work explores the bewildering collision of emotions and etiquette.
But while romance is a common thread in her work, Austen dismissed the sentimental style of writing so popular at the time.
Instead of lofty love stories, her characters act naturally, and often awkwardly.
They trade pragmatic advice, friendly jokes and not-so-friendly barbs about their arrogant peers.
As they grapple with the endless rules of their society, Austen’s characters can usually find humor in all the hypocrisy, propriety, and small talk.
As Mr. Bennet jokes to his favorite daughter, “For what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbors and laugh at them in our turn?” And though her heroines might ridicule senseless social mores, Austen fully understood the practical importance of maintaining appearances.
At the time she was writing, a wealthy marriage was a financial necessity for most young women, and she often explores the tension between the mythical quest for love, and the economic benefits of making a match.
The savvy socialite Mary Crawford sums this up in "Mansfield Park;" “I would have everybody marry if they can do it properly: I do not like to have people throw themselves away.” Unsurprisingly, these themes were also present in Austen’s personal life.
Born in 1775, she lived in the social circles found in her novels.
Jane's parents supported her education, and provided space for her to write and publish her work anonymously.
But writing was hardly lucrative work.
And although she had sparks of chemistry, she never married.
Elements of her circumstances can be found in many of her characters; often intelligent women with witty, pragmatic personalities, and rich inner lives.
These headstrong heroines provide an entertaining anchor for their tumultuous romantic narratives.
Like the irreverent Elizabeth Bennet of "Pride and Prejudice," whose devotion to her sisters’ love lives blinds her to a clumsy suitor.
Or the iron-willed Anne Elliot of "Persuasion," who chooses to remain unmarried after the disappearance of her first love.
And Elinor Dashwood, who fiercely protects her family at the cost of her own desires in "Sense and Sensibility."
These women all encounter difficult choices about romantic, filial, and financial stability, and they resolve them without sacrificing their values– or their sense of humor.
Of course, these characters are far from perfect.
They often think they have all the answers.
And by telling the story from their perspective, Austen tricks the viewer into believing their heroine knows best– only to pull the rug out from under the protagonist and the reader.
In "Emma," the titular character feels surrounded by dull neighbors, and friends who can’t hope to match her wit.
As her guests prattle on and on about nothing, the reader begins to agree– Emma is the only exciting character in this quiet neighborhood.
Yet despite her swelling ego, Emma may not be as in control as she thinks – in life or love.
And Austen’s intimate use of perspective makes these revelations doubly surprising, blindsiding both Emma and her audience.
But rather than diminishing her host of heroines, these flaws only confirm “the inconsistency of all human characters.” Their complexity has kept Austen prominent on stage and screen, and made her work easily adaptable for modern sensibilities.
So hopefully, new readers will continue to find a friend in Ms. Austen for many years to come.
"Can you taste words?"
It was a question that caught me by surprise.
This summer, I was giving a talk at a literary festival, and afterwards, as I was signing books, a teenage girl came with her friend, and this is what she asked me.
I told her that some people experience an overlap in their senses so that they could hear colors or see sounds, and many writers were fascinated by this subject, myself included.
But she cut me off, a bit impatiently, and said, "Yeah, I know all of that.
It's called synesthesia. We learned it at school.
But my mom is reading your book, and she says there's lots of food and ingredients and a long dinner scene in it.
She gets hungry at every page.
So I was thinking, how come you don't get hungry when you write?
And I thought maybe, maybe you could taste words.
Does it make sense?"
And, actually, it did make sense, because ever since my childhood, each letter in the alphabet has a different color, and colors bring me flavors.
So for instance, the color purple is quite pungent, almost perfumed, and any words that I associate with purple taste the same way, such as "sunset" -- a very spicy word.
But I was worried that if I tell all of this to the teenager, it might sound either too abstract or perhaps too weird, and there wasn't enough time anyhow, because people were waiting in the queue, so it suddenly felt like what I was trying to convey was more complicated and detailed than what the circumstances allowed me to say.
And I did what I usually do in similar situations: I stammered, I shut down, and I stopped talking.
I stopped talking because the truth was complicated, even though I knew, deep within, that one should never, ever remain silent for fear of complexity.
So I want to start my talk today with the answer that I was not able to give on that day.
Yes, I can taste words -- sometimes, that is, not always, and happy words have a different flavor than sad words.
I like to explore: What does the word "creativity" taste like, or "equality," "love," "revolution?"
And what about "motherland?"
These days, it's particularly this last word that troubles me.
It leaves a sweet taste on my tongue, like cinnamon, a bit of rose water and golden apples.
But underneath, there's a sharp tang, like nettles and dandelion.
The taste of my motherland, Turkey, is a mixture of sweet and bitter.
And the reason why I'm telling you this is because I think there's more and more people all around the world today who have similarly mixed emotions about the lands they come from.
We love our native countries, yeah?
How can we not?
We feel attached to the people, the culture, the land, the food.
And yet at the same time, we feel increasingly frustrated by its politics and politicians, sometimes to the point of despair or hurt or anger.
I want to talk about emotions and the need to boost our emotional intelligence.
I think it's a pity that mainstream political theory pays very little attention to emotions.
Oftentimes, analysts and experts are so busy with data and metrics that they seem to forget those things in life that are difficult to measure and perhaps impossible to cluster under statistical models.
But I think this is a mistake, for two main reasons.
Firstly, because we are emotional beings.
As human beings, I think we all are like that.
But secondly, and this is new, we have entered a new stage in world history in which collective sentiments guide and misguide politics more than ever before.
And through social media and social networking, these sentiments are further amplified, polarized, and they travel around the world quite fast.
Ours is the age of anxiety, anger, distrust, resentment and, I think, lots of fear.
But here's the thing: even though there's plenty of research about economic factors, there's relatively few studies about emotional factors.
Why is it that we underestimate feelings and perceptions?
I think it's going to be one of our biggest intellectual challenges, because our political systems are replete with emotions.
In country after country, we have seen illiberal politicians exploiting these emotions.
And yet within the academia and among the intelligentsia, we are yet to take emotions seriously.
I think we should.
And just like we should focus on economic inequality worldwide, we need to pay more attention to emotional and cognitive gaps worldwide and how to bridge these gaps, because they do matter.
Years ago, when I was still living in Istanbul, an American scholar working on women writers in the Middle East came to see me.
And at some point in our exchange, she said, "I understand why you're a feminist, because, you know, you live in Turkey."
And I said to her, "I don't understand why you're not a feminist, because, you know, you live in America."
(Laughter) (Applause) And she laughed.
She took it as a joke, and the moment passed.
(Laughter) But the way she had divided the world into two imaginary camps, into two opposite camps -- it bothered me and it stayed with me.
According to this imaginary map, some parts of the world were liquid countries.
They were like choppy waters not yet settled.
Some other parts of the world, namely the West, were solid, safe and stable.
So it was the liquid lands that needed feminism and activism and human rights, and those of us who were unfortunate enough to come from such places had to keep struggling for these most essential values.
But there was hope.
Since history moved forward, even the most unsteady lands would someday catch up.
And meanwhile, the citizens of solid lands could take comfort in the progress of history and in the triumph of the liberal order.
They could support the struggles of other people elsewhere, but they themselves did not have to struggle for the basics of democracy anymore, because they were beyond that stage.
I think in the year 2016, this hierarchical geography was shattered to pieces.
Our world no longer follows this dualistic pattern in the scholar's mind, if it ever did.
Now we know that history does not necessarily move forward.
Sometimes it draws circles, even slides backwards, and that generations can make the same mistakes that their great-grandfathers had made.
And now we know that there's no such thing as solid countries versus liquid countries.
In fact, we are all living in liquid times, just like the late Zygmunt Bauman told us.
And Bauman had another definition for our age.
He used to say we are all going to be walking on moving sands.
And if that's the case, I think, it should concern us women more than men, because when societies slide backwards into authoritarianism, nationalism or religious fanaticism, women have much more to lose.
That is why this needs to be a vital moment, not only for global activism, but in my opinion, for global sisterhood as well.
(Applause) But I want to make a little confession before I go any further.
Until recently, whenever I took part in an international conference or festival, I would be usually one of the more depressed speakers.
(Laughter) Having seen how our dreams of democracy and how our dreams of coexistence were crushed in Turkey, both gradually but also with a bewildering speed, over the years I've felt quite demoralized.
And at these festivals there would be some other gloomy writers, and they would come from places such as Egypt, Nigeria, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Philippines, China, Venezuela, Russia.
And we would smile at each other in sympathy, this camaraderie of the doomed.
(Laughter) And you could call us WADWIC: Worried and Depressed Writers International Club.
(Laughter) But then things began to change, and suddenly our club became more popular, and we started to have new members.
I remember -- (Laughter) I remember Greek writers and poets joined first, came on board.
And then writers from Hungary and Poland, and then, interestingly, writers from Austria, the Netherlands, France, and then writers from the UK, where I live and where I call my home, and then writers from the USA.
Suddenly, there were more of us feeling worried about the fate of our nations and the future of the world.
And maybe there were more of us now feeling like strangers in our own motherlands.
And then this bizarre thing happened.
Those of us who used to be very depressed for a long time, we started to feel less depressed, whereas the newcomers, they were so not used to feeling this way that they were now even more depressed.
(Laughter) So you could see writers from Bangladesh or Turkey or Egypt trying to console their colleagues from Brexit Britain or from post-election USA.
(Laughter) But joking aside, I think our world is full of unprecedented challenges, and this comes with an emotional backlash, because in the face of high-speed change, many people wish to slow down, and when there's too much unfamiliarity, people long for the familiar.
And when things get too confusing, many people crave simplicity.
This is a very dangerous crossroads, because it's exactly where the demagogue enters into the picture.
The demagogue understands how collective sentiments work and how he -- it's usually a he -- can benefit from them.
He tells us that we all belong in our tribes, and he tells us that we will be safer if we are surrounded by sameness.
Demagogues come in all sizes and in all shapes.
This could be the eccentric leader of a marginal political party somewhere in Europe, or an Islamist extremist imam preaching dogma and hatred, or it could be a white supremacist Nazi-admiring orator somewhere else.
All these figures, at first glance -- they seem disconnected.
But I think they feed each other, and they need each other.
And all around the world, when we look at how demagogues talk and how they inspire movements, I think they have one unmistakable quality in common: they strongly, strongly dislike plurality.
They cannot deal with multiplicity.
Adorno used to say, "Intolerance of ambiguity is the sign of an authoritarian personality."
But I ask myself: What if that same sign, that same intolerance of ambiguity -- what if it's the mark of our times, of the age we're living in?
Because wherever I look, I see nuances withering away.
On TV shows, we have one anti-something speaker situated against a pro-something speaker.
Yeah? It's good ratings.
It's even better if they shout at each other.
Even in academia, where our intellect is supposed to be nourished, you see one atheist scholar competing with a firmly theist scholar, but it's not a real intellectual exchange, because it's a clash between two certainties.
I think binary oppositions are everywhere.
So slowly and systematically, we are being denied the right to be complex.
Istanbul, Berlin, Nice, Paris, Brussels, Dhaka, Baghdad, Barcelona: we have seen one horrible terror attack after another.
And when you express your sorrow, and when you react against the cruelty, you get all kinds of reactions, messages on social media.
But one of them is quite disturbing, only because it's so widespread.
They say, "Why do you feel sorry for them?
Why do you feel sorry for them?
Why don't you feel sorry for civilians in Yemen or civilians in Syria?"
And I think the people who write such messages do not understand that we can feel sorry for and stand in solidarity with victims of terrorism and violence in the Middle East, in Europe, in Asia, in America, wherever, everywhere, equally and simultaneously.
They don't seem to understand that we don't have to pick one pain and one place over all others.
But I think this is what tribalism does to us.
It shrinks our minds, for sure, but it also shrinks our hearts, to such an extent that we become numb to the suffering of other people.
And the sad truth is, we weren't always like this.
I had a children's book out in Turkey, and when the book was published, I did lots of events.
I went to many primary schools, which gave me a chance to observe younger kids in Turkey.
And it was always amazing to see how much empathy, imagination and chutzpah they have.
These children are much more inclined to become global citizens than nationalists at that age.
And it's wonderful to see, when you ask them, so many of them want to be poets and writers, and girls are just as confident as boys, if not even more.
But then I would go to high schools, and everything has changed.
Now nobody wants to be a writer anymore, now nobody wants to be a novelist anymore, and girls have become timid, they are cautious, guarded, reluctant to speak up in the public space, because we have taught them -- the family, the school, the society -- we have taught them to erase their individuality.
I think East and West, we are losing multiplicity, both within our societies and within ourselves.
And coming from Turkey, I do know that the loss of diversity is a major, major loss.
Today, my motherland became the world's biggest jailer for journalists, surpassing even China's sad record.
And I also believe that what happened over there in Turkey can happen anywhere.
It can even happen here.
So just like solid countries was an illusion, singular identities is also an illusion, because we all have a multiplicity of voices inside.
The Iranian, the Persian poet, Hafiz, used to say, "You carry in your soul every ingredient necessary to turn your existence into joy.
All you have to do is to mix those ingredients."
And I think mix we can.
I am an Istanbulite, but I'm also attached to the Balkans, the Aegean, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the Levant.
I am a European by birth, by choice, the values that I uphold.
I have become a Londoner over the years.
I would like to think of myself as a global soul, as a world citizen, a nomad and an itinerant storyteller.
I have multiple attachments, just like all of us do.
And multiple attachments mean multiple stories.
As writers, we always chase stories, of course, but I think we are also interested in silences, the things we cannot talk about, political taboos, cultural taboos.
We're also interested in our own silences.
I have always been very vocal about and written extensively about minority rights, women's rights, LGBT rights.
But as I was thinking about this TED Talk, I realized one thing: I have never had the courage to say in a public space that I was bisexual myself, because I so feared the slander and the stigma and the ridicule and the hatred that was sure to follow.
But of course, one should never, ever, remain silent for fear of complexity.
(Applause) And although I am no stranger to anxieties, and although I am talking here about the power of emotions -- I do know the power of emotions -- I have discovered over time that emotions are not limitless.
You know? They have a limit.
There comes a moment -- it's like a tipping point or a threshold -- when you get tired of feeling afraid, when you get tired of feeling anxious.
And I think not only individuals, but perhaps nations, too, have their own tipping points.
So even stronger than my emotions is my awareness that not only gender, not only identity, but life itself is fluid.
They want to divide us into tribes, but we are connected across borders.
They preach certainty, but we know that life has plenty of magic and plenty of ambiguity.
And they like to incite dualities, but we are far more nuanced than that.
So what can we do?
I think we need to go back to the basics, back to the colors of the alphabet.
The Lebanese poet Khalil Gibran used to say, "I learned silence from the talkative and tolerance from the intolerant and kindness from the unkind."
I think it's a great motto for our times.
So from populist demagogues, we will learn the indispensability of democracy.
And from isolationists, we will learn the need for global solidarity.
And from tribalists, we will learn the beauty of cosmopolitanism and the beauty of diversity.
As I finish, I want to leave you with one word, or one taste.
The word "yurt" in Turkish means "motherland."
It means "homeland."
But interestingly, the word also means "a tent used by nomadic tribes."
And I like that combination, because it makes me think homelands do not need to be rooted in one place.
They can be portable.
We can take them with us everywhere.
And I think for writers, for storytellers, at the end of the day, there is one main homeland, and it's called "Storyland."
And the taste of that word is the taste of freedom.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My favorite topic is shortcuts.
The master of shortcuts -- it's, of course, nature.
But I will demonstrate different ways to get rid of difficulties and go to the point, to find an answer probably much quicker than Arthur did. So, first, we violate the common sense, the logic. All of you, if you hold your hand like this, 90 degrees -- all of you. Not you.
All of you, right? Palm up.
If you do this, the common, the logic says you must turn the wrist.
Do you agree?
Good.
But I will first teach you a method, how you can do it without moving the wrist, and then the shortcut.
You can do it immediately, right?
Hold the hand like this, palm up.
Don't move the wrist. The wrist is -- I doesn't speak very many, but I do the best, what I are.
Right-molded you say, with iron?
That was a joke, actually, and I -- OK.
Hold the hand palm up. Do this, don't move the wrist.
Over the heart, don't move the wrist.
Forward, don't move the wrist.
Up, don't move the wrist. Over the heart, don't move the wrist.
And forward. Yeah.
Now -- (Laughter) -- logic, logically, you have got to this position from this, without moving the wrist.
(Laughter) Now, the shortcut.
(Laughter) But it was six moves. Now with one move.
I start here, palm down, you can follow.
And then look at me.
Yeah! (Laughter) One move. OK.
So, that was the warming up.
Now, I need an assistant.
I talked to a nice girl before, Zoe.
She has left. No! A big hand.
(Applause) Good. Nice. And you can sit over there.
One item here was water, right?
And I will give my tribute to water.
I think it's enough with water for me. The other guys can talk about -- cheers.
(Laughter) Beer has about -- there's a lot of water in beer.
(Laughter) So, now I will demonstrate different ways of memorizing, control cards and so on.
And I think I'll take off this one.
I work with a special method to do it, quick.
I work with precision -- oh, sorry -- control and a very powerful ...
memory system, right?
(Laughter) So, if -- I have studied the poker. I like to gamble.
Officially, I don't gamble but ...
So, if we are -- if we have five person, and I will do a five-handed poker game.
Now I will interact. So a different person all the time, so not the same person can answer.
So we have an agreement.
Which one shall have a good poker hand?
Which number? One, two, three, four or five? (Audience: Three.) Lennart Green: Three -- good.
And here, I had a mat here to make it a little -- the critical moment is -- sorry.
If a card shark gathers the cards together, immediately when he -- before he deals the card. Now, so I think, number three, I have arranged them in a full house.
(Laughter) With queens and -- it's OK -- queens and tens.
That's a challenge. I like this.
I will explain later. One, two, three, four, five.
I start with three queens.
So here you see the contrast when I treat the cards.
And two tens.
Yeah. Thank you.
(Applause) But also the other hand is good, if all the other guys have good hands too.
So these guys have actually a stronger hand -- three aces and two kings.
This guy beats them with four of a kind, or deuce -- deuce.
No reaction? That with even -- OK, and this.
These look in order, I'm probably -- hopefully -- yeah. Three, four, five, six, seven and ...
But, of course, I will have the winning hand.
Ten, jack, queen, king, ace.
Yeah. So, good.
(Laughter) So the hand that looks so good from the beginning, number three, at the end was actually the lowest hand.
Such life. Right?
So, please mix them.
Now, if you are interested, I will demonstrate some underground techniques.
Yes?
I work with kind of estimation, shuffle tracking -- ah, good.
Impressive. Thank you.
(Laughter) So, first, the first term is estimation.
Here, I can estimate exactly how many cards are put between my royal flush.
Of course, I can count the cards, but this is much quicker.
Right? You agree.
So here I have, actually -- I know exactly where the cards are.
So here, I can make a bet, and this is actually one of the points where I get my money.
So here: 10, jack, queen, king, ace.
OK.
(Applause) Next is a term -- I do it quick. I call this stealing.
So here, I think I know about where the cards are.
I will spread the cards and you'll say stop, when I point to them, right. Point, say stop.
Zoe: Stop.
LG: Here -- you see some are missing?
And that's the stealing cards, which I did.
(Laughter) OK.
Now, another term called shuffle tracking.
Shuffle tracking means I keep track of the cards, even if another person shuffles.
This is a little risky.
So -- because if you look, now, I can still see it.
You agree? But if you square -- square, and shuffle, and then a cut.
So here, to follow my cards, I must look at the shuffle from the begin -- ah, we are started together. It's OK, it's OK.
Come to -- no, no, no, no.
I'm joking, yeah?
Any style -- yeah, good.
Here I have to calculate, but actually, I don't like to calculate.
I work direct with the right brain.
If you pass the left brain, you have to take care of logic and common sense.
Direct in the right brain, that's much better. And so -- (Laughter) -- Arthur Benjamin did a little of the same thing.
And if you work with, in the right atmosphere, with humor, you have -- that's the password to the cosmic bank of knowledge, where you can find any solution of any problem.
OK. Now, I drop the cards, and you say stop anyway, right?
Not at the last card.
Zoe: Stop. LG: Yeah.
When I'm sober, I do this much quicker, but we will check.
(Laughter) Ah, not in order, it -- that was a mistake.
No, I'm kidding.
(Applause) No, now and then I put in a mistake, just to emphasize how difficult it is.
Right?
Yeah, last night I forgot that. That was a mistake.
But now I'm glad I remember it.
So, this deck is bought here. Sorry.
I have a little pad to make it a little softer.
This deck is bought here in America.
It's called "Bicycle." And this deck is very flexible, but not so many people know, if you check, if you press at the right spots, you see how thin and flexible this deck is, right?
Now, you can carry this in your wallet, so ...
You don't see it, make no reaction?
(Laughter) So, but here, and -- is the camera getting too much? No.
(Laughter) Yeah? (Audience: It's getting too much.) LG: Pardon? But then, when we will have it back, you do this.
But not too much.
Then you have to push it down again.
Here, please. If you push these heaps -- everyone see -- push them together so they are really interlaced, right? Yeah, good.
Perfect.
Just push them through, good. Thank you.
And then, I will demonstrate a thing from Russian satellite, stealen -- stolen, probably copied from America but we will see.
Here -- shortcuts. I talk about shortcuts.
Now I go very quick through the deck and try to find some pattern.
The new chaos theory is already old, right?
But you know, I think you are familiar with fractals -- the Mandelbrot spirals and all these things.
And it's much easier to memorize cards in a pattern way, and not concentrate. If you concentrate and calculate, then you go to -- then it's the left brain. But if you just look and talk in another language ...
Yeah, great.
I think I have it.
So now, different persons, older, tap.
Please name any card, anyone.
(Audience: Jack of spades.) LG: Jack of spades.
Jack of spades.
I think jack of spades is number 12 from the top.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12. Yes, right.
So -- oh, jack of spades.
You said spades? (Audience: Yes.) LG: Ah.
My fault. Don't applaud, this was clubs.
So, jack of spades.
I think ...
23 -- 24, sorry, 24.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 -- ah, 25, yes.
It's the last.
Now, I do it quicker, better.
OK. Another person. Oh, I forgot, I shouldn't shuffle but I think -- (Laughter) -- actually, my technique is to peek, all the time.
When I lift the heap, I peek.
You see, yeah, perfect.
Three, four, five, six. Then I calculate -- yeah, good.
(Laughter) Another person, another card. (Audience: Seven of diamonds.) LG: Seven of diamonds. Perfect, my favorite, yeah, seven.
So I will do it quick, very quick, but in slow motion, so you can follow.
(Laughter) Seven of? (Audience: Diamonds.) LG: Diamonds, good. I start here.
Good, thank you.
(Applause) The thing I did -- I peeked.
I know where the card were, then I chose it. So another person, another card.
(Laughter) Another person.
(Audience: Ten of diamonds.) LG: Pardon?
(Audience: Ten of diamonds.) LG: Ten of diamonds, yeah.
I think I do it the same way. I like to, so I know where it is.
Ten of diamonds.
But now I do it the regular speed, right?
Ten of diamonds.
Good.
Maybe you will cut? Lift.
Excellent.
So, thank you. Another person, another card.
(Audience: Five of clubs.) LG: Pardon? (Audience: Five of clubs.) LG: Five of clubs. It's not the same person, even if it's the same spot.
We can take some over there later. So now, I will drop the cards.
And you'll say stop, anywhere. Got it?
Five of clubs.
Not the last. Yes, that's difficult to find a card here.
(Laughter) We do it again.
The person who said five of clubs say stop, when the cards are in the air, right?
(Audience: Stop.) LG: Very good.
OK.
(Applause) OK, I had to use a little force there.
I think we save five of clubs.
And now a card with a contrast of five of clubs.
(Audience: Queen of hearts.) LG: Queen of hearts, yeah.
Excellent. I love that card.
Here, I will do the most difficult thing.
For example, you are sitting in Las Vegas, and you're betting, and you let the other guys peek this card by mistake. Feel, it's just the regular, one card.
And now, when I lift this card, it shall be your card. What was your card?
(Audience: Queen of hearts.) LG: Queen of? Queen of hearts.
So that's a tough challenge, right?
So here, I grab -- you know this? Five of clubs ...
and queen of hearts. Yes!
This is a tough one, because here I must take advantage of -- I switch it with the five of clubs.
So, now a false count.
Which card shall I use? Queen or five?
Zoe: The queen. LG: Queen, yes.
So, I use the queen, and here's five of clubs.
The false count -- and the number one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight -- you say the same card all the time.
Eight, nine, 10.
This is a kind of optical deal, right?
When I put one card at a table -- look, it's not one card. It's -- look, it's a bunch of cards that gives this impression.
Yeah.
Now some hard stuff.
I think we keep the queen here, yes.
Now, to the satellites things.
This -- oh sorry, don't look at the beam. My fault.
(Laughter) This is high-frequency laser, and it's enough with a fraction of a second to destroy the retina completely.
Right, sorry, my -- I should have mentioned that, yeah.
But you can relax, because it takes half an hour before it works, so you have plenty of time to see my whole performance.
(Laughter) Now, I put the laser here, and -- now, when I deal the cards in the laser, I know where they are but -- yes?
Did the camera got it?
No?
They didn't?
What happened?
(Audience: It disappeared.) LG: OK, I'll take another group.
Do the cameras see the cards now?
No? (Audience: No, they're all gone.) LG: But you see the hand.
Ah, good, good, good. But now.
So now, that was the reason, right?
You see the cards? Yes.
(Laughter) Yeah, good.
Now -- (Laughter) -- one guy laughed. So now, to find the queen, do it this way: take back the other one, take back the queen.
(Laughter) Yeah, interesting, but a little dangerous.
(Laughter) I liked it. Now, a little more difficult.
Name -- anyone, name, please, any suit.
(Audience: Spades.) LG: Spades? Spades, good.
So here, here I have to peek, lots of cards.
I think there are lots of -- I don't know how many -- but 10, 15 spades in a deck, at least, right?
(Laughter) So every time I lift the heap, I peek, right.
Then I arrange them so I can get them quick.
Perfect, excellent.
So I start with the ace -- yeah, ace. Ah, yeah -- spades?
Same mistake as before, right?
So -- I arrange the spades -- the clubs.
I try to do this right here. First, I take the spades.
You see, I don't work with prestige, so always do mistakes.
It doesn't matter to me.
And now and then, I get some extra sympathy points, right?
One, two, three, four -- yes, the camera got it? Five, six, seven, eight -- ah -- nine, 10, the jack, jack of spades, queen of -- I like that laugh, yeah! Good. Queen.
(Laughter) Wait, wait, wait -- please take any card.
Grab any one. Quick, quick, good.
And we switch this to the king.
Ace of diamonds.
And now, look, ace of diamonds will guide.
So I find ...
king of spades.
There was the place. And here is king of spades, correct?
Yeah? OK.
(Applause) Now, a little more difficult thing.
Maybe you think I have the cards in order already, so you help me to shuffle again.
Another suit, please.
(Audience: Armani.) LG: Pardon? (Audience: Armani.) (Laughter) LG: It was after the blindfold.
I like this guy, yeah.
OK. That should be my end effect, but OK.
Armani -- who said Armani? You?
I drop the cards and you -- which size?
Which size? It's a piece of cake. I like challenges.
Which size?
(Audience: Extra large.) LG: Extra large, OK.
Say stop. (Audience: Stop.) (Laughter) LG: Yeah, Armani. OK.
(Applause) Ah, this is tough.
OK, a suit. I had clubs before, spades.
Another suit. (Audience: Diamonds.) LG: Diamonds, perfect.
So, in this case, I try to locate diamonds. I look at the cards, and OK.
We try. Yeah. You help me.
If I drop the card face up, like this, you reverse it. Zoe: OK.
LG: OK, now.
Do with both hands, and quick. Yes, good, good.
(Laughter) I think we have it now. Yeah, good, good.
So here, diamonds, hearts -- no, diamonds. Good, good.
Stop. Do you see the pattern?
No? Now?
Yes, yes, OK.
I work with pattern.
Oh sorry, I dropped one.
Maybe it's important -- yeah -- nine of diamonds, OK.
So now -- I always ask, why do I put myself in this position?
I have to figure out so many outs, when I miss some cards, but I love it. So now, I will do it. I will try to find the diamonds, but I will do it the hard way.
It's too easy to do it right away, right?
I think I will do it ...
blindfolded.
At this distance, it works immediately.
Aargh!
(Laughter) Duct tape.
I look -- shake the cards, so I don't.
Go ahead. Yeah, good. I like the empathy.
Empathy.
But it was -- did you hear?
It was women's voice. Hear the guy -- yeah, more, more, more.
(Laughter) Yeah, good. Yeah.
You can take the nostril too, because some guys think -- (Laughter) -- some guys think I can peek through the nostril, so do more. Go, go.
Right? Good.
Satisfied?
Looks good, like Batman. Ow!
(Laughter) No, with dignity and elegance, right?
But I like her, yeah. I said, be a little tough.
And it was OK. One more?
The last.
OK.
All right.
Now you must agree that I'm -- I must rely on other senses, right?
I work with vibration.
So, what was the card?
Diamonds. Ah, I memorized hearts.
So now I have to improvise again.
Maybe I'll stand up. Half.
Diamonds -- I'll start with ace of diamonds.
Just kidding, warming up -- king of hearts.
(Laughter) And I give you a diamonds, so they -- so you put them here, in a nice row, right. And you can see, yeah? Good.
Ace of diamonds, yes? Zoe: Yeah.
LG: Good. Good. Two -- (Applause) -- thank you.
I never ever miss two. This is interesting.
Always I've found two, but the wrong color. Spades, sorry.
And the deck is a gift to you after, so let the skepticals here, in this, examine them, right? Remind me. It's a gift.
Two -- and it was two of spades, right?
Sorry, two of diamonds. I'll do it quick now.
Three -- three of diamonds. Yes!
Four -- I like challenges, yes.
Yeah, good.
Chris Anderson: You're peeking.
LG: Pardon?
CA: You're peeking. You just got to -- this is a request from the lady in the back.
(Laughter) Okay.
Try that.
LG: Yeah. Also listen.
OK, now.
This is maybe a little tough.
We will try.
Yes? Good?
(Laughter) OK. So, how many cards? Five? Zoe: Four.
LG: Four. Is five the next card?
Zoe: Five of diamonds, yeah.
LG: It's not here? Zoe: It's not there.
LG: Oh.
So here, all the cards are face down -- you agree? (Audience: Yes.) LG: Yes? You see that in the screen?
And this is face up, and it's not at the bottom here.
So next card will be -- was it five?
Zoe: Five. LG: Yeah -- I will reverse it face up here.
Yes? Zoe: Yeah.
LG: Six -- six with the thumb.
Seven.
Yeah, I do this. I know where it is, because I peeked before and then I do this.
Right?
Eight.
If -- and then nine, right?
Yeah.
Yesterday -- the day before yesterday, I was in Vegas, and I used this actually.
Nine? Yeah? Correct?
No? Yes! Ah, good, good.
Ten -- once again, I love this Jonny Wayne move.
Yeah. Jack -- you [unclear] with Jack?
Jack of diamonds, correct? (Audience: No.) LG: Yes?
And queen! Queen, with misdirection.
Misdirection. (Applause) Yeah?
And then, king, after exactly five seconds.
Yeah. Five. Five seconds.
One, two, three, four -- mmm!
Check it.
Yes?
CA: King of diamonds. LG: Ah!
Good. Oh.
Touch me, feel -- ah, ah, you know!
CA: Ladies and gentlemen, Lennart Green! LG: Okay, thank you.
Dogs have interests.
They have interest sniffing each other, chasing squirrels.
And if we don't make that a reward in training, that will be a distraction.
It's always sort of struck me as really a scary thought that if you see a dog in a park, and the owner is calling it, and the owner says, you know, "Puppy, come here, come here," and the dog thinks, "Hmm, interesting.
I'm sniffing this other dog's rear end, the owner's calling."
It's a difficult choice, right?
Rear end, owner. Rear end wins.
I mean, you lose.
You cannot compete with the environment, if you have an adolescent dog's brain.
So, when we train, we're always trying to take into account the dog's point of view.
Now, I'm here largely because there's kind of a rift in dog training at the moment that -- on one side, we have people who think that you train a dog, number one, by making up rules, human rules.
We don't take the dog's point of view into account.
So the human says, "You're going to act this way, damn it.
We're going to force you to act against your will, to bend to our will."
Then, number two, we keep these rules a secret from the dog.
And then number three, now we can punish the dog for breaking rules he didn't even know existed.
So you get a little puppy, he comes. His only crime is he grew.
When he was a little puppy, he puts his paws on your leg -- you know, isn't that nice?
And you go, "Oh, there's a good boy."
You bend down, you pat him -- you reward him for jumping up.
His one mistake is he's a Tibetan mastiff, and a few months later, he weighs, you know, 80 pounds.
Every time he jumps up, he gets all sorts of abuse.
I mean, it is really very, very scary the abuse that dogs get.
So, this whole dominance issue -- number one, what we get in dog training is this Mickey-Mouse interpretation of a very complicated social system.
And they take this stuff seriously.
Male dogs are very serious about a hierarchy, because it prevents physical fights.
Of course, female dogs, bitches, on the other hand, have several bitch amendments to male hierarchical rule.
The number one is, "I have it, you don't."
And what you will find is a very, very low-ranking bitch will quite easily keep a bone away from a high-ranking male.
So, we get in dog training this notion of dominances, or of the alpha dog. I'm sure that you've heard this.
Dogs get so abused.
Dogs, horses and humans -- these are the three species which are so abused in life.
And the reason is built into their behavior -- is to always come back and apologize.
Like, "Oh, I'm sorry you had to beat me. I'm really sorry, yes, it's my fault."
They are just so beatable, and that's why they get beaten.
The poor puppy jumps up, you open the dog book, what does it say?
"Hold his front paws, squeeze his front paws, stamp on his hind feet, squirt him in the face with lemon juice, hit him on the head with a rolled-up newspaper, knee him in the chest, flip him over backwards."
Because he grew?
And because he's performing a behavior you've trained him to do?
This is insanity.
I ask owners, "Well, how would you like the dog to greet you?"
And people say, "Well, I don't know, to sit, I guess."
I said, "Let's teach him to sit."
And then we give him a reason for sitting.
Because the first stage is basically teaching a dog ESL.
I could speak to you and say, "Laytay-chai, paisey, paisey."
Go on, something should happen now.
Why aren't you responding? Oh, you don't speak Swahili.
Well, I've got news for you.
The dog doesn't speak English, or American, or Spanish, or French.
So the first stage in training is to teach the dog ESL, English as a second language.
And that's how we use the food lure in the hand, and we use food because we're dealing with owners.
My wife doesn't need food -- she's a great trainer, much better than I am.
I don't need food, but the average owner says, "Puppy, sit."
Or they go, "Sit, sit, sit."
They're making a hand signal in front of the dog's rectum for some reason, like the dog has a third eye there -- it's insane.
You know, "Sit, sit."
No, we go, "Puppy, sit" -- boom, it's got it in six to 10 trials.
Then we phase out the food as a lure, and now the dog knows that "sit" means sit, and you can actually communicate to a dog in a perfectly constructed English sentence.
"Phoenix, come here, take this, and go to Jamie, please."
And I've taught her "Phoenix," "come here," "take this," "go to" and the name of my son, "Jamie."
And the dog can take a note, and I've got my own little search-and-rescue dog.
He'll find Jamie wherever he is, you know, wherever kids are, crushing rocks by a stream or something, and take him a little message that says, "Hey, dinner's ready. Come in for dinner."
So, at this point, the dog knows what we want it to do.
Will it do it?
Not necessarily, no.
As I said, if he's in the park and there's a rear end to sniff, why come to the owner?
The dog lives with you, the dog can get you any time.
The dog can sniff your butt, if you like, when he wants to.
At the moment, he's in the park, and you are competing with smells, and other dogs, and squirrels.
So the second stage in training is to teach the dog to want to do what we want him to do, and this is very easy.
We use the Premack principle.
Basically, we follow a low-frequency behavior -- one the dog doesn't want to do -- by a high-frequency behavior, commonly known as a behavior problem, or a dog hobby -- something the dog does like to do.
That will then become a reward for the lower-frequency behavior.
So we go, "sit," on the couch; "sit," tummy-rub; "sit," look, I throw a tennis ball; "sit," say hello to that other dog.
Yes, we put "sniff butt" on queue.
"Sit," sniff butt.
So now all of these distractions that worked against training now become rewards that work for training.
And what we're doing, in essence, is we're teaching the dog, kind of like -- we're letting the dog think that the dog is training us.
And I can imagine this dog, you know, speaking through the fence to, say, an Akita, saying, "Wow, my owners, they are so incredibly easy to train.
They're like Golden Retrievers.
All I have to do is sit, and they do everything.
They open doors, they drive my car, they massage me, they will throw tennis balls, they will cook for me and serve the food.
It's like, if I just sit, that's my command.
Then I have my own personal doorman, chauffeur, masseuse, chef and waiter."
And now the dog's really happy.
And this, to me, is always what training is.
So we really motivate the dog to want to do it, such that the need for punishment seldom comes up.
Now we move to phase three, when now -- there's times, you know, when daddy knows best.
And I have a little sign on my fridge, and it says, "Because I'm the daddy, that's why."
Sorry, no more explanation. "I'm the daddy, you're not. Sit."
And there's times, for example, if my son's friends leave the door open, the dogs have to know you don't step across this line.
This is a life-or-death thing.
You leave this, the sanctity of your house, and you could be hit on the street.
So some things we have to let the dog know, "You mustn't do this."
And so we have to enforce, but without force.
People here get very confused about what a punishment is.
They think a punishment is something nasty.
I bet a lot of you do, right?
You think it's something painful, or scary, or nasty.
It doesn't have to be.
There's several definitions of what a punishment is, but one definition, the most popular, is: a punishment is a stimulus that reduces the immediately preceding behavior, such that it's less likely to occur in the future.
It does not have to be nasty, scary or painful.
And I would say, if it doesn't have to be, then maybe it shouldn't be.
I was working with a very dangerous dog about a year ago.
And this was a dog that put both his owners in hospital, plus the brother-in-law, plus the child.
And I only agreed to work with it if they promised it would stay in their house, and they never took it outside.
The dog is actually euthanized now, but this was a dog I worked with for a while.
A lot of the aggression happened around the kitchen, so while I was there -- this was on the fourth visit -- we did a four and a half hour down-stay, with the dog on his mat.
And he was kept there by the owner's calm insistence.
When the dog would try to leave the mat, she would say, "Rover, on the mat, on the mat, on the mat."
The dog broke his down-stay 22 times in four and a half hours, while she cooked dinner, because we had a lot of aggression related towards food.
The breaks got fewer and fewer.
You see, the punishment was working.
The behavior problem was going away.
She never raised her voice.
If she did, she would have got bitten.
It's not a good dog you shout at.
And a lot of my friends train really neat animals, grizzly bears -- if you've ever seen a grizzly bear on the telly or in film, then it's a friend of mine who's trained it -- killer whales. I love it because it wires you up.
How are you going to reprimand a grizzly bear?
"Bad bear, bad bear!" Voom!
Your head now is 100 yards away, sailing through the air, OK?
This is crazy.
So, where do we go from here?
We want a better way.
Dogs deserve better.
But for me, the reason for this actually has to do with dogs.
It has to do with watching people train puppies, and realizing they have horrendous interaction skills, horrendous relationship skills.
Not just with their puppy, but with the rest of the family at class.
I mean, my all-time classic is another "come here" one.
You see someone in the park -- and I'll cover my mic when I say this, because I don't want to wake you up -- and there's the owner in the park, and their dog's over here, and they say, "Rover, come here.
Rover, come here. Rover, come here, you son of a bitch."
The dog says, "I don't think so."
(Laughter) I mean, who in their right mind would think that a dog would want to approach them when they're screaming like that?
Instead, the dog says, "I know that tone. I know that tone.
Previously, when I've approached, I've gotten punished there."
I was walking onto a plane -- this, for me, was a pivotal moment in my career, and it really cemented what I wanted to do with this whole puppy-training thing, the notion of how to teach puppies in a dog-friendly way to want to do what we want to do, so we don't have to force them.
You know, I puppy-train my child.
And the seminal moment was, I was getting on a plane in Dallas, and in row two was a father, I presume, and a young boy about five, kicking the back of the chair.
"Johnny, don't do that."
Kick, kick, kick.
"Johnny, don't do that." Kick, kick, kick.
I'm standing right here with my bag.
The father leans over, grabs him like this and gives him ugly face.
And ugly face is this -- when you go face-to-face with a puppy or a child, you say, "What are you doing! Now stop it, stop it, stop it!"
And I went, "Oh my God, do I do something?"
That child has lost everything -- that one of the two people he can trust in this world has absolutely pulled the rug from under his feet.
And I thought, "Do I tell this jerk to quit it?"
I thought, "Ian, stay out of it, stay out of it, you know, walk on."
I walked to the back of the plane, I sat down, and a thought came to me.
If that had been a dog, I would have laid him out.
(Laughter) If he had kicked a dog, I would have punched him out.
He kicked a child, grabs the child like this and I let it go.
And this is what it's all about.
These relationship skills are so easy.
I mean, we as humans, our shallowness when we choose a life-mate based on the three Cs -- coat color, conformation, cuteness.
You know, kind of like a little robot.
This is how we go into a relationship, and it's hunky-dory for a year.
And then, a little behavior problem comes up.
No different from the dog barking.
The husband won't clear up his clothes, or the wife's always late for meetings, whatever it is, OK?
And it then starts, and we get into this thing, and our personal feedback -- there's two things about it.
When you watch people interacting with animals or other people, there is very little feedback, it's too infrequent.
And when it happens, it's bad, it's nasty.
You see it's especially in families, especially with spouses, especially with children, especially with parents.
You see it especially in the workplace, especially from boss to employee.
It's as if there's some schadenfreude there, that we actually take delight in people getting things wrong, so that we can then moan and groan and bitch at them.
And this, I would say, is the biggest human foible that we have.
It really is.
We take the good for granted, and we moan and groan at the bad.
And I think this whole notion of these skills should be taught.
You know, calculus is wonderful.
When I was a kid, I was a calculus whiz.
I don't understand a thing about it now, but I could do it as a kid.
Geometry, fantastic. You know, quantum mechanics -- these are cool things.
But they don't save marriages and they don't raise children.
And my look to the future is, and what I want to do with this doggy stuff, is to teach people that you know, your husband's just as easy to train.
Probably easier -- if you got a Rottie -- much easier to train.
Your kids are easy to train.
All you've got to do is to watch them, to time-sample the behavior, and say, every five minutes, you ask the question, "Is it good, or is it bad?"
If it's good, say, "That was really neat, thank you."
That is such a powerful training technique.
This should be taught in schools.
Relationships -- how do you negotiate?
How you do negotiate with your friend who wants your toy?
You know, how to prepare you for your first relationship?
How on earth about raising children?
We think how we do it -- one night in bed, we're pregnant, and then we're raising the most important thing in life, a child.
No, this is what should be taught -- the good living, the good habits, which are just as hard to break as bad habits.
So, that would be my wish to the future.
Ah, damn, I wanted to end exactly on time, but I got eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two -- so thank you very much. That's my talk, thank you.
(Applause)
Ninety-nine percent of us have the dream of listeners.
Not being the musicians -- the listeners, right?
And we crave one thing, even though we kind of don't know it all the time.
We crave to be in the room with the musician the day it was recorded, the day it was played.
And we go to live concerts, and we get that as much as we can.
But then we listen to the other 99 percent of our stuff recorded.
And it turns out the further back you go in history, the little rougher it sounds.
And so we said, there's a solution to this.
Let's separate the performance, as a thing, out from the recording, which was how it was made.
You know, the thing with microphones in the room and all that day.
But the performance itself was how the musicians worked their fingers, and what instruments they were using.
And it's the data hidden inside the recording.
In order to do this, it's a lot of hardware and software that runs in a very high resolution.
And Yamaha makes an incredible thing called the Disklavier Pro that looks like a nice grand piano there.
And you probably didn't realize it's going to do all these things -- but full of solenoids, and fiber optics, and computers and all this kind of stuff. The highest resolution out of Japan.
And this just didn't work until we could cross this line that says high-definition.
And we were able to cross this line, called the uncanny valley, in terms of -- artificial intelligence terms.
We have a process where we, you know, kind of put it into the computer and digitize it, and then a whole lot of analysis.
And we look at every single note, and all the attributes of those notes: how hard they were struck, and how they were held down, and how you move the fingers.
So we had to develop a whole new science of how you move your fingers.
And, you know, it's a thing your piano teacher teaches you, but we never had a science behind these kinds of things.
I'm going to start with Glenn Gould.
He died 25 years ago this year, and was born 75 years ago this year.
Was a beloved pianist, maybe the great cult pianist of the twentieth century.
He just got tired of being in front of an audience, and felt like -- a performing monkey was, in fact, his term.
So he stepped back, and did nothing but the crafting of his work.
And Gould's specialty was playing Bach.
His maybe most famous recording was something called "The Goldberg Variations."
Bach only wrote themes and variations one time.
He wrote some early pieces, but late in his life, in his mature period, he said, "Here's a theme -- 30 variations."
In fact, the theme isn't even the melody, it's the bass line.
And Gould recorded it in two major recordings that you may know about, one in mono, and one in stereo.
And the one in mono, by the way, he used the pedal, and as he got older, he said, "No, no, wait a minute.
I'm going to get very scientific about this, and not use the pedal."
What I'd like you to hear live is the 1955 version, and we'll play the first couple pieces of it.
Glenn Gould, 1955.
(Music) How about that?
(Applause) So let me tell you a little bit how this was done.
First of all, let me get you to the end step.
This is -- we have a fairly complex process that, you know, software and musicians and so on, but when we're all done, we know that the ear is the final arbiter.
We can play the original in one ear, and a new recording in the other.
So I'm going to do this for you right now, what you just heard.
And in the right speaker is going to be the original recording, and the left speaker is going to be the new recording, actually of an instrument just like that one, and I'm going to play them together at the same time.
(Music) That's the original. [Unclear] That's the two together.
(Music) Before "Jurassic Park," there was no science for how skin hung off of muscle, right?
So, in the video world, we've been able to invent, in our lifetimes, natural behavior.
And this is kind of another example of putting a science behind natural behavior.
And then you heard the original.
Ultimately, I started with the experience.
And the experience is: I want to be in the room and hear the musicians.
Lots of you can afford to buy one of these.
But, if not, there is now high-definition surround sound.
And I got to tell you, if you haven't heard high-definition surround, go down to your audio dealer, your audiophile dealer.
It's so involving compared to regular stereo.
But if you don't have that, maybe you can listen on your headphones.
And so on the same disk we have five recordings -- Sony has five recordings.
And you could listen in headphones with this thing called binaural recording.
And it's a dummy head that sits in front of the instrument, and it's got microphones where the ears are.
And when you put on headphones, and you listen to this, you're inside of Glenn Gould's body.
And it is a chuckle until, you know, the musicians, who are musicians who play the piano, listen to this, say, "I can't believe it! It's just what it's like to play the piano."
Except now you're inside Glenn Gould's body playing the piano, and it feels like your fingers are making the decisions and moving through the whole process.
It's a game changer.
Here's now something we know in spectacular quality.
The whole process is very sensitive to temperature and humidity.
What you heard today was not perfect.
It's an amalgam of wood, and cast iron, and felt, and steel strings, and all these, and they're all amazingly sensitive to temperature and humidity.
So when you go into the recording session, you get to stop after every piece and rebuild the piano if you need to.
There's the whole action there, sitting, kind of, on the side, and the dummy head and our recording engineers standing around while we rebuild the piano.
Without putting dates next to these things, step-by-step music will be turned into data, like every field that's occurred in the past 35 or 40 years.
Audio has come very late to this game -- I'm not talking about digitizing, and bits, and re-mastering.
I'm talking about turn it into the data that it was made from, which is how it was performed.
And audio came very late because our ears are so hard to fool -- they're high-resolution, and they're wired straight to our emotions, and you can't trick them very easily.
Your eyes are pretty happy with some color and movement, you know.
All right, there's this episode of "Star Trek."
(Laughter) I get it -- it was all just laid in for me yesterday there.
The episode of "Star Trek" for me was James Daly played Methuselah -- remember this one?
And at some point he's dancing with his -- and I won't ruin the episode for you, from 1967.
Right, do you know where I'm going?
And Nimoy, I'm sorry, Spock sits down at the piano, and he starts playing this Brahms waltz, and they all dance to it.
And then Spock turns round, he goes, "James, I know all of the Brahms waltzes, and I don't believe this is one of them in the category."
That's where I'm at.
I want to hear the waltzes Brahms didn't write.
I want to hear the pieces that Horowitz didn't play.
But I believe we're on a path now, when we get to data, that we can distill styles, and templates, and formulas, and all these kinds of things, again, that you've seen happen in the computer graphics world.
It's now coming in this world.
The transition will be this one.
It says right now, we think music is notes and how they're played.
And I believe this is coming.
Because what you've just heard was a computer playing data -- no Glenn Gould in the room.
But yet, it was human.
And I believe you'll get to the next step, the real dream of listeners.
Every time you listen to a recording today, every time you take out your iPod and whatever, every time you listen to it, it's the same thing -- it's frozen.
Wouldn't it be cool if every time you listened, it could be different?
This morning, you're sadder, you want to hear your song, the same song, played sadder than you did yesterday.
You want to hear it played by different musicians.
You want to hear it in different rooms and whatever.
We've seen all these "Star Treks," and they're all holodeck episodes as well.
Every time I listen to that, I get goose bumps.
It's so amazing, it's so exciting.
Every time I listen to that recording it's like, "Oh my God, I can't believe I'm in the same room. I can't believe this is happening."
It's a way better experience than whatever you're used to listening to, in whatever form.
And lastly, I will wrap up with one minute of Art Tatum.
So I've really overshot my budget here.
We made a new recording of him playing in the Shrine Auditorium in September.
It was a concert he recorded in the Shrine Auditorium in 1949.
And I've got to tell you, we have this lab where we build and measure everything, back in Raleigh, North Carolina, and we flew out to Los Angeles.
And as the president of the company, I didn't feel real comfortable about where we were.
That's a real uncomfortable feeling, when all the equipment's come out and a whole Sony team, and people are going to be sitting there in the audience.
And we put the piano on the sweet spot of the stage in the Shrine, which has not changed since 1949, still seats 6,000 people.
And on the sweet spot on the stage, Tatum starts playing ...
and every note, every beat, every slur, every accent, every pedal was perfect, because he played it for that room on that day.
And we captured all that data all over again.
And I want you to hear that right now.
And fortunately, it's right in here.
This is an encore he used to do.
It's one minute long.
It's an Irish jig, and I want you to hear his humor.
(Music) (Applause) And that's just what the live audience did.
(Applause) So thank you very much, Michael, thank you for the opportunity.
I get asked a lot what the difference between my work is and typical Pentagon long-range strategic planners.
And the answer I like to offer is what they typically do is they think about the future of wars in the context of war.
And what I've spent 15 years doing in this business -- and it's taken me almost 14 to figure it out -- is I think about the future of wars in the context of everything else.
So I tend to specialize on the scene between war and peace.
The material I'm going to show you is one idea from a book with a lot of ideas.
It's the one that takes me around the world right now interacting with foreign militaries quite a bit.
The material was generated in two years of work I did for the Secretary of Defense, thinking about a new national grand strategy for the United States.
I'm going to present a problem and try to give you an answer.
Here's my favorite bonehead concept from the 1990s in the Pentagon: the theory of anti-access, area-denial asymmetrical strategies.
Why do we call it that?
Because it's got all those A's lined up I guess.
This is gobbledygook for if the United States fights somebody we're going to be huge.
They're going to be small.
And if they try to fight us in the traditional, straight-up manner we're going to kick their ass, which is why people don't try to do that any more.
I met the last Air Force General who had actually shot down an enemy plane in combat.
He's now a one star General.
That's how distant we are from even meeting an air force willing to fly against ours.
So that overmatched capability creates problems -- catastrophic successes the White House calls them.
(Laughter) And we're trying to figure that out, because it is an amazing capability.
The question is, what's the good you can do with it?
OK?
The theory of anti-access, area-denial asymmetrical strategies -- gobbledygook that we sell to Congress, because if we just told them we can kick anybody's asses they wouldn't buy us all the stuff we want.
So we say, area-denial, anti-access asymmetrical strategies and their eyes glaze over.
(Laughter) And they say, "Will you build it in my district?"
(Laughter) (Applause) Here's my parody and it ain't much of one.
Let's talk about a battle space.
I don't know, Taiwan Straits 2025.
Let's talk about an enemy embedded within that battle space.
I don't know, the Million Man Swim.
(Laughter) The United States has to access that battle space instantaneously.
They throw up anti-access, area-denial asymmetrical strategies.
A banana peel on the tarmac.
(Laughter) Trojan horses on our computer networks reveal all our Achilles' heels instantly.
We say, "China, it's yours."
Prometheus approach, largely a geographic definition, focuses almost exclusively on the start of conflict.
We field the first-half team in a league that insists on keeping score until the end of the game.
That's the problem.
We can run the score up against anybody, and then get our asses kicked in the second half -- what they call fourth generation warfare.
Here's the way I like to describe it instead.
There is no battle space the U.S. Military cannot access.
They said we couldn't do Afghanistan. We did it with ease.
They said we couldn't do Iraq.
We did it with 150 combat casualties in six weeks.
We did it so fast we weren't prepared for their collapse.
There is nobody we can't take down.
The question is, what do you do with the power?
So there's no trouble accessing battle spaces.
What we have trouble accessing is the transition space that must naturally follow, and creating the peace space that allows us to move on.
Problem is, the Defense Department over here beats the hell out of you.
The State Department over here says, "Come on boy, I know you can make it."
And that poor country runs off that ledge, does that cartoon thing and then drops.
(Laughter) This is not about overwhelming force, but proportional force.
It's about non-lethal technologies, because if you fire real ammo into a crowd of women and children rioting you're going to lose friends very quickly.
This is not about projecting power, but about staying power, which is about legitimacy with the locals.
Who do you access in this transition space?
You have to create internal partners. You have to access coalition partners.
We asked the Indians for 17,000 peace keepers.
I know their senior leadership, they wanted to give it to us.
But they said to us, "You know what?
In that transition space you're mostly hat not enough cattle.
We don't think you can pull it off, we're not going to give you our 17,000 peace keepers for fodder."
We asked the Russians for 40,000.
They said no.
I was in China in August, I said, "You should have 50,000 peace keepers in Iraq.
It's your oil, not ours."
Which is the truth. It's their oil.
And the Chinese said to me, "Dr. Barnett, you're absolutely right.
In a perfect world we'd have 50,000 there.
But it's not a perfect world, and your administration isn't getting us any closer."
But we have trouble accessing our outcomes.
We lucked out, frankly, on the selection.
We face different opponents across these three.
And it's time to start admitting you can't ask the same 19-year-old to do it all, day in and day out.
It's just too damn hard.
We have an unparalleled capacity to wage war.
We don't do the everything else so well.
Frankly, we do it better than anybody and we still suck at it.
We have a brilliant Secretary of War.
We don't have a Secretary of Everything Else.
Because if we did, that guy would be in front of the Senate, still testifying over Abu Ghraib.
The problem is he doesn't exist.
There is no Secretary of Everything Else.
I think we have an unparalleled capacity to wage war.
I call that the Leviathan Force.
What we need to build is a force for the Everything Else.
I call them the System Administrators.
What I think this really represents is lack of an A to Z rule set for the world as a whole for processing politically bankrupt states.
We have one for processing economically bankrupt states.
It's the IMF Sovereign Bankruptcy Plan, OK?
We argue about it every time we use it.
Argentina just went through it, broke a lot of rules.
They got out on the far end, we said, "Fine, don't worry about it."
It's transparent. A certain amount of certainty gives the sense of a non-zero outcome.
We don't have one for processing politically bankrupt states that, frankly, everybody wants gone.
Like Saddam, like Mugabe, like Kim Jong-Il -- people who kill in hundreds of thousands or millions.
Like the 250,000 dead so far in Sudan.
What would an A to Z system look like?
I'm going to distinguish between what I call front half and back half.
And let's call this red line, I don't know, mission accomplished.
(Laughter) (Applause) What we have extant right now, at the beginning of this system, is the U.N. Security Council as a grand jury.
What can they do?
They can indict your ass.
They can debate it. They can write it on a piece of paper.
They can put it in an envelope and mail it to you, and then say in no uncertain terms, "Please cut that out."
(Laughter) That gets you about four million dead in Central Africa over the 1990s.
That gets you 250,000 dead in the Sudan in the last 15 months.
Everybody's got to answer their grandchildren some day what you did about the holocaust in Africa, and you better have an answer.
We don't have anything to translate that will into action.
What we do have is the U.S.-enabled Leviathan Force that says, "You want me to take that guy down? I'll take that guy down.
I'll do it on Tuesday. It will cost you 20 billion dollars."
(Laughter) But here's the deal.
As soon as I can't find anybody else to air out, I leave the scene immediately.
That's called the Powell Doctrine.
Way downstream we have the International Criminal Court.
They love to put them on trial. They've got Milosević right now.
What are we missing?
A functioning executive that will translate will into action, because we don't have it.
Every time we lead one of these efforts we have to whip ourselves into this imminent threat thing.
We haven't faced an imminent threat since the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
But we use this language from a bygone era to scare ourselves into doing something because we're a democracy and that's what it takes.
And if that doesn't work we scream, "He's got a gun!"
just as we rush in.
(Laughter) And then we look over the body and we find an old cigarette lighter and we say, "Jesus, it was dark."
(Laughter) Do you want to do it, France?
France says, "No, but I do like to criticize you after the fact."
What we need downstream is a great power enabled -- what I call that Sys Admin Force.
We should have had 250,000 troops streaming into Iraq on the heels of that Leviathan sweeping towards Baghdad.
What do you get then?
No looting, no military disappearing, no arms disappearing, no ammo disappearing, no Muqtada Al-Sadr -- I'm wrecking his bones -- no insurgency.
Talk to anybody who was over there in the first six months.
We had six months to feel the lob, to get the job done, and we dicked around for six months.
And then they turned on us.
Why? Because they just got fed up.
They saw what we did to Saddam.
They said, "You're that powerful, you can resurrect this country.
You're America."
What we need is an international reconstruction fund -- Sebastian Mallaby, Washington Post, great idea.
Model on the IMF.
Instead of passing the hat each time, OK?
Where are we going to find this guy? G20, that's easy.
Check out their agenda since 9/11.
All security dominated.
They're going to decide up front how the money gets spent just like in the IMF.
You vote according to how much money you put in the kitty.
Here's my challenge to the Defense Department.
You've got to build this force. You've got to seed this force.
You've got to track coalition partners. Create a record of success.
You will get this model.
You tell me it's too hard to do.
I'll walk this dog right through that six part series on the Balkans.
We did it just like that.
I'm talking about regularizing it, making it transparent.
Would you like Mugabe gone?
Would you like Kim Jong-Il, who's killed about two million people, would you like him gone?
Would you like a better system?
This is why it matters to the military.
They've been experiencing an identity crisis since the end of the Cold War.
I'm not talking about the difference between reality and desire, which I can do because I'm not inside the beltway.
(Laughter) I'm talking about the 1990s.
The Berlin Wall falls. We do Desert Storm.
The split starts to emerge between those in the military who see a future they can live with, and those who see a future that starts to scare them, like the U.S. submarine community, which watches the Soviet Navy disappear overnight.
Ah!
(Laughter) So they start moving from reality towards desire and they create their own special language to describe their voyage of self-discovery and self-actualization.
(Laughter) The problem is you need a big, sexy opponent to fight against.
And if you can't find one you've got to make one up.
China, all grown up, going to be a looker!
(Laughter) The rest of the military got dragged down into the muck across the 1990s and they developed this very derisive term to describe it: military operations other than war.
I ask you, who joins the military to do things other than war?
Actually, most of them.
Jessica Lynch never planned on shooting back.
Most of them don't pick up a rifle.
I maintain this is code inside the Army for, "We don't want to do this."
They spent the 1990s working the messy scene between globalized parts of the world What I call the core and the gap.
The Clinton administration wasn't interested in running this.
For eight years, after screwing up the relationship on day one -- inauguration day with gays in the military -- which was deft.
(Laughter) So we were home alone for eight years.
And what did we do home alone?
We bought one military and we operated another.
It's like the guy who goes to the doctor and says, "Doctor, it hurts when I do this."
(Laughter) The doctor says, "Stop doing that you idiot."
I used to give this brief inside the Pentagon in the early 1990s.
I'd say, "You're buying one military and you're operating another, and eventually it's going to hurt. It's wrong.
Bad Pentagon, bad!"
(Laughter) And they'd say, "Dr. Barnett, you are so right.
Can you come back next year and remind us again?"
(Laughter) Some people say 9/11 heals the rift -- jerks the long-term transformation gurus out of their 30,000 foot view of history, drags them down in to the muck and says, "You want a networked opponent?
I've got one, he's everywhere, go find him."
It elevates MOOTW -- how we pronounce that acronym -- from crap to grand strategy, because that's how you're going to shrink that gap.
Some people put these two things together and they call it empire, which I think is a boneheaded concept.
Empire is about the enforcement of not just minimal rule sets, which you cannot do, but maximum rule sets which you must do.
It's not our system of governance.
Never how we've sought to interact with the outside world.
I prefer that phrase System Administration.
We enforce the minimal rule sets for maintaining connectivity to the global economy.
Certain bad things you cannot do.
How this impacts the way we think about the future of war.
This is a concept which gets me vilified throughout the Pentagon.
It makes me very popular as well.
Everybody's got an opinion.
Going back to the beginning of our country -- historically, defenses meant protection of the homeland.
Security has meant everything else.
Written into our constitution, two different forces, two different functions.
Raise an army when you need it, and maintain a navy for day-to-day connectivity.
A Department of War, a Department of Everything Else.
A big stick, a baton stick.
Can of whup ass, the networking force.
In 1947 we merged these two things together in the Defense Department.
Our long-term rationale becomes, we're involved in a hair trigger stand off with the Soviets.
To attack America is to risk blowing up the world.
We connected national security to international security with about a seven minute time delay.
That's not our problem now.
They can kill three million in Chicago tomorrow and we don't go to the mattresses with nukes.
That's the scary part.
The question is how do we reconnect American national security with global security to make the world a lot more comfortable, and to embed and contextualize our employment of force around the planet?
What's happened since is that bifurcation I described.
We talked about this going all the way back to the end of the Cold War.
Let's have a Department of War, and a Department of Something Else.
Some people say, "Hell, 9/11 did it for you."
Now we've got a home game and an away game.
(Laughter) The Department of Homeland Security is a strategic feel good measure.
It's going to be the Department of Agriculture for the 21st century.
TSA -- thousands standing around.
(Laughter) I supported the war in Iraq.
He was a bad guy with multiple priors.
It's not like we had to find him actually killing somebody live to arrest him.
I knew we'd kick ass in the war with the Leviathan Force.
I knew we'd have a hard time with what followed.
But I know this organization doesn't change until it experiences failure.
What do I mean by these two different forces?
This is the Hobbesian Force.
I love this force. I don't want to see it go.
That plus nukes rules out great power war.
This is the military the rest of the world wants us to build.
It's why I travel all over the world talking to foreign militaries.
What does this mean?
It means you've got to stop pretending you can do these two very disparate skill sets with the same 19-year-old.
Switching back, morning, afternoon, evening, morning, afternoon, evening.
Handing out aid, shooting back, handing out aid, shooting back.
It's too much.
The 19-year-olds get tired from the switching, OK?
(Laughter) That force on the left, you can train a 19-year-old to do that.
That force on the right is more like a 40-year-old cop.
You need the experience.
What does this mean in terms of operations?
The rule is going to be this.
That Sys Admin force is the force that never comes home, does most of your work.
You break out that Leviathan Force only every so often.
But here's the promise you make to the American public, to your own people, to the world.
You break out that Leviathan Force, you promise, you guarantee that you're going to mount one hell of a -- immediately -- follow-on Sys Admin effort.
Don't plan for the war unless you plan to win the peace.
(Applause) Other differences. Leviathan traditional partners, they all look like the Brits and their former colonies.
(Laughter) Including us, I would remind you.
The rest -- wider array of partners.
International organizations, non-governmental organizations, private voluntary organizations, contractors.
You're not going to get away from that.
Leviathan Force, it's all about joint operations between the military services.
We're done with that.
What we need to do is inter-agency operations, which frankly Condi Rice was in charge of.
And I'm amazed nobody asked her that question when she was confirmed.
I call the Leviathan Force your dad's military.
I like them young, male, unmarried, slightly pissed off.
(Laughter) I call the Sys Admin Force your mom's military.
It's everything the man's military hates.
Gender balanced much more, older, educated, married with children.
The force on the left, up or out.
The force on the right, in and out.
The force on the left respects Posse Comitatus restrictions on the use of force inside the U.S.
The force on the right's going to obliterate it.
That's where the National Guard's going to be.
The force on the left is never coming under the purview of the International Criminal Court.
Sys Admin Force has to.
Different definitions of network centricity.
One takes down networks, one puts them up.
And you've got to wage war here in such a way to facilitate that.
Do we need a bigger budget?
Do we need a draft to pull this off?
Absolutely not.
I've been told by the Revolution of Military Affairs crowd for years, we can do it faster, cheaper, smaller, just as lethal.
I say, "Great, I'm going to take the Sys Admin budget out of your hide."
Here's the larger point.
You're going to build the Sys Admin Force inside the U.S. Military first.
But ultimately you're going to civilianize it, probably two thirds.
Inter agency-ize it, internationalize it.
So yes, it begins inside the Pentagon, but over time it's going to cross that river.
(Laughter) I have been to the mountain top. I can see the future.
I may not live long enough to get you there, but it's going to happen.
We're going to have a Department of Something Else between war and peace.
Last slide.
Who gets custody of the kids?
This is where the Marines in the audience get kind of tense.
(Laughter) And this is when they think about beating the crap out of me after the talk.
(Laughter) Read Max Boon.
This is the history of the marines -- small wars, small arms.
The Marines are like my West Highland Terrier.
They get up every morning, they want to dig a hole and they want to kill something.
(Laughter) I don't want my Marines handing out aid.
I want them to be Marines.
That's what keeps the Sys Admin Force from being a pussy force.
It keeps it from being the U.N.
You shoot at these people the Marines are going to come over and kill you.
(Laughter) (Applause) Department of Navy, strategic subs go this way, surface combatants are over there, and the news is they may actually be that small.
(Laughter) I call it the Smart Dust Navy.
I tell young officers, "You may command 500 ships in your career.
Bad news is they may not have anybody on them."
Carriers go both ways because they're a swing asset.
You'll see the pattern -- airborne, just like carriers.
Armor goes this way.
Here's the dirty secret of the Air Force, you can win by bombing.
But you need lots of these guys on the ground to win the peace.
Shinseki was right with the argument.
Air force, strategic airlift goes both ways.
Bombers, fighters go over here.
Special Operations Command down at Tampa.
Trigger-pullers go this way.
Civil Affairs, that bastard child, comes over here.
Return to the Army.
The point about the trigger-pullers and Special Operations Command.
No off season, these guys are always active.
They drop in, do their business, disappear.
See me now. Don't talk about it later.
(Laughter) I was never here.
(Laughter) The world is my playground.
(Laughter) I want to keep trigger-pullers trigger-happy.
I want the rules to be as loose as possible.
Because when the thing gets prevented in Chicago with the three million dead that perverts our political system beyond all recognition, these are the guys who are going to kill them first.
So it's better off to have them make some mistakes along the way than to see that.
Reserve component -- National Guard reserves overwhelmingly Sys Admin.
How are you going to get them to work for this force?
Most firemen in this country do it for free.
This is not about money.
This is about being up front with these guys and gals.
Last point, intelligence community -- the muscle and the defense agencies go this way.
What should be the CIA, open, analytical, open source should come over here.
The information you need to do this is not secret.
It's not secret.
Read that great piece in the New Yorker about how our echo boomers, 19 to 25, over in Iraq taught each other how to do Sys Admin work, over the Internet in chat rooms.
They said, "Al Qaeda could be listening."
They said, "Well, Jesus, they already know this stuff."
(Laughter) Take a gift in the left hand.
These are the sunglasses that don't scare people, simple stuff.
Censors and transparency, the overheads go in both directions.
Thanks.
So what's image got do with it?
And I must say, I think Emeka is trying to send a lot of subliminal messages, because I'm going to keep harping on some of the issues that have come up.
But I'm going to try and do something different, and try and just close the loop with some of my personal stories, and try and put a face to a lot of the issues that we've been talking about.
So, Africa is a complex continent full of contradictions, as you can see.
We're not the only ones.
(Laughter) (Applause) And you know, it's amazing.
I mean, we need a whole conference just devoted to telling the good stories about the continent.
Just think about that, you know?
And this is typically what we've been talking about, the role that the media plays in focusing just on the negative stuff.
Now, why is that a problem?
A typical disaster story: disease, corruption, poverty.
And some of you might be standing here thinking, saying, "OK, you know, Ory, you're Harvard-educated, and all you privileged people come here, saying, 'Forget the poor people.
Let's focus on business and the markets, and whatever.' " And they're all, "There's the 80 percent of Africans who really need help."
And I want to tell you that this is my story, OK?
And it's the story of many of the Africans who are here.
We start with poverty.
I didn't grow up in the slums or anything that dire, but I know what it is to grow up without having money, or being able to support family.
Euvin was talking about bellwether signs.
The bellwether for whether our family was broke or not was breakfast.
You know, when things were good, we had eggs and sausages.
When things were bad, we had porridge.
And like many African families, my parents could never save because they supported siblings, cousins, you know, their parents, and things were always dicey.
Now, when I was born, they realized they had a pretty smart kid, and they didn't want me to go to the neighborhood school, which was free.
And they adopted a very interesting approach to education, which was they were going to take me to a school that they can barely afford.
So they took me to a private, Catholic, elementary school, which set the foundation for what ended up being my career.
And what happened was, because they could afford it sometimes, sometimes not, I got kicked out pretty much every term.
You know, someone would come in with a list of the people who haven't paid school fees, and when they started getting pretty strict, you had to leave, until your school fees could be paid.
And I remember thinking, I mean, why don't these guys just take me to a cheap school?
Because you know, as a kid you're embarrassed and you're sensitive, and everyone knows you guys don't have money.
But they kept at it, and I now understand why they did what they did.
They talk about corruption.
In Kenya, we have an entrance exam to go into high school.
And there's national schools, which are like the best schools, and provincial schools.
My dream school at that time was Kenya High School, a national school.
I missed the cutoff by one point.
And I was so disappointed, and I was like, "Oh my God, you know, what am I going to do?"
And my father said, "OK, listen.
Let's go and try and talk to the headmistress.
You know, it's just one point. I mean, maybe she'll let you in if that slot's still there."
So we went to the school, and because we were nobodies, and because we didn't have privilege, and because my father didn't have the right last name, he was treated like dirt.
And I sat and listened to the headmistress talk to him, saying, you know, who do you think you are?
And, you know, you must be joking if you think you can get a slot.
And I had gone to school with other girls, who were kids of politicians, and who had done much, much worse than I did, and they had slots there.
And there's nothing worse than seeing your parent being humiliated in front of you, you know?
And we left, and I swore to myself, and I was like, "I'm never, ever going to have to beg for anything in my life."
They called me two weeks later, they're like, oh, yeah, you can come now. And I told them to stuff it.
(Laughter) (Applause) Final story, and I sort of have to speak quickly.
Disease.
My father, who I've been talking about, died of AIDS in 1999.
He never told anyone that he had AIDS, his fear of the stigma was so strong.
And I'm pretty much the one who figured it out, because I was a nerd.
And I was in the States at the time, and they called me. He was very sick, the first time he got sick.
And he had Cryptococcal meningitis.
And so I went on to Google, Cryptococcal meningitis, you know.
Because of doctor-patient privilege, they couldn't really tell us what was going on.
But they were like, you know, this is a long-term thing.
And when I went online and looked at the infectious -- read about the disease, I pretty much realized what was going on.
The first time he got sick, he recovered.
But what happened was that he had to be on medication that, at that time -- Diflucan, which in the States is used for yeast infections -- cost 30 dollars a pill.
He had to be on that pill for the rest of his life.
You know, so money ran out.
He got sick again.
And up until that time, he had a friend who used to travel to India, and he used to import, bring him, could get him a generic version of it.
And that kept him going.
But the money ran out.
He got sick again. He got sick on a Friday.
At that time, there was only one bank that had ATMs in Kenya, and we could not get cash. The family couldn't get cash for him to start the treatment until Monday.
The hospital put him on a water drip for three days.
And finally, we figured, well, OK, we'd better just try and take him to a public hospital.
At least he'll get treated while we try to figure out the money situation.
And he died when the ambulance was coming to the hospital to take him.
And, you know, now, imagine if -- and I could go on and on -- imagine if this is all you know about me.
How would you look at me?
With pity, you know. Sadness.
And this is how you look at Africa.
This is the damage it causes.
You don't see the other side of me.
You don't see the blogger, you don't see the Harvard-educated lawyer, the vibrant person, you know?
And I just wanted to personalize that.
Because we talk about it in big terms, and you wonder, you know, so what?
But it's damaging.
And I'm not unique, right?
Imagine if all you knew about William was the fact that he grew up in a poor village.
And you didn't know about the windmill, you know?
And I was just moved.
I was actually crying during his presentation.
He was like, I try and I make.
I was like Nike should hire him, you know, "Just do it!"
(Laughter) And this is, again, the point I'm trying to make.
When you focus just on the disasters -- (Laughter) (Applause) -- we're ignoring the potential.
So, what is to be done?
First of all, Africans, we need to get better at telling our stories.
We heard about that yesterday.
We had some of them this morning.
And this is an example, you know, blogging is one way of doing that.
Afrigator is an aggregator of African blogs that was developed in South Africa.
So we need to start getting better.
If no one else will tell our stories, let's do it.
And going back to the point I was trying to make, this is the Swahili Wikipedia.
Swahili is spoken by about 50 million people in East Africa.
It only has five contributors.
Four of them are white males -- non-native speakers.
The other person is -- Ndesanjo, if you're here, stand up -- is a Tanzanian, [the] first Swahili blogger.
He's the only African who's contributing to this.
People, please. We can't whine and complain the West is doing this.
What are we doing?
Where are the rest of the Swahili speakers?
Why are we not generating our own content?
You know, it's not enough to complain. We need to act.
Reuters now integrates African blogs into their coverage of Africa.
So, that's a start, and we've heard of all their other initiatives.
The cheetah generation.
The aid approach, you know, is flawed.
And after all the hoopla of Live 8, we're still not anywhere in the picture.
No, you're not.
(Laughter) But the point I'm trying to make, though, is that it's not enough for us to criticize.
And for those of you in the diaspora who are struggling with where should I be, should I move back, should I stay?
You know, just jump.
The continent needs you.
And I can't emphasize that enough, you know.
I walked away from a job with one of the top firms in D.C., Covington and Burling, six figures.
With two paychecks, or three paychecks, I could solve a lot of my family's problems.
But I walked away from that, because my passion was here, and because I wanted to do things that were fulfilling.
And because I'm needed here, you know?
I probably can win a prize for the most ways to use a Harvard Law School degree because of all the things I'm doing.
One is because I'm pretty aggressive, and I try and find, you know, opportunities.
But there is such a need, you know?
I'm a corporate lawyer most of the time for an organization called Enablis that supports entrepreneurs in South Africa.
We're now moving into East Africa.
And we give them business development services, as well as financing loan and equity.
I've also set up a project in Kenya, and what we do is we track the performance of Kenyan MPs.
My partner, M, who's a tech guru, hacked WordPress.
It costs us, like, 20 dollars a month just for hosting.
Everything else on there is a labor of love.
We've manually entered all the data there.
And you can get profiles of each MP, questions they've asked in parliament.
We have a comment function, where people can ask their MPs questions.
There are some MPs who participate, and come back and ask.
And basically, we started this because we were tired of complaining about our politicians.
You know, I believe that accountability stems from demand.
You're not just going to be accountable out of the goodness of your heart.
And we as Africans need to start challenging our leaders.
What are they doing?
You know, they're not going to change just out of nowhere.
So we need new policies, we need -- where's that coming from, you know?
Another thing is that these leaders are a reflection of our society.
We talk about African governments like they've been dropped from Mars, you know?
They come from us.
And what is it about our society that is generating leaders that we don't like?
And how can we change that?
So Mzalendo was one small way we thought we could start inspiring people to start holding their leaders accountable.
Where do we go from here?
I believe in the power of ideas.
I believe in the power of sharing knowledge.
And I'd ask all of you, when you leave here, please just share, and keep the ideas that you've gotten out of here going, because it can make a difference.
The other thing I want to urge you to do is take an interest in the individual.
I've had lots of conversations about things I think need to be happening in Africa.
People are like, "OK, if you don't do aid, I'm a bleeding heart liberal, what can I do?"
And when I talk about my ideas, they're like, "BBut it's not scalable, you know.
Give me something I can do with Paypal."
It's not that easy, you know?
And sometimes just taking an interest in the individual, in the fellows you've met, and the businesspeople you've met, it can make a huge difference, especially in Africa, because usually the individual in Africa carries a lot of people behind them.
Practically. I mean, when I was a first-year student in law school, my mom's business had collapsed, so I was supporting her.
My sister was struggling to get through undergrad.
I was helping her pay her tuition.
My cousin ran out of school fees, and she's really smart.
I was paying her school fees.
A cousin of mine died of AIDS, left an orphan, so we said, well, what are we going to do with her?
You know, she's now my baby sister.
And because of the opportunities that were afforded to me, I am able to lift all those people.
So, don't underestimate that.
An example. This man changed my life.
He's a professor. He's now at Vanderbilt.
He's an undergrad professor, Mitchell Seligson.
And because of him, I got into Harvard Law School, because he took an interest.
I was taking a class of his, and he was just like, this is an overeager student, which we don't normally get in the United States, because everyone else is cynical and jaded.
He called me to his office and said, "What do you want to do when you grow up?"
I said, "I want to be a lawyer."
And he was like, "Why? You know, we don't need another lawyer in the United States."
And he tried to talk me out of it, but it was like, "OK, I know nothing about applying to law school, I'm poli-sci Ph.D.
But, you know, let's figure out what I need you to do, what I need to do to help you out."
It was like, "Where do you want to go?"
And to me at that time university -- I was at University of Pitts for undergrad, and that was like heaven, OK, because compared to what could have been in Kenya.
So I'm like, "Yeah, I'm just applying to Pitt for law school."
He was like, "Why? You know, you're smart, you have all these things going for you."
And I'm like, "Because I'm here and it's cheap, and you know, I kind of like Pittsburgh."
Like, that's the dumbest reason I've ever heard for applying to law school.
And, you know, so he took me under his wing, and he encouraged me.
And he said, "Look, you can get into Harvard, you're that good, OK?
And if they don't admit you, they're the ones who are messed up."
And he built me up, you know?
And this is just an illustration.
You can meet other individuals here.
We just need a push.
That's all I needed was a push to go to the next level.
Basically, I want to end with my vision for Africa, you know?
A gentleman spoke yesterday about the indignity of us having to leave the continent so that we can fulfill our potential.
You know, my vision is that my daughter, and any other African child being born today, can be whoever they want to be here, without having to leave.
And they can have the possibility of transcending the circumstances under which they were born.
That's one thing you Americans take for granted, you know?
That you can grow up, you know, not so good circumstances, and you can move.
Just because you are born in rural Arkansas, whatever, that doesn't define who you are.
For most Africans today, where you live, or where you were born, and the circumstances under which you were born, determine the rest of your life.
I would like to see that change, and the change starts with us.
And as Africans, we need to take responsibility for our continent.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, people argue vigorously about the definition of life.
They ask if it should have reproduction in it, or metabolism, or evolution.
And I don't know the answer to that, so I'm not going to tell you.
I will say that life involves computation.
So this is a computer program.
Booted up in a cell, the program would execute, and it could result in this person; or with a small change, it could result in this person; or another small change, this person; or with a larger change, this dog, or this tree, or this whale.
So now, if you take this metaphor [of] genome as program seriously, you have to consider that Chris Anderson is a computer-fabricated artifact, as is Jim Watson, Craig Venter, as are all of us.
And in convincing yourself that this metaphor is true, there are lots of similarities between genetic programs and computer programs that could help to convince you.
But one, to me, that's most compelling is the peculiar sensitivity to small changes that can make large changes in biological development -- the output.
A small mutation can take a two-wing fly and make it a four-wing fly.
Or it could take a fly and put legs where its antennae should be.
Or if you're familiar with "The Princess Bride," it could create a six-fingered man.
Now, a hallmark of computer programs is just this kind of sensitivity to small changes.
If your bank account's one dollar, and you flip a single bit, you could end up with a thousand dollars.
So these small changes are things that I think that -- they indicate to us that a complicated computation in development is underlying these amplified, large changes.
So now, all of this indicates that there are molecular programs underlying biology, and it shows the power of molecular programs -- biology does.
And what I want to do is write molecular programs, potentially to build technology.
And there are a lot of people doing this, a lot of synthetic biologists doing this, like Craig Venter.
And they concentrate on using cells.
They're cell-oriented.
So my friends, molecular programmers, and I have a sort of biomolecule-centric approach.
We're interested in using DNA, RNA and protein, and building new languages for building things from the bottom up, using biomolecules, potentially having nothing to do with biology.
So, these are all the machines in a cell.
There's a camera.
There's the solar panels of the cell, some switches that turn your genes on and off, the girders of the cell, motors that move your muscles.
My little group of molecular programmers are trying to refashion all of these parts from DNA.
We're not DNA zealots, but DNA is the cheapest, easiest to understand and easy to program material to do this.
And as other things become easier to use -- maybe protein -- we'll work with those.
If we succeed, what will molecular programming look like?
You're going to sit in front of your computer.
You're going to design something like a cell phone, and in a high-level language, you'll describe that cell phone.
Then you're going to have a compiler that's going to take that description and it's going to turn it into actual molecules that can be sent to a synthesizer and that synthesizer will pack those molecules into a seed.
And what happens if you water and feed that seed appropriately, is it will do a developmental computation, a molecular computation, and it'll build an electronic computer.
And if I haven't revealed my prejudices already, I think that life has been about molecular computers building electrochemical computers, building electronic computers, which together with electrochemical computers will build new molecular computers, which will build new electronic computers, and so forth.
And if you buy all of this, and you think life is about computation, as I do, then you look at big questions through the eyes of a computer scientist.
So one big question is, how does a baby know when to stop growing?
And for molecular programming, the question is how does your cell phone know when to stop growing?
(Laughter) Or how does a computer program know when to stop running?
Or more to the point, how do you know if a program will ever stop?
There are other questions like this, too.
One of them is Craig Venter's question.
Turns out I think he's actually a computer scientist.
He asked, how big is the minimal genome that will give me a functioning microorganism?
How few genes can I use?
This is exactly analogous to the question, what's the smallest program I can write that will act exactly like Microsoft Word?
(Laughter) And just as he's writing, you know, bacteria that will be smaller, he's writing genomes that will work, we could write smaller programs that would do what Microsoft Word does.
But for molecular programming, our question is, how many molecules do we need to put in that seed to get a cell phone?
What's the smallest number we can get away with?
Now, these are big questions in computer science.
These are all complexity questions, and computer science tells us that these are very hard questions.
Almost -- many of them are impossible.
But for some tasks, we can start to answer them.
So, I'm going to start asking those questions for the DNA structures I'm going to talk about next.
So, this is normal DNA, what you think of as normal DNA.
It's double-stranded, it's a double helix, has the As, Ts, Cs and Gs that pair to hold the strands together.
And I'm going to draw it like this sometimes, just so I don't scare you.
We want to look at individual strands and not think about the double helix.
When we synthesize it, it comes single-stranded, so we can take the blue strand in one tube and make an orange strand in the other tube, and they're floppy when they're single-stranded.
You mix them together and they make a rigid double helix.
Now for the last 25 years, Ned Seeman and a bunch of his descendants have worked very hard and made beautiful three-dimensional structures using this kind of reaction of DNA strands coming together.
But a lot of their approaches, though elegant, take a long time.
They can take a couple of years, or it can be difficult to design.
So I came up with a new method a couple of years ago I call DNA origami that's so easy you could do it at home in your kitchen and design the stuff on a laptop.
But to do it, you need a long, single strand of DNA, which is technically very difficult to get.
So, you can go to a natural source.
You can look in this computer-fabricated artifact, and he's got a double-stranded genome -- that's no good.
You look in his intestines. There are billions of bacteria.
They're no good either.
Double strand again, but inside them, they're infected with a virus that has a nice, long, single-stranded genome that we can fold like a piece of paper.
And here's how we do it.
This is part of that genome.
We add a bunch of short, synthetic DNAs that I call staples.
Each one has a left half that binds the long strand in one place, and a right half that binds it in a different place, and brings the long strand together like this.
The net action of many of these on that long strand is to fold it into something like a rectangle.
Now, we can't actually take a movie of this process, but Shawn Douglas at Harvard has made a nice visualization for us that begins with a long strand and has some short strands in it.
And what happens is that we mix these strands together.
We heat them up, we add a little bit of salt, we heat them up to almost boiling and cool them down, and as we cool them down, the short strands bind the long strands and start to form structure.
And you can see a little bit of double helix forming there.
When you look at DNA origami, you can see that what it really is, even though you think it's complicated, is a bunch of double helices that are parallel to each other, and they're held together by places where short strands go along one helix and then jump to another one.
So there's a strand that goes like this, goes along one helix and binds -- it jumps to another helix and comes back.
That holds the long strand like this.
Now, to show that we could make any shape or pattern that we wanted, I tried to make this shape.
I wanted to fold DNA into something that goes up over the eye, down the nose, up the nose, around the forehead, back down and end in a little loop like this.
And so, I thought, if this could work, anything could work.
So I had the computer program design the short staples to do this.
I ordered them; they came by FedEx.
I mixed them up, heated them, cooled them down, and I got 50 billion little smiley faces floating around in a single drop of water.
And each one of these is just one-thousandth the width of a human hair, OK?
So, they're all floating around in solution, and to look at them, you have to get them on a surface where they stick.
So, you pour them out onto a surface and they start to stick to that surface, and we take a picture using an atomic-force microscope.
It's got a needle, like a record needle, that goes back and forth over the surface, bumps up and down, and feels the height of the first surface.
It feels the DNA origami.
There's the atomic-force microscope working and you can see that the landing's a little rough.
When you zoom in, they've got, you know, weak jaws that flip over their heads and some of their noses get punched out, but it's pretty good.
You can zoom in and even see the extra little loop, this little nano-goatee.
Now, what's great about this is anybody can do this.
And so, I got this in the mail about a year after I did this, unsolicited.
Anyone know what this is? What is it?
It's China, right?
So, what happened is, a graduate student in China, Lulu Qian, did a great job.
She wrote all her own software to design and built this DNA origami, a beautiful rendition of China, which even has Taiwan, and you can see it's sort of on the world's shortest leash, right?
(Laughter) So, this works really well and you can make patterns as well as shapes, OK?
And you can make a map of the Americas and spell DNA with DNA.
And what's really neat about it -- well, actually, this all looks like nano-artwork, but it turns out that nano-artwork is just what you need to make nano-circuits.
So, you can put circuit components on the staples, like a light bulb and a light switch.
Let the thing assemble, and you'll get some kind of a circuit.
And then you can maybe wash the DNA away and have the circuit left over.
So, this is what some colleagues of mine at Caltech did.
They took a DNA origami, organized some carbon nano-tubes, made a little switch, you see here, wired it up, tested it and showed that it is indeed a switch.
Now, this is just a single switch and you need half a billion for a computer, so we have a long way to go.
But this is very promising because the origami can organize parts just one-tenth the size of those in a normal computer.
So it's very promising for making small computers.
Now, I want to get back to that compiler.
The DNA origami is a proof that that compiler actually works.
So, you start with something in the computer.
You get a high-level description of the computer program, a high-level description of the origami.
You can compile it to molecules, send it to a synthesizer, and it actually works.
And it turns out that a company has made a nice program that's much better than my code, which was kind of ugly, and will allow us to do this in a nice, visual, computer-aided design way.
So, now you can say, all right, why isn't DNA origami the end of the story?
You have your molecular compiler, you can do whatever you want.
The fact is that it does not scale.
So if you want to build a human from DNA origami, the problem is, you need a long strand that's 10 trillion trillion bases long.
That's three light years' worth of DNA, so we're not going to do this.
We're going to turn to another technology, called algorithmic self-assembly of tiles.
It was started by Erik Winfree, and what it does, it has tiles that are a hundredth the size of a DNA origami.
You zoom in, there are just four DNA strands and they have little single-stranded bits on them that can bind to other tiles, if they match.
And we like to draw these tiles as little squares.
And if you look at their sticky ends, these little DNA bits, you can see that they actually form a checkerboard pattern.
So, these tiles would make a complicated, self-assembling checkerboard.
And the point of this, if you didn't catch that, is that tiles are a kind of molecular program and they can output patterns.
And a really amazing part of this is that any computer program can be translated into one of these tile programs -- specifically, counting.
So, you can come up with a set of tiles that when they come together, form a little binary counter rather than a checkerboard.
So you can read off binary numbers five, six and seven.
And in order to get these kinds of computations started right, you need some kind of input, a kind of seed.
You can use DNA origami for that.
You can encode the number 32 in the right-hand side of a DNA origami, and when you add those tiles that count, they will start to count -- they will read that 32 and they'll stop at 32.
So, what we've done is we've figured out a way to have a molecular program know when to stop going.
It knows when to stop growing because it can count.
It knows how big it is.
So, that answers that sort of first question I was talking about.
It doesn't tell us how babies do it, however.
So now, we can use this counting to try and get at much bigger things than DNA origami could otherwise.
Here's the DNA origami, and what we can do is we can write 32 on both edges of the DNA origami, and we can now use our watering can and water with tiles, and we can start growing tiles off of that and create a square.
The counter serves as a template to fill in a square in the middle of this thing.
So, what we've done is we've succeeded in making something much bigger than a DNA origami by combining DNA origami with tiles.
And the neat thing about it is, is that it's also reprogrammable.
You can just change a couple of the DNA strands in this binary representation and you'll get 96 rather than 32.
And if you do that, the origami's the same size, but the resulting square that you get is three times bigger.
So, this sort of recapitulates what I was telling you about development.
You have a very sensitive computer program where small changes -- single, tiny, little mutations -- can take something that made one size square and make something very much bigger.
Now, this -- using counting to compute and build these kinds of things by this kind of developmental process is something that also has bearing on Craig Venter's question.
So, you can ask, how many DNA strands are required to build a square of a given size?
If we wanted to make a square of size 10, 100 or 1,000, if we used DNA origami alone, we would require a number of DNA strands that's the square of the size of that square; so we'd need 100, 10,000 or a million DNA strands.
That's really not affordable.
But if we use a little computation -- we use origami, plus some tiles that count -- then we can get away with using 100, 200 or 300 DNA strands.
And so we can exponentially reduce the number of DNA strands we use, if we use counting, if we use a little bit of computation.
And so computation is some very powerful way to reduce the number of molecules you need to build something, to reduce the size of the genome that you're building.
And finally, I'm going to get back to that sort of crazy idea about computers building computers.
If you look at the square that you build with the origami and some counters growing off it, the pattern that it has is exactly the pattern that you need to make a memory.
So if you affix some wires and switches to those tiles -- rather than to the staple strands, you affix them to the tiles -- then they'll self-assemble the somewhat complicated circuits, the demultiplexer circuits, that you need to address this memory.
So you can actually make a complicated circuit using a little bit of computation.
It's a molecular computer building an electronic computer.
Now, you ask me, how far have we gotten down this path?
Experimentally, this is what we've done in the last year.
Here is a DNA origami rectangle, and here are some tiles growing from it.
And you can see how they count.
One, two, three, four, five, six, nine, 10, 11, 12, 17.
So it's got some errors, but at least it counts up.
(Laughter) So, it turns out we actually had this idea nine years ago, and that's about the time constant for how long it takes to do these kinds of things, so I think we made a lot of progress.
We've got ideas about how to fix these errors.
And I think in the next five or 10 years, we'll make the kind of squares that I described and maybe even get to some of those self-assembled circuits.
So now, what do I want you to take away from this talk?
I want you to remember that to create life's very diverse and complex forms, life uses computation to do that.
And the computations that it uses, they're molecular computations, and in order to understand this and get a better handle on it, as Feynman said, you know, we need to build something to understand it.
And so we are going to use molecules and refashion this thing, rebuild everything from the bottom up, using DNA in ways that nature never intended, using DNA origami, and DNA origami to seed this algorithmic self-assembly.
You know, so this is all very cool, but what I'd like you to take from the talk, hopefully from some of those big questions, is that this molecular programming isn't just about making gadgets.
It's not just making about -- it's making self-assembled cell phones and circuits.
What it's really about is taking computer science and looking at big questions in a new light, asking new versions of those big questions and trying to understand how biology can make such amazing things. Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to try and explain why it is that perhaps we don't understand as much as we think we do.
I'd like to begin with four questions.
This is not some sort of cultural thing for the time of year.
That's an in-joke, by the way.
But these four questions, actually, are ones that people who even know quite a lot about science find quite hard.
And they're questions that I've asked of science television producers, of audiences of science educators -- so that's science teachers -- and also of seven-year-olds, and I find that the seven-year-olds do marginally better than the other audiences, which is somewhat surprising.
So the first question, and you might want to write this down, either on a bit of paper, physically, or a virtual piece of paper in your head. And, for viewers at home, you can try this as well.
A little seed weighs next to nothing and a tree weighs a lot, right?
I think we agree on that. Where does the tree get the stuff that makes up this chair, right? Where does all this stuff come from?
(Knocks) And your next question is, can you light a little torch-bulb with a battery, a bulb and one piece of wire?
And would you be able to, kind of, draw a -- you don't have to draw the diagram, but would you be able to draw the diagram, if you had to do it? Or would you just say, that's actually not possible?
The third question is, why is it hotter in summer than in winter?
I think we can probably agree that it is hotter in summer than in winter, but why? And finally, would you be able to -- and you can sort of scribble it, if you like -- scribble a plan diagram of the solar system, showing the shape of the planets' orbits?
Would you be able to do that?
And if you can, just scribble a pattern.
OK. Now, children get their ideas not from teachers, as teachers often think, but actually from common sense, from experience of the world around them, from all the things that go on between them and their peers, and their carers, and their parents, and all of that. Experience.
And one of the great experts in this field, of course, was, bless him, Cardinal Wolsey. Be very careful what you get into people's heads because it's virtually impossible to shift it afterwards, right?
(Laughter) I'm not quite sure how he died, actually.
Was he beheaded in the end, or hung?
(Laughter) Now, those questions, which, of course, you've got right, and you haven't been conferring, and so on.
And I -- you know, normally, I would pick people out and humiliate, but maybe not in this instance.
A little seed weighs a lot and, basically, all this stuff, 99 percent of this stuff, came out of the air.
Now, I guarantee that about 85 percent of you, or maybe it's fewer at TED, will have said it comes out of the ground. And some people, probably two of you, will come up and argue with me afterwards, and say that actually, it comes out of the ground.
Now, if that was true, we'd have trucks going round the country, filling people's gardens in with soil, it'd be a fantastic business.
But, actually, we don't do that.
The mass of this comes out of the air.
Now, I passed all my biology exams in Britain.
I passed them really well, but I still came out of school thinking that that stuff came out of the ground.
Second one: can you light a little torch-bulb with a battery bulb and one piece of wire?
Yes, you can, and I'll show you in a second how to do that.
Now, I have some rather bad news, which is that I had a piece of video that I was about to show you, which unfortunately -- the sound doesn't work in this room, so I'm going to describe to you, in true "Monty Python" fashion, what happens in the video. And in the video, a group of researchers go to MIT on graduation day.
We chose MIT because, obviously, that's a very long way away from here, and you wouldn't mind too much, but it sort of works the same way in Britain and in the West Coast of the USA.
And we asked them these questions, and we asked those questions of science graduates, and they couldn't answer them.
And so, there's a whole lot of people saying, "I'd be very surprised if you told me that this came out of the air.
That's very surprising to me." And those are science graduates.
And we intercut it with, "We are the premier science university in the world," because of British-like hubris.
(Laughter) And when we gave graduate engineers that question, they said it couldn't be done.
And when we gave them a battery, and a piece of wire, and a bulb, and said, "Can you do it?" They couldn't do it. Right?
And that's no different from Imperial College in London, by the way, it's not some sort of anti-American thing going on.
As if. Now, the reason this matters is we pay lots and lots of money for teaching people -- we might as well get it right.
And there are also some societal reasons why we might want people to understand what it is that's happening in photosynthesis. For example, one half of the carbon equation is how much we emit, and the other half of the carbon equation, as I'm very conscious as a trustee of Kew, is how much things soak up, and they soak up carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere.
That's what plants actually do for a living.
And, for any Finnish people in the audience, this is a Finnish pun: we are, both literally and metaphorically, skating on thin ice if we don't understand that kind of thing.
Now, here's how you do the battery and the bulb.
It's so easy, isn't it? Of course, you all knew that.
But if you haven't played with a battery and a bulb, if you've only seen a circuit diagram, you might not be able to do that, and that's one of the problems.
So, why is it hotter in summer than in winter?
We learn, as children, that you get closer to something that's hot, and it burns you. It's a very powerful bit of learning, and it happens pretty early on.
By extension, we think to ourselves, "Why it's hotter in summer than in winter must be because we're closer to the Sun."
I promise you that most of you will have got that.
Oh, you're all shaking your heads, but only a few of you are shaking your heads very firmly.
Other ones are kind of going like this. All right.
It's hotter in summer than in winter because the rays from the Sun are spread out more, right, because of the tilt of the Earth.
And if you think the tilt is tilting us closer, no, it isn't.
The Sun is 93 million miles away, and we're tilting like this, right?
It makes no odds. In fact, in the Northern Hemisphere, we're further from the Sun in summer, as it happens, but it makes no odds, the difference.
OK, now, the scribble of the diagram of the solar system.
If you believe, as most of you probably do, that it's hotter in summer than in winter because we're closer to the Sun, you must have drawn an ellipse.
Right? That would explain it, right?
Except, in your -- you're nodding -- now, in your ellipse, have you thought, "Well, what happens during the night?"
Between Australia and here, right, they've got summer and we've got winter, and what -- does the Earth kind of rush towards the Sun at night, and then rush back again? I mean, it's a very strange thing going on, and we hold these two models in our head, of what's right and what isn't right, and we do that, as human beings, in all sorts of fields.
So, here's Copernicus' view of what the solar system looked like as a plan.
That's pretty much what you should have on your piece of paper. Right?
And this is NASA's view. They're stunningly similar.
I hope you notice the coincidence here.
What would you do if you knew that people had this misconception, right, in their heads, of elliptical orbits caused by our experiences as children?
What sort of diagram would you show them of the solar system, to show that it's not really like that?
You'd show them something like this, wouldn't you?
It's a plan, looking down from above.
But, no, look what I found in the textbooks.
That's what you show people, right? These are from textbooks, from websites, educational websites -- and almost anything you pick up is like that.
And the reason it's like that is because it's dead boring to have a load of concentric circles, whereas that's much more exciting, to look at something at that angle, isn't it? Right? And by doing it at that angle, if you've got that misconception in your head, then that two-dimensional representation of a three-dimensional thing will be ellipses.
So you've -- it's crap, isn't it really? As we say.
So, these mental models -- we look for evidence that reinforces our models.
We do this, of course, with matters of race, and politics, and everything else, and we do it in science as well. So we look, just look -- and scientists do it, constantly -- we look for evidence that reinforces our models, and some folks are just all too able and willing to provide the evidence that reinforces the models.
So, being I'm in the United States, I'll have a dig at the Europeans.
These are examples of what I would say is bad practice in science teaching centers. These pictures are from La Villette in France and the welcome wing of the Science Museum in London.
And, if you look at the, kind of the way these things are constructed, there's a lot of mediation by glass, and it's very blue, and kind of professional -- in that way that, you know, Woody Allen comes up from under the sheets in that scene in "Annie Hall," and said, "God, that's so professional." And that you don't -- there's no passion in it, and it's not hands on, right, and, you know, pun intended. Whereas good interpretation -- I'll use an example from nearby -- is San Francisco Exploratorium, where all the things that -- the demonstrations, and so on, are made out of everyday objects that children can understand, it's very hands-on, and they can engage with, and experiment with.
And I know that if the graduates at MIT and in the Imperial College in London had had the battery and the wire and the bit of stuff, and you know, been able to do it, they would have learned how it actually works, rather than thinking that they follow circuit diagrams and can't do it.
So good interpretation is more about things that are bodged and stuffed and of my world, right?
And things that -- where there isn't an extra barrier of a piece of glass or machined titanium, and it all looks fantastic, OK?
And the Exploratorium does that really, really well.
And it's amateur, but amateur in the best sense, in other words, the root of the word being of love and passion.
So, children are not empty vessels, OK?
So, as "Monty Python" would have it, this is a bit Lord Privy Seal to say so, but this is -- children are not empty vessels.
They come with their own ideas and their own theories, and unless you work with those, then you won't be able to shift them, right? And I probably haven't shifted your ideas of how the world and universe operates, either.
But this applies, equally, to matters of trying to sell new technology.
For example, we are, in Britain, we're trying to do a digital switchover of the whole population into digital technology [for television].
And it's one of the difficult things is that when people have preconceptions of how it all works, it's quite difficult to shift those.
So we're not empty vessels; the mental models that we have as children persist into adulthood.
Poor teaching actually does more harm than good.
In this country and in Britain, magnetism is understood better by children before they've been to school than afterwards, OK?
Same for gravity, two concepts, so it's -- which is quite humbling, as a, you know, if you're a teacher, and you look before and after, that's quite worrying. They do worse in tests afterwards, after the teaching.
And we collude. We design tests, or at least in Britain, so that people pass them. Right?
And governments do very well. They pat themselves on the back.
OK? We collude, and actually if you -- if someone had designed a test for me when I was doing my biology exams, to really understand, to see whether I'd understood more than just kind of putting starch and iodine together and seeing it go blue, and really understood that plants took their mass out of the air, then I might have done better at science.
So the most important thing is to get people to articulate their models.
Your homework is -- you know, how does an aircraft's wing create lift?
An obvious question, and you'll have an answer now in your heads.
And the second question to that then is, ensure you've explained how it is that planes can fly upside down.
Ah ha, right. Second question is, why is the sea blue? All right?
And you've all got an idea in your head of the answer.
So, why is it blue on cloudy days? Ah, see.
(Laughter) I've always wanted to say that in this country.
(Laughter) Finally, my plea to you is to allow yourselves, and your children, and anyone you know, to kind of fiddle with stuff, because it's by fiddling with things that you, you know, you complement your other learning. It's not a replacement, it's just part of learning that's important.
Thank you very much.
Now -- oh, oh yeah, go on then, go on.
(Applause)
Stephanie White: I'm going to let her introduce herself to everybody.
Can you tell everybody your name?
Einstein: Einstein.
SW: This is Einstein. Can you tell everyone "hi"?
E: Hello.
SW: That's nice. Can you be polite?
E: Hi, sweetheart.
SW: Much better.
Well, Einstein is very honored to be here at TED 2006, amongst all you modern-day Einsteins.
E: Woo.
(Laughter) Since we've arrived, there's been a constant buzz about all the exciting speakers here for the conference.
This morning we've heard a lot of whispers about Tom O'Reilly's wrap-up on Saturday.
Einstein, did you hear whispers?
E: [Squawks] SW: Yeah.
(Laughter) Einstein's especially interested in Penelope's talk.
A lot of her research goes on in case, which can get pretty dusty.
E: Achoo!
SW: It could make her sneeze.
But more importantly, her research could help Einstein find a cure for her never-ending scratchy throat.
Einstein: [Coughs] SW: Yeah.
(Laughter) Well, Bob Russell was telling us about his work on nanotubes in his research at the microscopic level.
Well, that's really cool, but what Einstein's really hoping is that maybe he'll genetically engineer a five-pound peanut.
E: Oh, my God! My God! My God!
SW: Yeah. She would get really, really excited.
(Laughter) That is one big peanut.
Since Einstein is a bird, she's very interested in things that fly.
She thinks Burt Rutan is very impressive.
E: Ooh.
SW: Yeah. She especially likes his latest achievement, SpaceShipOne.
Einstein, would you like to ride in Burt's spaceship?
E: [Spaceship noise] SW: Even if it doesn't have a laser?
E: [Laser noise] (Laughter) SW: Yeah, yeah. That was pretty funny, Einstein.
Now, Einstein also thinks, you know, working in caves and travelling through space -- it's all very dangerous jobs.
It would be very dangerous if you fell down.
E: Wheeeeeee! [Splat] SW: Yeah.
(Laughter) Little splat at the end there. Einstein, did that hurt?
E: Ow, ow, ow.
SW: Yeah. It's all a lot of hard work.
E: [Squawks] SW: Yeah. It can get a bird like Einstein frustrated.
E: [Squawks] SW: Yeah, it sure can.
But when Einstein needs to relax from her job educating the public she loves to take in the arts.
If the children of the Uganda need another dance partner, Einstein could sure fit the bill, because she loves to dance.
Can you get down?
E: [Bobbing head] (Laughter) SW: Let's get down for everybody. Come on now.
She's going to make me do it, too. Ooh, ooh.
Einstein: Ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh.
SW: Do your head now.
E: Ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh.
(Laughter) SW: Or maybe Sirena Huang would like to learn some arias on her violin, and Einstein can sing along with some opera?
E: [Operatic squawk] SW: Very good.
(Laughter) Or maybe Stu just needs another backup singer?
Einstein, can you also sing?
I know, you need to get rid of that seed first. Can you sing?
E: La, la.
SW: There you go.
And, of course, if all else fails, she can just run off and enjoy a fun fiesta.
E: [Squawks] SW: All right.
Well, Einstein was pretty embarrassed to admit this earlier, but she was telling me backstage that she had a problem.
E: What's the matter?
SW: No, I don't have a problem. You have the problem, remember?
You were saying that you were really embarrassed, because you're in love with a pirate?
E: Yar.
SW: There we go. And what do pirates like to drink?
E: Beer.
SW: Yeah, that's right.
You like to drink water.
E: [Water sound] SW: Very good. Now, really, she is pretty nervous.
Because one of her favorite folks from back home is here, and she's pretty nervous to meet him.
She thinks Al Gore is a really good-looking man.
What do you say to a good-looking man?
E: Hey, baby.
(Laughter) SW: And so do all the folks back home in Tennessee.
E: Yee haw.
(Laughter) SW: And since she's such a big fan, she knows that his birthday is coming up at the end of March.
And we didn't think he'd be in town then, so Einstein wanted to do something special for him.
So let's see if Einstein will sing "Happy Birthday" to Al Gore.
Can you sing "Happy Birthday" to him?
E: Happy birthday to you.
SW: Again.
E: Happy birthday to you.
SW: Again.
E: Happy birthday to you.
SW: Big finish.
E: Happy birthday to you.
SW: Good job!
(Applause) Well, before we wrap it up, she would like to give a shout out to all our animal friends back at the Knoxville Zoo.
Einstein, do you want to say "hi" to all the owls?
E: Woo, woo, woo.
SW: What about the other birds?
E: Tweet, tweet, tweet.
SW: And the penguin?
E: Quack, quack, quack.
SW: There we go.
(Laughter) Let's get that one out of there. How about a chimpanzee?
E: Ooh, ooh, ooh. Aah, aah, aah.
SW: Very good.
(Laughter) What about a wolf?
E: Ooooowww.
SW: And a pig?
E: Oink, oink, oink.
SW: And the rooster?
E: Cock-a-doodle-doo!
SW: And how about those cats?
E: Meow.
(Laughter) SW: At the zoo we have big cats from the jungle.
E: Grrrrr.
(Laughter) SW: What about a skunk?
E: Stinker.
(Laughter) SW: She's a comedian. I suppose you think you're famous? Are you famous?
E: Superstar.
SW: Yeah. You are a superstar.
(Laughter) Well, we would like to encourage all of you to do your part to help protect Einstein's animal friends, and to do your part to help protect their homes that they live [in].
Now, Einstein does say it best when we ask her.
Why do we want to protect your home?
E: I'm special.
SW: You are very special.
E: I love you.
SW: That's good. Can you blow them a kiss?
E: [Kissing noise] SW: And what do you say when it's time to go?
E: Goodbye.
SW: Good job. Thank you all.
(Applause)
My mission in life since I was a kid was, and is, to take the rest of you into space.
It's during our lifetime that we're going to take the Earth, take the people of Earth and transition off, permanently. And that's exciting.
In fact, I think it is a moral imperative that we open the space frontier.
You know, it's the first time that we're going to have a chance to have planetary redundancy, a chance to, if you would, back up the biosphere.
And if you think about space, everything we hold of value on this planet -- metals and minerals and real estate and energy -- is in infinite quantities in space.
In fact, the Earth is a crumb in a supermarket filled with resources.
The analogy for me is Alaska. You know, we bought Alaska.
We Americans bought Alaska in the 1850s. It's called Seward's folly.
We valued it as the number of seal pelts we could kill.
And then we discovered these things -- gold and oil and fishing and timber -- and it became, you know, a trillion-dollar economy, and now we take our honeymoons there. The same thing will happen in space.
We are on the verge of the greatest exploration that the human race has ever known.
We explore for three reasons, the weakest of which is curiosity.
You know, it's funded NASA's budget up until now.
Some images from Mars, 1997.
In fact, I think in the next decade, without any question, we will discover life on Mars and find that it is literally ubiquitous under the soils and different parts of that planet.
The stronger motivator, the much stronger motivator, is fear.
It drove us to the moon. We -- literally in fear -- with the Soviet Union raced to the moon. And we have these huge rocks, you know, killer-sized rocks in the hundreds of thousands or millions out there, and while the probability is very small, the impact, figured in literally, of one of these hitting the Earth is so huge that to spend a small fraction looking, searching, preparing to defend, is not unreasonable.
And of course, the third motivator, one near and dear to my heart as an entrepreneur, is wealth.
In fact, the greatest wealth. If you think about these other asteroids, there's a class of the nickel iron, which in platinum-group metal markets alone are worth something like 20 trillion dollars, if you can go out and grab one of these rocks.
My plan is to actually buy puts on the precious metal market, and then actually claim that I'm going to go out and get one.
And that will fund the actual mission to go and get one.
But fear, curiosity and greed have driven us.
And for me, this is -- I'm the short kid on the right.
This was -- my motivation was actually during Apollo.
And Apollo was one of the greatest motivators ever.
If you think about what happened at the turn of -- early 1960s, on May 25, JFK said, "We're going to go to the moon."
And people left their jobs and they went to obscure locations to go and be part of this amazing mission.
And we knew nothing about going to space.
We went from having literally put Alan Shepard in suborbital flight to going to the moon in eight years, and the average age of the people that got us there was 26 years old.
They didn't know what couldn't be done.
They had to make up everything.
And that, my friend, is amazing motivation.
This is Gene Cernan, a good friend of mine, saying, "If I can go to the moon" -- this is the last human on the moon so far -- "nothing, nothing is impossible." But of course, we've thought about the government always as the person taking us there.
But I put forward here, the government is not going to get us there.
The government is unable to take the risks required to open up this precious frontier.
The shuttle is costing a billion dollars a launch.
That's a pathetic number. It's unreasonable.
We shouldn't be happy in standing for that.
One of the things that we did with the Ansari X PRIZE was take the challenge on that risk is OK, you know.
As we are going out there and taking on a new frontier, we should be allowed to risk.
In fact, anyone who says we shouldn't, you know, just needs to be put aside, because, as we go forward, in fact, the greatest discoveries we will ever know is ahead of us.
The entrepreneurs in the space business are the furry mammals, and clearly the industrial-military complex -- with Boeing and Lockheed and NASA -- are the dinosaurs.
The ability for us to access these resources to gain planetary redundancy -- we can now gather all the information, the genetic codes, you know, everything stored on our databases, and back them up off the planet, in case there would be one of those disastrous situations.
The difficulty is getting there, and clearly, the cost to orbit is key.
Once you're in orbit, you are two thirds of the way, energetically, to anywhere -- the moon, to Mars. And today, there's only three vehicles -- the U.S. shuttle, the Russian Soyuz and the Chinese vehicle -- that gets you there.
Arguably, it's about 100 million dollars a person on the space shuttle.
One of the companies I started, Space Adventures, will sell you a ticket.
We've done two so far. We'll be announcing two more on the Soyuz to go up to the space station for 20 million dollars.
But that's expensive and to understand what the potential is -- (Laughter) -- it is expensive. But people are willing to pay that!
You know, one -- we have a very unique period in time today.
For the first time ever, we have enough wealth concentrated in the hands of few individuals and the technology accessible that will allow us to really drive space exploration.
But how cheap could it get? I want to give you the end point.
We know -- 20 million dollars today, you can go and buy a ticket, but how cheap could it get?
Let's go back to high school physics here.
If you calculate the amount of potential energy, mgh, to take you and your spacesuit up to a couple hundred miles, and then you accelerate yourself to 17,500 miles per hour -- remember, that one half MV squared -- and you figure it out.
It's about 5.7 gigajoules of energy.
If you expended that over an hour, it's about 1.6 megawatts.
If you go to one of Vijay's micro-power sources, and they sell it to you for seven cents a kilowatt hour -- anybody here fast in math?
How much will it cost you and your spacesuit to go to orbit?
100 bucks. That's the price-improvement curve that -- we need some breakthroughs in physics along the way, I'll grant you that.
(Laughter) But guys, if history has taught us anything, it's that if you can imagine it, you will get there eventually.
I have no question that the physics, the engineering to get us down to the point where all of us can afford orbital space flight is around the corner.
The difficulty is that there needs to be a real marketplace to drive the investment.
Today, the Boeings and the Lockheeds don't spend a dollar of their own money in R&amp;D.
It's all government research dollars, and very few of those.
And in fact, the large corporations, the governments, can't take the risk.
So we need what I call an exothermic economic reaction in space.
Today's commercial markets worldwide, global commercial launch market?
12 to 15 launches per year.
Number of commercial companies out there? 12 to 15 companies.
One per company. That's not it. There's only one marketplace, and I call them self-loading carbon payloads.
They come with their own money. They're easy to make.
It's people. The Ansari X PRIZE was my solution, reading about Lindbergh for creating the vehicles to get us there.
We offered 10 million dollars in cash for the first reusable ship, carry three people up to 100 kilometers, come back down, and within two weeks, make the trip again.
Twenty-six teams from seven countries entered the competition, spending between one to 25 million dollars each.
And of course, we had beautiful SpaceShipOne, which made those two flights and won the competition.
And I'd like to take you there, to that morning, for just a quick video.
(Video) Pilot: Release our fire.
Richard Searfoss: Good luck.
(Applause) RS: We've got an altitude call of 368,000 feet.
(Applause) RS: So in my official capacity as the chief judge of the Ansari X PRIZE competition, I declare that Mojave Aerospace Ventures has indeed earned the Ansari X PRIZE.
(Applause) Peter Diamandis: Probably the most difficult thing that I had to do was raise the capital for this. It was literally impossible.
We went -- I went to 100, 200 CEOs, CMOs.
No one believed it was done. Everyone said, "Oh, what does NASA think?
Well, people are going to die, how can you possibly going to put this forward?"
I found a visionary family, the Ansari family, and Champ Car, and raised part of the money, but not the full 10 million.
And what I ended up doing was going out to the insurance industry and buying a hole-in-one insurance policy.
See, the insurance companies went to Boeing and Lockheed, and said, "Are you going to compete?" No.
"Are you going to compete?" No. "No one's going to win this thing."
So, they took a bet that no one would win by January of '05, and I took a bet that someone would win.
(Applause) So -- and the best thing is they paid off and the check didn't bounce.
(Laughter) We've had a lot of accomplishments and it's been a tremendous success.
One of the things I'm most happy about is that the SpaceShipOne is going to hang in Air and Space Museum, next to the Spirit of St. Louis and the Wright Flyer.
Isn't that great? (Applause) So a little bit about the future, steps to space, what's available for you.
Today, you can go and experience weightless flights.
By '08, suborbital flights, the price tag for that, you know, on Virgin, is going to be about 200,000.
There are three or four other serious efforts that will bring the price down very rapidly, I think, to about 25,000 dollars for a suborbital flight.
Orbital flights -- we can take you to the space station.
And then I truly believe, once a group is in orbit around the Earth -- I know if they don't do it, I am -- we're going to stockpile some fuel, make a beeline for the moon and grab some real estate.
(Laughter) Quick moment for the designers in the audience.
We spent 11 years getting FAA approval to do zero gravity flights.
Here are some fun images. Here's Burt Rutan and my good friend Greg Meronek inside a zero gravity -- people think a zero gravity room, there's a switch on there that turns it off -- but it's actually parabolic flight of an airplane.
And turns out 7-Up has just done a little commercial that's airing this month.
If we can get the audio up?
(Video) Narrator: For a chance to win the first free ticket to space, look for specially marked packages of Diet 7-Up.
When you want the taste that won't weigh you down, the only way to go is up.
PD: That was filmed inside our airplane, and so, you can now do this.
We're based down in Florida.
Let me talk about the other thing I'm excited about.
The future of prizes. You know, prizes are a very old idea.
I had the pleasure of borrowing from the Longitude Prize and the Orteig Prize that put Lindbergh forward.
And we have made a decision in the X PRIZE Foundation to actually carry that concept forward into other technology areas, and we just took on a new mission statement: "to bring about radical breakthroughs in space and other technologies for the benefit of humanity."
And this is something that we're very excited about.
I showed this slide to Larry Page, who just joined our board.
And you know, when you give to a nonprofit, you might have 50 cents on the dollar.
If you have a matching grant, it's typically two or three to one.
If you put up a prize, you can get literally a 50 to one leverage on your dollars.
And that's huge. And then he turned around and said, "Well, if you back a prize institute that runs a 10 prize, you get 500 to one."
I said, "Well, that's great."
So, we have actually -- are looking to turn the X PRIZE into a world-class prize institute.
This is what happens when you put up a prize, when you announce it and teams start to begin doing trials.
You get publicity increase, and when it's won, publicity shoots through the roof -- if it's properly managed -- and that's part of the benefits to a sponsor.
Then, when the prize is actually won, after it's moving, you get societal benefits, you know, new technology, new capability.
And the benefit to the sponsors is the sum of the publicity and societal benefits over the long term.
That's our value proposition in a prize.
If you were going to go and try to create SpaceShipOne, or any kind of a new technology, you have to fund that from the beginning and maintain that funding with an uncertain outcome.
It may or may not happen. But if you put up a prize, the beautiful thing is, you know, it's a very small maintenance fee, and you pay on success.
Orteig didn't pay a dime out to the nine teams that went across -- tried to go across the Atlantic, and we didn't pay a dime until someone won the Ansari X PRIZE.
So, prizes work great.
You know, innovators, the entrepreneurs out there, you know that when you're going for a goal, the first thing you have to do is believe that you can do it yourself.
Then, you've got to, you know, face potential public ridicule of -- that's a crazy idea, it'll never work.
And then you have to convince others, so that they can, in fact, help you raise the funds, and then you've got to deal with the fact that you've got government bureaucracies and institutions that don't want you to move those things forward, and you have to deal with failures. What a prize does, what we've experienced a prize doing, is literally help to short-circuit or support all of these things, because a prize credentials the idea that this is a good idea.
Well, it must be a good idea.
Someone's offering 10 million dollars to go and do this thing.
And each of these areas was something that we found the Ansari X PRIZE helped short-circuit these for innovation.
So, as an organization, we put together a prize discovery process of how to come up with prizes and write the rules, and we're actually looking at creating prizes in a number of different categories.
We're looking at attacking energy, environment, nanotechnology -- and I'll talk about those more in a moment.
And the way we're doing that is we're creating prize teams within the X PRIZE. We have a space prize team.
We're going after an orbital prize.
We are looking at a number of energy prizes.
Craig Venter has just joined our board and we're doing a rapid genome sequencing prize with him, we'll be announcing later this fall, about -- imagine being able to sequence anybody's DNA for under 1,000 dollars, revolutionize medicine.
And clean water, education, medicine and even looking at social entrepreneurship.
So my final slide here is, the most critical tool for solving humanity's grand challenges -- it isn't technology, it isn't money, it's only one thing -- it's the committed, passionate human mind.
(Applause)
Now, Hegel -- he very famously said that Africa was a place without history, without past, without narrative.
Yet, I'd argue that no other continent has nurtured, has fought for, has celebrated its history more concertedly.
The struggle to keep African narrative alive has been one of the most consistent and hard-fought endeavors of African peoples, and it continues to be so.
The struggles endured and the sacrifices made to hold onto narrative in the face of enslavement, colonialism, racism, wars and so much else has been the underpinning narrative of our history.
And our narrative has not just survived the assaults that history has thrown at it.
We've left a body of material culture, artistic magistery and intellectual output.
We've mapped and we've charted and we've captured our histories in ways that are the measure of anywhere else on earth.
Long before the meaningful arrival of Europeans -- indeed, whilst Europe was still mired in its Dark Age -- Africans were pioneering techniques in recording, in nurturing history, forging revolutionary methods for keeping their story alive.
And living history, dynamic heritage -- it remains important to us.
We see that manifest in so many ways.
I'm reminded of how, just last year -- you might remember it -- the first members of the al Qaeda-affiliated Ansar Dine were indicted for war crimes and sent to the Hague.
And one of the most notorious was Ahmad al-Faqi, who was a young Malian, and he was charged, not with genocide, not with ethnic cleansing, but with being one of the instigators of a campaign to destroy some of Mali's most important cultural heritage.
This wasn't vandalism; these weren't thoughtless acts.
One of the things that al-Faqi said when he was asked to identify himself in court was that he was a graduate, that he was a teacher.
Over the course of 2012, they engaged in a systematic campaign to destroy Mali's cultural heritage.
This was a deeply considered waging of war in the most powerful way that could be envisaged: in destroying narrative, in destroying stories.
The attempted destruction of nine shrines, the central mosque and perhaps as many as 4,000 manuscripts was a considered act.
They understood the power of narrative to hold communities together, and they conversely understood that in destroying stories, they hoped they would destroy a people.
But just as Ansar Dine and their insurgency were driven by powerful narratives, so was the local population's defense of Timbuktu and its libraries.
These were communities who've grown up with stories of the Mali Empire; lived in the shadow of Timbuktu's great libraries.
They'd listened to songs of its origin from their childhood, and they weren't about to give up on that without a fight.
Over difficult months of 2012, during the Ansar Dine invasion, Malians, ordinary people, risked their lives to secrete and smuggle documents to safety, doing what they could to protect historic buildings and defend their ancient libraries.
And although they weren't always successful, many of the most important manuscripts were thankfully saved, and today each one of the shrines that was damaged during that uprising have been rebuilt, including the 14th-century mosque that is the symbolic heart of the city.
It's been fully restored.
But even in the bleakest periods of the occupation, enough of the population of Timbuktu simply would not bow to men like al-Faqi.
They wouldn't allow their history to be wiped away, and anyone who has visited that part of the world, they will understand why, why stories, why narrative, why histories are of such importance.
History matters.
History really matters.
And for peoples of African descent, who have seen their narrative systematically assaulted over centuries, this is critically important.
This is part of a recurrent echo across our history of ordinary people making a stand for their story, for their history.
Just as in the 19th century, enslaved peoples of African descent in the Caribbean fought under threat of punishment, fought to practice their religions, to celebrate Carnival, to keep their history alive.
Ordinary people were prepared to make great sacrifices, some even the ultimate sacrifice, for their history.
And it was through control of narrative that some of the most devastating colonial campaigns were crystallized.
It was through the dominance of one narrative over another that the worst manifestations of colonialism became palpable.
When, in 1874, the British attacked the Ashanti, they overran Kumasi and captured the Asantehene.
They knew that controlling territory and subjugating the head of state -- it wasn't enough.
They recognized that the emotional authority of state lay in its narrative and the symbols that represented it, like the Golden Stool.
They understood that control of story was absolutely critical to truly controlling a people.
And the Ashanti understood, too, and they never were to relinquish the precious Golden Stool, never to completely capitulate to the British.
Narrative matters.
In 1871, Karl Mauch, a German geologist working in Southern Africa, he stumbled across an extraordinary complex, a complex of abandoned stone buildings.
And he never quite recovered from what he saw: a granite, drystone city, stranded on an outcrop above an empty savannah: Great Zimbabwe.
And Mauch had no idea who was responsible for what was obviously an astonishing feat of architecture, but he felt sure of one single thing: this narrative needed to be claimed.
He later wrote that the wrought architecture of Great Zimbabwe was simply too sophisticated, too special to have been built by Africans.
Mauch, like dozens of Europeans that followed in his footsteps, speculated on who might have built the city.
And one went as far as to posit, "I do not think that I am far wrong if I suppose that that ruin on the hill is a copy of King Solomon's Temple."
And as I'm sure you know, Mauch, he hadn't stumbled upon King Solomon's Temple, but upon a purely African complex of buildings constructed by a purely African civilization from the 11th century onward.
But like Leo Frobenius, a fellow German anthropologist who speculated some years later, upon seeing the Nigerian Ife Heads for the very first time, that they must have been artifacts from the long-lost kingdom of Atlantis.
He felt, just like Hegel, an almost instinctive need to rob Africa of its history.
These ideas are so irrational, so deeply held, that even when faced with the physical archaeology, they couldn't think rationally.
They could no longer see.
And like so much of Africa's relationship with Enlightenment Europe, it involved appropriation, denigration and control of the continent.
It involved an attempt to bend narrative to Europe's ends.
And if Mauch had really wanted to find an answer to his question, "Where did Great Zimbabwe or that great stone building come from?"
he would have needed to begin his quest a thousand miles away from Great Zimbabwe, at the eastern edge of the continent, where Africa meets the Indian Ocean.
He would have needed to trace the gold and the goods from some of the great trading emporia of the Swahili coast to Great Zimbabwe, to gain a sense of the scale and influence of that mysterious culture, to get a picture of Great Zimbabwe as a political, cultural entity through the kingdoms and the civilizations that were drawn under its control.
For centuries, traders have been drawn to that bit of the coast from as far away as India and China and the Middle East.
And it might be tempting to interpret, because it's exquisitely beautiful, that building, it might be tempting to interpret it as just an exquisite, symbolic jewel, a vast ceremonial sculpture in stone.
But the site must have been a complex at the center of a significant nexus of economies that defined this region for a millennium.
This matters.
These narratives matter.
Even today, the fight to tell our story is not just against time.
It's not just against organizations like Ansar Dine.
It's also in establishing a truly African voice after centuries of imposed histories.
We don't just have to recolonize our history, but we have to find ways to build back the intellectual underpinning that Hegel denied was there at all.
We have to rediscover African philosophy, African perspectives, African history.
The flowering of Great Zimbabwe -- it wasn't a freak moment.
It was part of a burgeoning change across the whole of the continent.
Perhaps the great exemplification of that was Sundiata Keita, the founder of the Mali Empire, probably the greatest empire that West Africa has ever seen.
Sundiata Keita was born about 1235, growing up in a time of profound flux.
He was seeing the transition between the Berber dynasties to the north, he may have heard about the rise of the Ife to the south and perhaps even the dominance of the Solomaic Dynasty in Ethiopia to the east.
And he must have been aware that he was living through a moment of quickening change, of growing confidence in our continent.
He must have been aware of new states that were building their influence from as far afield as Great Zimbabwe and the Swahili sultanates, each engaged directly or indirectly beyond the continent itself, each driven also to invest in securing their intellectual and cultural legacy.
He probably would have engaged in trade with these peer nations as part of a massive continental nexus of great medieval African economies.
And like all of those great empires, Sundiata Keita invested in securing his legacy through history by using story -- not just formalizing the idea of storytelling, but in building a whole convention of telling and retelling his story as a key to founding a narrative for his empire.
And these stories, in musical form, are still sung today.
Now, several decades after the death of Sundiata, a new king ascended the throne, Mansa Musa, its most famous emperor.
Now, Mansa Musa is famed for his vast gold reserves and for sending envoys to the courts of Europe and the Middle East.
He was every bit as ambitious as his predecessors, but saw a different kind of route of securing his place in history.
In 1324, Mansa Musa went on pilgrimage to Mecca, and he traveled with a retinue of thousands.
It's been said that 100 camels each carried 100 pounds of gold.
It's been recorded that he built a fully functioning mosque every Friday of his trip, and performed so many acts of kindness, that the great Berber chronicler, Ibn Battuta, wrote, "He flooded Cairo with kindness, spending so much in the markets of North Africa and the Middle East that it affected the price of gold into the next decade."
And on his return, Mansa Musa memorialized his journey by building a mosque at the heart of his empire.
And the legacy of what he left behind, Timbuktu, it represents one of the great bodies of written historical material produced by African scholars: about 700,000 medieval documents, ranging from scholarly works to letters, which have been preserved often by private households.
And at its peak, in the 15th and 16th centuries, the university there was as influential as any educational establishment in Europe, attracting about 25,000 students.
This was in a city of around 100,000 people.
It cemented Timbuktu as a world center of learning.
But this was a very particular kind of learning that was focused and driven by Islam.
And since I first visited Timbuktu, I've visited many other libraries across Africa, and despite Hegel's view that Africa has no history, not only is it a continent with an embarrassment of history, it has developed unrivaled systems for collecting and promoting it.
There are thousands of small archives, textile drum stores, that have become more than repositories of manuscripts and material culture.
They have become fonts of communal narrative, symbols of continuity, and I'm pretty sure that many of those European philosophers who questioned an African intellectual tradition must have, beneath their prejudices, been aware of the contribution of Africa's intellectuals to Western learning.
They must have known of the great North African medieval philosophers who had driven the Mediterranean.
They must have known about and been aware of that tradition that is part of Christianity, of the three wise men.
And in the medieval period, Balthazar, that third wise man, was represented as an African king.
And he became hugely popular as the third intellectual leg of Old World learning, alongside Europe and Asia, as a peer.
These things were well-known.
These communities did not grow up in isolation.
Timbuktu's wealth and power developed because the city became a hub of lucrative intercontinental trade routes.
This was one center in a borderless, transcontinental, ambitious, outwardly focused, confident continent.
Berber merchants, they carried salt and textiles and new precious goods and learning down into West Africa from across the desert.
But as you can see from this map that was produced a little time after the life of Mansa Musa, there was also a nexus of sub-Saharan trade routes, along which African ideas and traditions added to the intellectual worth of Timbuktu and indeed across the desert to Europe.
Manuscripts and material culture, they have become fonts of communal narrative, symbols of continuity.
And I'm pretty sure that those European intellectuals who cast aspersions on our history, they knew fundamentally about our traditions.
And today, as strident forces like Ansar Dine and Boko Haram grow popular in West Africa, it's that spirit of truly indigenous, dynamic, intellectual defiance that holds ancient traditions in good stead.
When Mansa Musa made Timbuktu his capital, he looked upon the city as a Medici looked upon Florence: as the center of an open, intellectual, entrepreneurial empire that thrived on great ideas wherever they came from.
The city, the culture, the very intellectual DNA of this region remains so beautifully complex and diverse, that it will always remain, in part, located in storytelling traditions that derive from indigenous, pre-Islamic traditions.
The highly successful form of Islam that developed in Mali became popular because it accepted those freedoms and that inherent cultural diversity.
And the celebration of that complexity, that love of rigorously contested discourse, that appreciation of narrative, was and remains, in spite of everything, the very heart of West Africa.
And today, as the shrines and the mosque vandalized by Ansar Dine have been rebuilt, many of the instigators of their destruction have been jailed.
And we are left with powerful lessons, reminded once again of how our history and narrative have held communities together for millennia, how they remain vital in making sense of modern Africa.
And we're also reminded of how the roots of this confident, intellectual, entrepreneurial, outward-facing, culturally porous, tariff-free Africa was once the envy of the world.
But those roots, they remain.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
What does it mean to be a witness?
Why is it important to bear witness to people's suffering, especially when those people are isolated from us?
And what happens when we turn away?
Three years ago, I traveled to the Central African Republic to report on its ongoing war.
I'd heard warnings of massacres in the country's jungles and deserts, but no one could locate these massacres or tell me who was killed, or when.
I drove into this war with little information.
I witnessed scenes that were tragic and unreal, and only at the end did I realize that I had witnessed the slow preparation of ethnic cleansing.
The Central African Republic is a country of about five million people the size of Texas in the center of Africa.
The country has known chronic violence since French colonial rule ended in 1960.
The war I reported on was between the minority Muslim government, called the Seleka, and citizen militias, mostly Christian, called the anti-balaka.
The first sign of the impending cleansing was the breakdown of trust within communities.
Three days after I arrived in the country, I watched the small city of Gaga be abandoned.
A battle was about to break out.
And to save themselves, many people were working as government spies, identifying friends and neighbors to be killed.
Cities and towns, any place with humans, had become unsafe.
So people moved to the jungle.
I felt strangely isolated as pigs and livestock moved into the empty homes.
In a war zone, you know that you are near the killing when people have left.
The war moved across the jungle and reached Gaga, and I was surrounded by the thunder of bombs.
Government forces drove into the jungle to attack a town sheltering a militia.
I rode on motorcycle for hours, crossing jungle streams and tall elephant grass, but I only got to the town after the government had burned it and its people were gone.
To see if I could speak to someone, I shouted out that I was a friend, that I would not hurt them.
A woman in a red shirt ran out of the forest.
Others cautiously emerged from the trees and asked, "Est-ce les gens savent?"
"Do people know?"
The question surprised me.
Their children were hungry and sick, but they didn't ask for food or medicine.
They asked me, "Do people know what is happening to us?"
I felt helpless as I wrote down their question.
And I became determined that this moment in their lives should not be forgotten.
In bearing witness to their crisis, I felt a small communion with these people.
From far away, this war had felt like a footnote in world news.
As a witness, the war felt like history unfolding.
The government denied that it was committing any violence, but I continually drove through towns where people described government massacres from a day or a week before.
I felt overwhelmed and tried to calm myself.
As I reported on these massacres, I bought and ate little sweets, seeking the familiar comfort of their taste.
Central Africans ate these sweets to ease their hunger, leaving a trail of thousands of plastic wrappers as they fled.
On the few radio stations still operating in the country, I mostly heard pop music.
As the war mounted, we received less information about the massacres.
It became easier to feel a sense of normalcy.
I witnessed the effect of this missing information.
Two weeks later, I slowly and anxiously drove into an isolated militia headquarters, a town called PK100.
Here, Christian fighters told me that all Muslims were foreigners, evil and allied with the government.
They likened Muslims to animals.
Without neutral observers or media to counter this absurd narrative, it became the single narrative in these camps.
The militias began to hunt down Muslims, and emptied the capital, Bangui, of nearly 140,000 Muslims in just a few months.
Most of the killing and fleeing of Muslims went unrecorded by witnesses.
I'm telling you about my reporting in the Central African Republic, but I still ask myself why I went there.
Why put myself at risk?
I do this work because I feel that ignored people in all our communities tell us something important about who we are.
When information is missing, people have the power to manipulate reality.
Without witnesses, we would believe that those thousands of massacred people are still alive, that those hundreds of burned homes are still standing.
A war zone can pass for a mostly peaceful place when no one is watching.
And a witness can become precious, and their gaze most necessary, when violence passes silently, unseen and unheard.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Picture it: a big, sweaty, tattooed man in a cowboy hat and chaps, is in the ring as the arena full of fans cheer him on.
Their hero: "Cowboy" Gator Magraw.
Gator bounces off the ropes and is quickly body-slammed to the mat.
His wild opponent leaps into the air, crashing down onto Gator's rib cage.
Gator struggles to breathe, wondering: "Is this really what my father wanted for me?"
(Laughter) That wild man in the chaps ...
was me.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Cheers) And the answer to the question, surprisingly, is yes.
(Laughter) I grew up watching professional wrestling with my dad.
And like him, I loved everything about it: the showmanship, the athletic skill, the drama.
I'd be this little boy, bouncing all over our living room, pretending to be my favorite wrestlers from TV.
My dad actually reminded me a little bit of Hulk Hogan, but I was Hulk Hogan and he was Andre the Giant.
I'd get all serious on him and say things like, "Dad ...
someday I am going to be world heavyweight champion."
And he would usually smile and very calmly say, "OK, then I guess I can count on you to be my retirement fund."
(Laughter) When I was 16, a small wrestling show came to my little town in Minnesota.
I couldn't believe it.
Nothing like that had ever come to my town before.
So I got to the arena early in the morning the day of the show, waiting out in the parking lot to see if I could spot some wrestlers pulling up in their cars.
It wasn't as creepy as it sounds.
But I could definitely tell who the wrestlers were, just the way they walked.
They were tall and confident and intimidating, with their tank tops and Zubaz and fanny packs.
Why wouldn't I want to be them?
(Laughter) All I could think about was who are these people, and what are they like?
How did they become wrestlers?
So before the show started, I walked into this tiny arena -- more like a gymnasium -- and I asked them if I could help set up the wrestling ring.
"Sure, kid. No problem."
And then I pleaded with them to show me some wrestling moves.
"Sure, kid. No problem."
Man, they would just punch and kick me -- hard!
But I never complained.
They would come to my town for one night every couple of months that year, and then -- poof! -- next day, they were gone.
By the next year, they finally told me about an actual wrestling training camp that one of the wrestlers was running, and I begged my parents to sign me up.
Next thing I knew, I was a high school senior by day and wrestling in front of live audiences by night.
I had this giant poster of an alligator hanging on my bedroom wall.
So when I needed to come up with a wrestling name at the last minute and Jesse "The Body" Ventura was already taken -- (Laughter) I went with "Gator."
I also wrestled in a t-shirt and camouflage pants because that's what I had in my closet.
I hadn't quite figured out how to develop my own persona yet, but I was learning.
But I was a wrestler.
And my dad would come to all my matches wearing a t-shirt that said, "Papa Gator" across the front.
(Laughter) And he'd brag to his friends about how his son was going to pay for his retirement someday.
(Laughter) And I would've.
Not long after I started wrestling, my dad unexpectedly passed away.
And as you can imagine, especially as a teenage boy, it destroyed me.
If you've ever lost someone, you know what a difficult time that can be.
Your mind -- it's not working right.
The whole thing is just so surreal.
I wanted to feel normal again, even if it was for just a second, so I went back to wrestling almost immediately.
Wrestling belonged to me and my dad, you know?
So there I was, sitting in the locker room, getting ready for a match within days of my dad passing away.
He was gone.
And sitting there alone -- it felt like I was hiding.
But it also felt like I needed to be there.
One of the wrestlers who'd been on the scene a long time knew what I was going through, and he came over to see how I was holding up.
I couldn't get the words out.
I just said, "I don't know what I'm doing."
And then we just sat there in silence -- just ... silence.
Before he got up to get ready for his own match, he gave me this piece of advice that would change the entire direction of my life.
He told me the best wrestlers are just themselves, but "turned up."
He said successful wrestlers find the traits within themselves they're the strongest at and make those the focus of who they become in the ring.
So there I sat -- a scared teenager who didn't know who he was or why he was even wrestling anymore.
I looked around the locker room at some of the other wrestlers, and I thought, "I look so different. How can I ever be like them?"
And then it hit me.
That's the moment I realized I didn't have to be like them.
What I did have to do was find out: What did it mean to be me?
What made me unique, and how could I use it to my advantage?
I knew I wasn't a chiseled athlete like some of these guys, but I really didn't care.
So the first thing I thought was, "How can I amplify something as simple as: comfortable with my own body?"
I didn't know.
And then I thought: Speedo.
(Laughter) (Applause) Or "trunks," as we call them in wrestling.
Yeah, trunks.
I could be this big guy who was comfortable wearing these little trunks in front of a bunch of strangers.
So I ditched the t-shirt and camouflage pants, and Gator's new wardrobe was born.
(Laughter) I was also pretty good at drawing cartoons, so I wondered if I could turn that up.
I could design my own wrestling costumes, so each pair of trunks would have its own unique design and color, all of them completely different -- and extremely comfortable, by the way.
(Laughter) And I was also the funny kid in school, believe it or not.
So I thought maybe I could turn that up.
Maybe I could go from the boy who made his buddies laugh to the man who could rally hundreds or thousands.
So I committed to the idea that my character wasn't going to be as scary as some of the others.
I'd be hilarious from the moment I walked into the arena.
With every wrestling match, I dug deeper.
I found out that I could laugh at myself.
So this guy would dance and sing his entrance music all the way to the ring.
That was dancing, by the way.
(Laughter) I found out that I was an OK wrestler, but I was an even better entertainer.
And turning myself up made me unforgettable to the fans.
I was trying to find those things about me -- the simple things that were special, and then ask, "How can I turn them up?"
Now, I knew I wanted my character to be a man's man like my dad was.
I thought, "What's more of a man's man than a cowboy?"
And that's when Gator became "Cowboy" ... Gator ...
Yeah, I needed a last name.
I thought about it until my head hurt. I couldn't come up with anything.
I'm sitting there watching TV one night, flipping through the channels, and this commercial comes on about a country singer who had just won an Entertainer of the Year award.
Tim McGraw.
And I liked his music.
It was just all part of my process.
But I just kept turning myself up until I became Cowboy Gator Magraw!
(Laughter) (Applause) And I knew that if I kept turning myself up and pushing myself harder, the opportunities would come.
And then it finally happened.
In the middle of the night, I got a phone call.
It was the call I wish my dad was around to hear.
The WWE, the biggest wrestling organization in the world, wanted me to come and be a part of Monday Night Raw.
Yes -- all of my hard work and miles on the road were finally paying off.
I got to walk down the WWE Raw entrance ramp on live television -- (Laughter) dressed up as a fake security guard -- (Laughter) to escort another wrestler to the ring.
(Laughter) Sure, I was disappointed I didn't get to wrestle, but very few wrestlers get any kind of call from the WWE.
Maybe one in a few hundred.
And becoming Cowboy Gator Magraw is what got me there.
So instead of walking away that day, I decided to turn myself up again and become the best security guard I could.
In fact, I did it so well, I was the only guard to get a close-up on TV that night.
That's a big deal, you know?
(Laughter) And I got to sit backstage that entire day with some of the most famous pro wrestlers in the world, some of which were heroes of mine as a kid.
And I got to listen to them and learn from them, and for that day, I was accepted as one of them.
Maybe my experience with the WWE wasn't ideal.
I mean, I didn't get to wrestle.
But it made me work harder, turning myself up louder year after year.
I was becoming the biggest version of myself in the ring, and other people took notice.
Before I knew it, I'd gone from wrestling maybe once a month in Minnesota to as often as four times a week all over the United States on the independent wrestling circuit.
I was literally living my dream.
While wrestling over the next few years, I suffered a pretty bad shoulder injury right around the same time my wife and I found out that we were expecting our first child.
I know what you're thinking, but believe me when I say those two events are completely unrelated.
(Laughter) But I needed shoulder surgery, and I wanted to be home with my family.
It was my turn to be a dad.
So on July 27, 2007, I wrestled my final match, and walked away from professional wrestling to pursue the next chapter of my life.
And as time passed, the strangest thing started to happen.
I found out that once someone has been turned up, it's pretty hard to turn them down.
I left the ring but Gator stayed with me, and I use the turned-up version of myself every day.
My beautiful wife has been with me through this entire journey.
And by the way -- she does not like pro wrestling.
(Laughter) Like, at all.
But she was always my biggest fan.
She still is.
She knows there's always going to be some part of Gator Magraw in here, and she wants our daughter and twin sons to discover themselves the way that I did, but probably with fewer body slams and steel chair shots to the head.
I mean, do you know how many times she's had to remind me not to clothesline the referees at my kid's soccer games?
(Laughter) I mean, it was just the one time, and my daughter was clearly fouled!
(Laughter) As a parent now, I've begun to realize that my dad wanted something much more valuable than a retirement fund.
Like most parents, he just wanted his kids to reach their fullest potential.
I'm trying to teach my children that turning yourself up is just not some perfect idea of how to be great, it's a way of living -- constantly looking for what makes you different and how you can amplify it for the world to see.
And by the way, my kids don't like wrestling, either.
(Laughter) But that's OK with me, because they each have their own unique talents that can be turned up just like the rest of us.
My one son -- he's a whiz at electronics.
So maybe helping him turn up makes him become the next Steve Jobs.
My other son and my daughter -- they're great at art, so maybe helping them turn up their gifts helps them become the next Pablo Picasso.
You never know what you have the ability to do until you dig.
And don't be afraid to put yourself out there.
I mean, look around.
They say that if you get nervous in front of an audience, just imagine them in their underwear.
(Laughter) (Applause) Look, the wrestling circus doesn't need to come to your town before you get an invitation to be the real you -- the bigger, more stunning version of yourself.
It doesn't even necessarily come from our parents.
Turning yourself up means looking inward toward our true selves and harnessing the voice that says, "Maybe, just maybe, I am more than I thought I was."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I recognized the roles that were placed on me very early.
One persistent concept that I observed -- existing in our language, in our media -- was that women are not only supposed to have children, they are supposed to want to.
This existed everywhere.
It existed in the ways that adults spoke to me when they posed questions in the context of "when."
"When you get married ..."
"When you have kids ..."
And these future musings were always presented to me like part of this American dream, but it always felt to me like someone else's dream.
You see, a value that I have always understood about myself was that I never wanted children.
And as a kid, when I would try to explain this, this disconnect between their roles and my values, they often laughed in the way that adults do at the absurdities of children.
And they would tell me knowingly, "You'll change your mind."
And people have been saying things like that to me my whole life.
Otherwise polite conversation can turn intrusive fast.
"Does your husband know?"
(Laughter) "Do your parents know?"
(Laughter) "Don't you want a family?"
"Don't you want to leave anything behind?"
And the primary buzzword when discussing childlessness, "That's selfish."
There are countless reasons a woman may have for choosing to abstain from motherhood, the majority of them not self-prioritizing.
But it is still socially acceptable to publicly vilify women as such, because none of these reasons have made it into the social narrative.
When I was little and learning about the inevitability of maternity, it was never explained to me the commonness of these factors that women consider, like the risk of passing on hereditary illness, the danger of having to stop life-saving medication for the duration of your pregnancy, concern about overpopulation, your access to resources, and the fact that there are 415,000 children in the foster-care system in the United States at any given time.
Reasons like these, many more, and the fact that I don't like to leave things of this magnitude to chance, all informed my decision to become surgically sterilized.
I began my research eagerly.
I wanted to fully understand all that was going to come with undergoing a tubal ligation, which is just another word for getting your tubes tied.
I wanted to know approval to aftermath, satisfaction rates, risks, statistics.
And at first, I was empowered.
You see, the way the narrative has always been taught to me, I would have thought that women who didn't want children were so rare, and then I learned one in five American women won't be having a biological child -- some by choice, some by chance.
(Applause) But I was not alone.
But the more I read, the more disheartened I became.
I read women's stories, trying desperately to get this procedure.
I learned how common it was for women to exhaust their finances appealing to dozens of ob-gyns over many years, only to be turned down so many times, often with such blatant disrespect that they just gave up.
Women reported that medical practitioners were often condescending and dismissive of their motivations, being told things like, "Come back when you're married with a child."
But women who did have children, who went to go get this procedure, were told they were too young, or they didn't have enough children, which is very interesting, because the legal requirements in my state for getting this kind of surgery were, "Be at least 21 years old," "appear of sound mind, acting of your own accord," and "have a 30-day waiting period."
And I was perplexed that I could meet all of these legal requirements and still have to face a battle in the exam room for my bodily autonomy.
And it was daunting, but I was determined.
I remember I dressed so professionally to that first appointment.
(Laughter) I sat up straight.
I spoke clearly.
I wanted to give that doctor every piece of evidence that I was not the date of birth in that file.
And I made sure to mention things like, "I just got my bachelor's degree and I'm applying to these doctoral programs, I'm going to study these things."
And "my long-term partner has this kind of business," and "I've done research on this for months.
I understand everything about it, all the risks."
Because I needed the doctor to know that this was not a whim, not reactionary, not your 20-something looking to go out and party without fear of getting knocked up ...
(Laughter) that this supported something integral to who I was.
And I understand informed consent, so I fully expected to be reeducated on how it all worked, but ...
At one point, the information being given to me started to feel agenda'd, interlaced with bias and inflated statistics.
The questions began to feel interrogative.
At first they were asking me questions that seemed to understand my situation better, and then it seemed like they were asking questions to try to trip me up.
I felt like I was on the witness stand, being cross-examined.
The doctor asked me about my partner.
"How does he or she feel about all of this?"
"Well, I've been with the same man for five years, and he fully supports any decision I make for my body."
And he said, "Well, what happens in the future, if you change partners?
What happens when that person wants children?"
And I didn't quite know how to react to that, because what I was hearing was this doctor tell me that I'm supposed to disregard everything I believe if a partner demands children.
So I told him not to worry about that.
My stance on childbearing has always been first date conversation.
(Laughter) (Cheering) (Laughter) He then asks me to consider how "in 20 years, you could really come to regret this" ...
as though I hadn't.
I told him, "OK, if I wake up one day and realize, you know, I wish I'd made a different decision back then, the truth is, I'd only removed a single path to parenthood.
I never needed biology to form family anyway."
(Applause) And I would much rather deal with that any day than deal with one day waking up, realize I'd had a child that I didn't really want or was prepared to care for.
Because one of these affects only me.
The other affects a child, their development, their well-being -- (Applause) and human beings are not to be gambled with.
He then tells me why no one was going to approve this procedure, certainly not he, because of a concept called medical paternalism, which allows him, as my well-informed provider, to make decisions for me ...
based on his perception of my best interest, regardless of what I, as the patient, want or believe.
He takes this opportunity to step out and discuss my case with my potential surgeon, and through the door, I hear him describe me as a little girl.
I was so offended.
I wanted to defend myself.
I wanted to explicitly explain to each one of these providers how they were treating me, that it was belittling and sexist, and I didn't have to take it.
But I did take it.
I swallowed every sharp word in my throat, clenched my jaw, and instead answered each one of their condescending questions and statements.
I had come here looking for objectivity and support and instead I felt dismissed and silenced, and I hated myself for it.
I hated that I was letting people disrespect me repeatedly.
But this was my one shot.
That was one of multiple consultations that I had to go to.
At one point, I had seen five or six medical professionals in the same hour.
The door to the exam room felt more like the door to a clown car.
There's my primary, there's his colleague, the director, OK.
It felt like I was asking them to infect me with smallpox instead of, I don't know, obtain birth control.
But I didn't waver, and I was persistent, and I eventually convinced one of them to allow the procedure.
And even as I am in the room, signing the consent forms and getting the hormone shots and tying up loose ends ...
my doctor is shaking his head in disapproval.
"You'll change your mind."
I never really understood how strongly this society clings to this role until I went through this.
I experienced firsthand, repeatedly, how people, be it medical providers, colleagues, strangers, were literally unable to separate me being a woman from me being a mother.
And I've always believed that having children was an extension of womanhood, not the definition.
I believe that a woman's value should never be determined by whether or not she has a child, because that strips her of her entire identity as an adult unto herself.
Women have this amazing ability to create life, but when we say that that is her purpose, that says that her entire existence is a means to an end.
It's so easy to forget the roles that society places on us are so much more than mere titles.
What about the weight that comes with them, the pressure to conform to these standards ...
the fear associated with questioning them, and the desires that we cast aside to accept them?
There are many paths to happiness and fulfillment.
They all look very different, but I believe that every one is paved with the right to self-determination.
I want women to know that your choice to embrace or forego motherhood is not in any way tied to your worthiness or identity as spouses, as adults, or as women ...
and there absolutely is a choice behind maternity, and it is yours and yours alone.
Thank you.
(Applause)
According to the UN, billions of people still live without an address.
The economist Hernando de Soto said, "Without an address, you live outside the law.
You might as well not exist."
I'm here to tell you how my team and I are trying to change that.
If you go to an online map and look at a favela in Brazil or a township in South Africa, you'll see a few streets but a lot of empty space.
But if you flip to satellite view, there are thousands of people, homes and businesses in this vast, unmapped and unaddressed spaces.
In Ghana's capital, Accra, there are numbers and letters scrawled onto the sides of walls, where they piloted address systems but not finished them.
But these places, these unaddressed places, hold huge economic potential.
Here's why the issue of addressing stuck with me.
I worked in the music business for 10 years, and what you may not know about the music world is that every day, people struggle with the problems of addressing.
So from the musicians who have to find the gigs to the production companies who bring the equipment, everyone somehow always gets lost.
We even had to add someone to our schedules who was the person you called when you thought you'd arrived but then realized you hadn't.
And we had some pretty bad days, like in Italy, where a truck driver unloaded all the equipment an hour north of Rome, not an hour south of Rome, and a slightly worse day where a keyboard player called me and said, "Chris, don't panic, but we may have just sound-checked at the wrong people's wedding."
(Laughter) So not long after the fated Rome event, I chatted this through with a friend of mine who is a mathematician, and we thought it was a problem we could do something about.
We thought, well, we could make a new system, but it shouldn't look like the old system.
We agreed that addresses were bad.
We knew we wanted something very precise, but GPS coordinates, latitude and longitude, were just too complicated.
So we divided the world into three-meter squares.
The world divides into around 57 trillion three-meter squares, and we found that there are enough combinations of three dictionary words that we could name every three-meter square in the world uniquely with just three words.
We used 40,000 words, so that's 40,000 cubed, 64 trillion combinations of three words, which is more than enough for the 57-trillion-odd three-meter squares, with a few spare.
So that's exactly what we did.
We divided the world into three-meter squares, gave each one a unique, three-word identifier -- what we call a three-word address.
So for example, right here, I'm standing at mustards.coupons.pinup, (Laughter) but over here ...
I'm standing at pinched. singularly.tutorial.
But we haven't just done this in English.
We thought it was essential that people should be able to use this system in their own language.
So far, we've built it into 14 languages, including French, Swahili and Arabic, and we're working on more now, like Xhosa, Zulu and Hindi.
But this idea can do a lot more than just get my musicians to their gigs on time.
If the 75 percent of countries that struggle with reliable addressing started using three-word addresses, there's a stack of far more important applications.
In Durban, South Africa, an NGO called Gateway Health have distributed 11,000 three-word address signs to their community, so the pregnant mothers, when they go into labor, can call the emergency services and tell them exactly where to pick them up from, because otherwise, the ambulances have often taken hours to find them.
In Mongolia, the National Post Service have adopted the system and are now doing deliveries to many people's houses for the first time.
The UN are using it to geotag photos in disaster zones so they can deliver aid to exactly the right place.
Even Domino's Pizza are using it in the Caribbean, because they haven't been able to find customers' homes, but they really want to get their pizza to them while its still hot.
Shortly, you'll be able to get into a car, speak the three words, and the car will navigate you to that exact spot.
In Africa, the continent has leapfrogged phone lines to go to mobile phones, bypassed traditional banks to go straight to mobile payments.
We're really proud that the post services of three African countries -- Nigeria, Djibouti and Côte d'Ivoire, have gone straight to adopting three-word addresses, which means that people in those countries have a really simple way to explain where they live, today.
For me, poor addressing was an annoying frustration, but for billions of people, it's a huge business inefficiency, severely hampers their infrastructure growth, and can cost lives.
We're on a mission to change that, three words at a time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Let's go back to 1957.
Representatives from six European countries had come to Rome to sign the treaty that was to create the European Union.
Europe was destroyed.
A world war had emerged from Europe.
The human suffering was unbelievable and unprecedented.
Those men wanted to create a peaceful, democratic Europe, a Europe that works for its people.
And one of the many building blocks in that peace project was a common European market.
Already back then, they saw how markets, when left to themselves, can sort of slip into being just the private property of big businesses and cartels, meeting the needs of some businesses and not the needs of customers.
So from our very first day, in 1957, the European Union had rules to defend fair competition.
And that means competition on the merits, that you compete on the quality of your products, the prices you can offer, the services, the innovation that you produce.
That's competition on the merits.
You have a fair chance of making it on such a market.
And it's my job, as Commissioner for Competition, to make sure that companies who do business in Europe live by those rules.
But let's take a step back.
Why do we need rules on competition at all?
Why not just let businesses compete?
Isn't that also the best for us if they compete freely, since more competition drives more quality, lower prices, more innovation?
Well, mostly it is.
But the problem is that sometimes, for businesses, competition can be inconvenient, because competition means that the race is never over, the game is never won.
No matter how well you were doing in the past, there's always someone who are out there wanting to take your place.
So the temptation to avoid competition is powerful.
It's rooted in motives as old as Adam and Eve: in greed for yet more money, in fear of losing your position in the market and all the benefits it brings.
And when greed and fear are linked to power, you have a dangerous mix.
We see that in political life.
In part of the world, the mix of greed and fear means that those who get power become reluctant to give it back.
One of the many things I like and admire in our democracies are the norms that make our leaders hand over power when voters tell them to.
And competition rules can do a similar thing in the market, making sure that greed and fear doesn't overcome fairness.
Because those rules mean that companies cannot misuse their power to undermine competition.
Think for a moment about your car.
It has thousands of parts, from the foam that makes the seats to the electrical wiring to the light bulbs.
And for many of those parts, the world's carmakers, they are dependent on only a few suppliers.
So it's hardly surprising that it is kind of tempting for those suppliers to come together and fix prices.
But just imagine what that could do to the final price of your new car in the market.
Except, it's not imaginary.
The European Commission has dealt with already seven different car parts cartels, and we're still investigating some.
Here, the Department of Justice are also looking into the market for car parts, and it has called it the biggest criminal investigation it has ever pursued.
But without competition rules, there would be no investigation, and there would be nothing to stop this collusion from happening and the prices of your car to go up.
Yet it's not only companies who can undermine fair competition.
Governments can do it, too.
And governments do that when they hand out subsidies to just the favorite few, the selected.
They may do that when they hand out subsidies -- and, of course, all financed by taxpayers -- to companies.
That may be in the form of special tax treatments, like the tax benefits that firms like Fiat, Starbucks and Apple got from some governments in Europe.
Those subsidies stop companies from competing on equal terms.
They can mean that the companies that succeed, well, they are the companies that got the most subsidy, the ones that are the best-connected, and not, as it should be, the companies that serve consumers the best.
So there are times when we need to step in to make sure that competition works the way it should.
By doing that, we help the market to work fairly, because competition gives consumers the power to demand a fair deal.
It means that companies know that if they cannot offer good prices or the service that's expected, well, the customers will go somewhere else.
And that sort of fairness is more important than we may sometimes realize.
Very few people think about politics all the time.
Some even skip it at election time.
But we are all in the market.
Every day, we are in the market.
And we don't want businesses to agree on prices in the back office.
We don't want them to divide the market between them.
We don't want one big company just to shut out competitors from ever showing us what they can do.
If that happens, well, obviously, we feel that someone has cheated us, that we are being ignored or taken for granted by the market.
And that may undermine not only our trust in the market but also our trust in the society.
In a recent survey, more than two-thirds of Europeans said that they had felt the effects of lack of competition: that the price for electricity was too high, that the price for the medicines they needed was too high, that they had no real choice if they wanted to travel by bus or by plane, or they got poor service from their internet provider.
In short, they found that the market didn't treat them fairly.
And that might seem like very small things, but they can give you this sense that the world isn't really fair.
And they see the market, which was supposed to serve everyone, become more like the private property of a few powerful companies.
The market is not the society.
Our societies are, of course, much, much more than the market.
But lack of trust in the market can rub off on society so we lose trust in our society as well.
And it may be the most important thing we have, trust.
We can trust each other if we are treated as equals.
If we are all to have the same chances, well, we all have to follow the same fundamental rules.
Of course, some people and some businesses are more successful than others, but we do not trust in a society if the prizes are handed out even before the contest begins.
And this is where competition rules come in, because when we make sure that markets work fairly, then businesses compete on the merits, and that helps to build the trust that we need as citizens to feel comfortable and in control, and the trust that allows our society to work.
Because without trust, everything becomes harder.
Just to live our daily lives, we need to trust in strangers, to trust the banks who keep our money, the builders who build our home, the electrician who comes to fix the wiring, the doctor who treats us when we're ill, not to mention the other drivers on the road, and everyone knows that they are crazy.
And yet, we have to trust them to do the right thing.
And the thing is that the more our societies grow, the more important trust becomes and the harder it is to build.
And that is a paradox of modern societies.
And this is especially true when technology changes the way that we interact.
Of course, to some degree, technology can help us to build trust in one another with ratings systems and other systems that enable the sharing economy.
But technology also creates completely new challenges when they ask us not to trust in other people but to trust in algorithms and computers.
Of course, we all see and share and appreciate all the good that new technology can do us.
It's a lot of good.
Autonomous cars can give people with disabilities new independence.
It can save us all time, and it can make a much, much better use of resources.
Algorithms that rely on crunching enormous amounts of data can enable our doctors to give us a much better treatment, and many other things.
But no one is going to hand over their medical data or step into a car that's driven by an algorithm unless they trust the companies that they are dealing with.
And that trust isn't always there.
Today, for example, less than a quarter of Europeans trust online businesses to protect their personal information.
But what if people knew that they could rely on technology companies to treat them fairly?
What if they knew that those companies respond to competition by trying to do better, by trying to serve consumers better, not by using their power to shut out competitors, say, by pushing their services far, far down the list of search results and promoting themselves?
What if they knew that compliance with the rules was built into the algorithms by design, that the algorithm had to go to competition rules school before they were ever allowed to work, that those algorithms were designed in a way that meant that they couldn't collude, that they couldn't form their own little cartel in the black box they're working in?
Together with regulation, competition rules can do that.
They can help us to make sure that new technology treats people fairly and that everyone can compete on a level playing field.
And that can help us build the trust that we need for real innovation to flourish and for societies to develop for citizens.
Because trust cannot be imposed.
It has to be earned.
Since the very first days of the European Union, 60 years ago, our competition rules have helped to build that trust.
A lot of things have changed.
It's hard to say what those six representatives would have made of a smartphone.
But in today's world, as well as in their world, competition makes the market work for everyone.
And that is why I am convinced that real and fair competition has a vital role to play in building the trust we need to get the best of our societies, and that starts with enforcing our rules, actually just to make the market work for everyone.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you.
Thank you, Commissioner.
Margrethe Vestager: It was a pleasure.
BG: I want to ask you two questions.
The first one is about data, because I have the impression that technology and data are changing the way competition takes place and the way competition regulation is designed and enforced.
Can you maybe comment on that?
MV: Well, yes, it is definitely challenging us, because we both have to sharpen our tools but also to develop new tools.
When we were going through the Google responses to our statement of objection, we were going through 5.2 terabytes of data.
It's quite a lot.
So we had to set up new systems.
We had to figure out how to do this, because you cannot work the way you did just a few years ago.
So we are definitely sharpening up our working methods.
The other thing is that we try to distinguish between different kinds of data, because some data is extremely valuable and they will form, like, a barrier to entry in a market.
Other things you can just -- it loses its value tomorrow.
So we try to make sure that we never, ever underestimate the fact that data works as a currency in the market and as an asset that can be a real barrier for competition.
BG: Google. You fined them 2.8 billion euros a few months ago.
MV: No, that was dollars. It's not so strong these days.
BG: Ah, well, depends on the -- (Laughter) Google appealed the case. The case is going to court.
It will last a while.
Earlier, last year, you asked Apple to pay 13 billion in back taxes, and you have also investigated other companies, including European and Russian companies, not only American companies, by far.
Yet the investigations against the American companies are the ones that have attracted the most attention and they have also attracted some accusations.
You have been accused, essentially, of protectionism, of jealousy, or using legislation to hit back at American companies that have conquered European markets.
"The Economist" just this week on the front page writes, "Vestager Versus The Valley."
How do you react to that?
MV: Well, first of all, I take it very seriously, because bias has no room in law enforcement.
We have to prove our cases with the evidence and the facts and the jurisprudence in order also to present it to the courts.
The second thing is that Europe is open for business, but not for tax evasion.
(Applause) The thing is that we are changing, and for instance, when I ask my daughters -- they use Google as well -- "Why do you do that?"
They say, "Well, because it works. It's a very good product."
They would never, ever, come up with the answer, "It's because it's a US product."
It's just because it works.
And that is of course how it should be.
But just the same, it is important that someone is looking after to say, "Well, we congratulate you while you grow and grow and grow, but congratulation stops if we find that you're misusing your position to harm competitors so that they cannot serve consumers."
BG: It will be a fascinating case to follow.
Thank you for coming to TED.
MV: It was a pleasure. Thanks a lot.
(Applause)
HR jargon makes me crazy.
We have to have all these stupid acronyms that describe things that nobody understands: OKRs and PIPs.
I think we can run our businesses by just talking to each other like regular human beings.
We might actually get more done.
[The Way We Work] I really always wanted to be an HR professional, I wanted to be able to speak the language of management.
And you know what I've learned after all this time?
I don't think any of it matters.
There's all kinds of things that we call "best practices" that aren't best practices at all.
How do we know it's best? We don't measure this stuff.
In fact, I've learned that "best practices" usually means copying what everybody else does.
Our world is changing and evolving all the time.
Here are some lessons to help you adapt.
Lesson one: Your employees are adults.
You know, we've created so many layers and so many processes and so many guidelines to keep those employees in place that we've ended up with systems that treat people like they're children.
And they're not.
Fully formed adults walk in the door every single day.
They have rent payments, they have obligations, they're members of society, they want to create a difference in the world.
So if we start with the assumption that everybody comes to work to do an amazing job, you'd be surprised what you get.
Lesson two: The job of management isn't to control people, it's to build great teams.
When managers build great teams, here's how you know it.
They've done amazing stuff.
Customers are really happy.
Those are the metrics that really matter.
Not the metrics of: "Do you come to work on time?"
"Did you take your vacation?" "Did you follow the rules?"
Lesson three: People want to do work that means something.
After they do it, they should be free to move on.
Careers are journeys.
Nobody's going to want to do the same thing for 60 years.
So the idea of keeping people for the sake of keeping them really hurts both of us.
Instead, what if we created companies that were great places to be from?
And everyone who leaves you becomes an ambassador for not only your product, but who you are and how you operate.
And when you spread that kind of excitement throughout the world, then we make all of our companies better.
Lesson four: Everyone in your company should understand the business.
Now, based on the assumption that we've got smart adults here, the most important thing we can teach them is how our business works.
When I look at companies that are moving fast, that are really innovative and that are doing amazing things with agility and speed, it's because they're collaborative.
The best thing that we can do is constantly teach each other what we do, what matters to us, what we measure, what goodness looks like, so that we can all drive towards achieving the same thing.
Lesson five: Everyone in your company should be able to handle the truth.
You know why people say giving feedback is so hard?
They don't practice.
Let's take the annual performance review.
What else do you do in your whole life that you're really good at that you only do once a year?
Here's what I found: humans can hear anything if it's true.
So let's rethink the word "feedback," and think about it as telling people the truth, the honest truth, about what they're doing right and what they're doing wrong, in the moment when they're doing it.
That good thing you just did, whoo!
That's exactly what I'm talking about.
Go do that again.
And people will do that again, today, three more times.
Lesson six: Your company needs to live out its values.
I was talking to a company not long ago, to the CEO.
He was having trouble because the company was rocky and things weren't getting done on time, and he felt like things were sloppy.
This also was a man who, I observed, never showed up to any meeting on time.
Ever.
If you're part of a leadership team, the most important thing that you can do to "uphold your values" is to live them.
People can't be what they can't see.
We say, "Yes, we're here for equality," and then we proudly pound our chest because we'd achieved 30 percent representation of women on an executive team.
Well that's not equal, that's 30 percent.
Lesson seven: All start-up ideas are stupid.
I spend a lot of time with start-ups, and I have a lot of friends that work in larger, more established companies.
They are always pooh-poohing the companies that I work with.
"That is such a stupid idea."
Well, guess what: all start-up ideas are stupid.
If they were reasonable, somebody else would have already been doing them.
Lesson eight: Every company needs to be excited for change.
Beware of the smoke of nostalgia.
If you find yourself saying, "Remember the way it used to be?"
I want you to shift your thinking to say, "Think about the way it's going to be."
If I had a dream company, I would walk in the door and I would say, "Everything's changed, all bets are off.
We were running as fast as we can to the right, and now we'll take a hard left."
It's a pretty exciting world out there, and it's changing all the time.
The more we embrace it and get excited about it, the more fun we're going to have.
My name is Glenn, I'm 25, and I don't know my real last name.
It's not uncommon in America.
Most black people in this country are walking around with a slave owner's last name.
Black history has been systemically erased and altered for centuries.
As I give this talk, there are more than 700 Confederate monuments standing nationwide.
These were erected to honor Confederate soldiers who fought to maintain slavery -- mostly in the South -- from the 1890s to the 1950s, when Jim Crow laws enforcing racial segregation were in full effect.
To this day, black people are forced to confront monuments of slaveholders in our public spaces.
These memorials are a physical representation of a system that is actively working to define whose lives matter and whose lives do not.
If we are going to disrupt the narrative, we have to start at the origin.
Genocide, slavery and patriarchy started in the Americas with Christopher Columbus.
Most people in the United States know about his voyage of 1492.
Fewer people know that an estimated 250,000 indigenous Arawaks were wiped out within two years of his arrival.
Even fewer people know that Columbus admitted in a letter written to Doña Juana de la Torre that "nine and 10-year-old girls were in high demand, and for girls of all ages a good price must be paid."
Yet New York City's Columbus Circle has had him perched 76 feet high next to Central Park since 1892.
I started Movers and Shakers, a nonprofit, to get the statue removed.
Movers and Shakers is a group of activists, artists, educators and engineers focused on using immersive technology to highlight the narratives of the oppressed.
In our campaign to knock Columbus off his pedestal, we engaged in a visually provocative form of activism.
We created an augmented reality installation on the true story of Christopher Columbus and used it to host teach-ins in Columbus Circle and Times Square.
Many see the controversy around the statue as tension between the Italian-American community and the indigenous community.
The reality is that most black people are here in this country as a result of the atrocities that were kicked off by Christopher Columbus.
So we ended up holding a slave auction in Union Square to tie into the genesis of the transatlantic slave trade.
I ran the New York City Marathon in chains to spread awareness to this issue.
I was also arrested in Giants Stadium for hosting a slave reenactment at their football team's home opener.
We gave it everything that we had, but in the end, New York City decided to keep the statue, and New York State unanimously voted to make it a landmark.
The news was devastating, but it opened up another door.
We realized that with augmented reality you don't need permission from the government to put up a monument or to make a statement.
You can just do it.
So New York City right now currently has more than 150 statues of men and six of women and currently acknowledges slaveholders in public spaces as well.
So we decided, why not just put up a bunch of AR monuments of women and people of color throughout the city?
Typically, monuments are created to commemorate the achievements of the deceased, but with augmented reality, we can reroute the rules.
We started with sports.
Colin Kaepernick.
He was the starting quarterback of the San Francisco 49ers, and he wanted to use his platform to highlight the injustice of systemic racism.
So he consulted a Green Beret on the most respectful way to do this, and he decided to take a knee during the national anthem.
He lost his contract with the 49ers, he was blackballed by every NFL owner, he was criticized by millions and even the president of the United States decided to insult him.
It may be decades before Colin Kaepernick is adequately respected for his courage, so our team decided to do this.
Now anyone that walks by Trump Tower can see Colin Kaepernick take a knee in augmented reality, and there's nothing they can do about it.
(Laughter) Representation matters.
Serena Williams proved to the world that a black girl from Compton can dominate a sport that's traditionally played at exclusive country clubs.
Let's celebrate her now.
Jackie Robinson.
He broke the color barrier and empowered many black athletes to play in Major League Baseball.
We're going to take this monument of him and put it in Ebbets Field so that anyone can see him swing for the fences in Ebbets Field in Brooklyn.
With augmented reality, we have the power to tell stories in public spaces that need to be told.
The achievements of people like Frida Kahlo, Audre Lorde, Toussaint Louverture, Madam C.J. Walker -- this should be common knowledge.
Our vision is a "Pokémon Go" for a contextualized history.
Augmented reality can also be used as a tool to support organizations that are fighting against systemic oppression.
In 2019 we will release our free smartphone app with augmented reality monuments and content.
You can take your smartphone and hold it over any one-dollar bill and see a scene in augmented reality that illustrates the injustice of cash bail.
You can then click on the screen and be directed to the donation page of The Bail Project, a fund that raises money for people who cannot afford bail.
With augmented reality, we the people have the power to highlight the narratives of the oppressed when institutions refuse to do so.
We can use this tool to highlight the systemic implications of erasing someone's history.
And more concretely, we can use this technology as a way to support initiatives that are fighting against systemic racism.
With AR, we have the power to reimagine a world that prioritizes justice over oppression.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
Here are two images of a house.
There’s one obvious difference, but to this patient, P.S., they looked completely identical.
P.S. had suffered a stroke that damaged the right side of her brain, leaving her unaware of everything on her left side.
But though she could discern no difference between the houses, when researchers asked her which she would prefer to live in, she chose the house that wasn’t burning— not once, but again and again.
P.S.’s brain was still processing information from her whole field of vision.
She could see both images and tell the difference between them, she just didn’t know it.
If someone threw a ball at her left side, she might duck.
But she wouldn’t have any awareness of the ball, or any idea why she ducked.
P.S.’s condition, known as hemispatial neglect, reveals an important distinction between the brain’s processing of information and our experience of that processing.
That experience is what we call consciousness.
We are conscious of both the external world and our internal selves— we are aware of an image in much the same way we are aware of ourselves looking at an image, or our inner thoughts and emotions.
But where does consciousness come from?
Scientists, theologians, and philosophers have been trying to get to the bottom of this question for centuries— without reaching any consensus.
One recent theory is that consciousness is the brain’s imperfect picture of its own activity.
To understand this theory, it helps to have a clear idea of one important way the brain processes information from our senses.
Based on sensory input, it builds models, which are continuously updating, simplified descriptions of objects and events in the world.
Everything we know is based on these models.
They never capture every detail of the things they describe, just enough for the brain to determine appropriate responses.
For instance, one model built deep into the visual system codes white light as brightness without color.
In reality, white light includes wavelengths that correspond to all the different colors we can see.
Our perception of white light is wrong and oversimplified, but good enough for us to function.
Likewise, the brain’s model of the physical body keeps track of the configuration of our limbs, but not of individual cells or even muscles, because that level of information isn’t needed to plan movement.
If it didn’t have the model keeping track of the body’s size, shape, and how it is moving at any moment, we would quickly injure ourselves.
The brain also needs models of itself.
For example, the brain has the ability to pay attention to specific objects and events.
It also controls that focus, shifting it from one thing to another, internal and external, according to our needs.
Without the ability to direct our focus, we wouldn’t be able to assess threats, finish a meal, or function at all.
To control focus effectively, the brain has to construct a model of its own attention.
With 86 billion neurons constantly interacting with each other, there’s no way the brain’s model of its own information processing can be perfectly self-descriptive.
But like the model of the body, or our conception of white light, it doesn’t have to be.
Our certainty that we have a metaphysical, subjective experience may come from one of the brain’s models, a cut-corner description of what it means to process information in a focused and deep manner.
Scientists have already begun trying to figure out how the brain creates that self model.
MRI studies are a promising avenue for pinpointing the networks involved.
These studies compare patterns of neural activation when someone is and isn’t conscious of a sensory stimulus, like an image.
The results show that the areas needed for visual processing are activated whether or not the participant is aware of the image, but a whole additional network lights up only when they are conscious of seeing the image.
Patients with hemispatial neglect, like P.S., typically have damage to one particular part of this network.
More extensive damage to the network can sometimes lead to a vegetative state, with no sign of consciousness.
Evidence like this brings us closer to understanding how consciousness is built into the brain, but there’s still much more to learn.
For instance, the way neurons in the networks related to consciousness compute specific pieces of information is outside the scope of our current technology.
As we approach questions of consciousness with science, we’ll open new lines of inquiry into human identity.
The world’s largest orchid grows several meters tall.
The tiniest is practically invisible.
Some bloom high up in trees, while others live underground.
All in, there are around 28,000 species of orchid on earth – about as many as all the bird, mammal and reptile species combined.
They grow all over the world, bearing every imaginable colour, shape, and pattern.
And there’s a cunning purpose behind these elaborate displays: many orchids trick insects, sometimes even into having sex with them.
Like other flowers, most orchids need to attract insects to gather their pollen and carry it between plants.
But unlike most flowers, which attract a range of pollinators with sweet nectar, these masters of deception deploy other tactics– like pretending to be an insect’s mate, letting off alluring scents, and mimicking the appearance of other species.
One of their most intriguing methods is sexual deception.
Through a combination of sexy shapes and pheromones, orchids convince insects to mate with them.
Take the bee orchid, whose petals look almost exactly like the velvety body of a bee.
This disguise is so convincing that male bees land on the orchid and try to have sex with it, picking up pollen as they go.
Other orchids have evolved contrasting colours and ultraviolet spots– invisible to humans but irresistible to insects.
Still others have tactile ‘love-handles’ that ensure insects are positioned precisely for pollination.
When a male wasp lands on the hammer orchid, for example, his enthusiastic mating motion flips a hinge in the flower, forcing his body into the pollen.
At the next flower he visits, that same hinge pushes his pollen-covered body onto the stigma, fertilizing it.
Some orchids make such convincing mates that insects even ejaculate on them, wasting valuable sperm.
But the most vital component of sexual deception is scent: orchids mimic the precise scent of a single insect species.
This is possible because many insects and flowers produce simple organic compounds called hydrocarbons, which form a layer that protects their bodies from drying out.
The precise blend of compounds in this layer is species-specific.
Its scent can double as a way for insects to attract potential mates, known as a sex pheromone.
Over the course of many thousands of years, random compound combinations have given some orchid species precisely the same signature scent as particular insect species.
This matching scent allows them to attract male pollinators who fall over and over again for the flowers masquerading as females of their own species.
Sexual deception isn’t the only trick orchids have up their sleeves.
Their oldest scam is mimicking the shapes and colours of other nectar-producing flowers— but without the sweet nectar.
Some orchids also masquerade as places where insects lay their eggs.
One species not only has the colour and appearance of rotting meat; it emits a scent of decay as well– drawing in flies who deposit their eggs on the flower and unwittingly pollinate the plant.
Other orchids look and smell just like the fungi on which certain insects lay their eggs.
Where do all these bizarre adaptations come from?
Random genetic mutations in orchids may result in a trait– like a scent or a shape– that, by chance, matches the needs of a single insect species.
The huge diversity within the insect world also increases the likelihood that an orchid will find a unique audience.
Able to make more seeds and offspring with the help of its dedicated pollinators, the orchid successfully reproduces in isolation, and becomes a new species.
But because of their dependence on sometimes just one pollinator species, orchids are also vulnerable, and many quickly go extinct.
Over time, though, more orchid species have formed than died out, and orchids are some of the most diverse flowering plants.
They have such exuberant and otherworldly shapes that they occasionally deceive human senses, too: In their petals we see what appear to be tiny, dancing people, monkey’s faces, spiders, and even birds in flight.
Bryn Freedman: You're a guy whose company funds these AI programs and invests.
So why should we trust you to not have a bias and tell us something really useful for the rest of us about the future of work?
Roy Bahat: Yes, I am.
And when you wake up in the morning and you read the newspaper and it says, "The robots are coming, they may take all our jobs," as a start-up investor focused on the future of work, our fund was the first one to say artificial intelligence should be a focus for us.
So I woke up one morning and read that and said, "Oh, my gosh, they're talking about me. That's me who's doing that."
And then I thought: wait a minute.
If things continue, then maybe not only will the start-ups in which we invest struggle because there won't be people to have jobs to pay for the things that they make and buy them, but our economy and society might struggle, too.
And look, I should be the guy who sits here and tells you, "Everything is going to be fine. It's all going to work out great.
Hey, when they introduced the ATM machine, years later, there's more tellers in banks."
It's true.
And yet, when I looked at it, I thought, "This is going to accelerate.
And if it does accelerate, there's a chance the center doesn't hold."
But I figured somebody must know the answer to this; there are so many ideas out there.
And I read all the books, and I went to the conferences, and at one point, we counted more than 100 efforts to study the future of work.
And it was a frustrating experience, because I'd hear the same back-and-forth over and over again: "The robots are coming!"
And then somebody else would say, "Oh, don't worry about that, they've always said that and it turns out OK."
Then somebody else would say, "Well, it's really about the meaning of your job, anyway."
And then everybody would shrug and go off and have a drink.
And it felt like there was this Kabuki theater of this discussion, where nobody was talking to each other.
And many of the people that I knew and worked with in the technology world were not speaking to policy makers; the policy makers were not speaking to them.
And so we partnered with a nonpartisan think tank NGO called New America to study this issue.
And we brought together a group of people, including an AI czar at a technology company and a video game designer and a heartland conservative and a Wall Street investor and a socialist magazine editor -- literally, all in the same room; it was occasionally awkward -- to try to figure out what is it that will happen here.
The question we asked was simple.
It was: What is the effect of technology on work going to be?
And we looked out 10 to 20 years, because we wanted to look out far enough that there could be real change, but soon enough that we weren't talking about teleportation or anything like that.
And we recognized -- and I think every year we're reminded of this in the world -- that predicting what's going to happen is hard.
So instead of predicting, there are other things you can do.
You can try to imagine alternate possible futures, which is what we did.
We did a scenario-planning exercise, and we imagined cases where no job is safe.
We imagined cases where every job is safe.
And we imagined every distinct possibility we could.
And the result, which really surprised us, was when you think through those futures and you think what should we do, the answers about what we should do actually turn out to be the same, no matter what happens.
And the irony of looking out 10 to 20 years into the future is, you realize that the things we want to act on are actually already happening right now.
The automation is right now, the future is right now.
BF: So what does that mean, and what does that tell us?
If the future is now, what is it that we should be doing, and what should we be thinking about?
RB: We have to understand the problem first.
And so the data are that as the economy becomes more productive and individual workers become more productive, their wages haven't risen.
If you look at the proportion of prime working-age men, in the United States at least, who work now versus in 1960, we have three times as many men not working.
And then you hear the stories.
I sat down with a group of Walmart workers and said, "What do you think about this cashier, this futuristic self-checkout thing?"
They said, "That's nice, but have you heard about the cash recycler?
That's a machine that's being installed right now, and is eliminating two jobs at every Walmart right now."
And so we just thought, "Geez. We don't understand the problem."
And so we looked at the voices that were the ones that were excluded, which is all of the people affected by this change.
And we decided to listen to them, sort of "automation and its discontents."
And I've spent the last couple of years doing that.
I've been to Flint, Michigan, and Youngstown, Ohio, talking about entrepreneurs, trying to make it work in a very different environment from New York or San Francisco or London or Tokyo.
I've been to prisons twice to talk to inmates about their jobs after they leave.
I've sat down with truck drivers to ask them about the self-driving truck, with people who, in addition to their full-time job, care for an aging relative.
And when you talk to people, there were two themes that came out loud and clear.
The first one was that people are less looking for more money or get out of the fear of the robot taking their job, and they just want something stable.
They want something predictable.
So if you survey people and ask them what they want out of work, for everybody who makes less than 150,000 dollars a year, they'll take a more stable and secure income, on average, over earning more money.
And if you think about the fact that not only for all of the people across the earth who don't earn a living, but for those who do, the vast majority earn a different amount from month to month and have an instability, all of a sudden you realize, "Wait a minute. We have a real problem on our hands."
And the second thing they say, which took us a longer time to understand, is they say they want dignity.
And that concept of self-worth through work emerged again and again and again in our conversations.
BF: So, I certainly appreciate this answer.
But you can't eat dignity, you can't clothe your children with self-esteem.
So, what is that, how do you reconcile -- what does dignity mean, and what is the relationship between dignity and stability?
RB: You can't eat dignity. You need stability first.
And the good news is, many of the conversations that are happening right now are about how we solve that.
You know, I'm a proponent of studying guaranteed income, as one example, conversations about how health care gets provided and other benefits.
Those conversations are happening, and we're at a time where we must figure that out.
It is the crisis of our era.
And my point of view after talking to people is that we may do that, and it still might not be enough.
Because what we need to do from the beginning is understand what is it about work that gives people dignity, so they can live the lives that they want to live.
And so that concept of dignity is ...
it's difficult to get your hands around, because when many people hear it -- especially, to be honest, rich people -- they hear "meaning."
And again, if you survey people and you ask them, "How important is it to you that your work be important to you?"
only people who make 150,000 dollars a year or more say that it is important to them that their work be important.
BF: Meaning, meaningful?
RB: Just defined as, "Is your work important to you?"
Whatever somebody took that to mean.
And yet, of course dignity is essential.
We talked to truck drivers who said, "I saw my cousin drive, and I got on the open road and it was amazing.
And I started making more money than people who went to college."
Then they'd get to the end of their thought and say something like, "People need their fruits and vegetables in the morning, and I'm the guy who gets it to them."
He was making plenty of money.
At one point we just asked, "What is it about caring for your aunt? Can't you just pay somebody to do it?"
He said, "My aunt doesn't want somebody we pay for.
So there was this concept there of being needed.
If you study the word "dignity," it's fascinating.
It's one of the oldest words in the English language, from antiquity.
And it has two meanings: one is self-worth, and the other is that something is suitable, it's fitting, meaning that you're part of something greater than yourself, and it connects to some broader whole.
In other words, that you're needed.
BF: So how do you answer this question, this concept that we don't pay teachers, and we don't pay eldercare workers, and we don't pay people who really care for people and are needed, enough?
RB: Well, the good news is, people are finally asking the question.
So as AI investors, we often get phone calls from foundations or CEOs and boardrooms saying, "What do we do about this?"
And they used to be asking, "What do we do about introducing automation?"
And now they're asking, "What do we do about self-worth?"
And they know that the employees who work for them who have a spouse who cares for somebody, that dignity is essential to their ability to just do their job.
I think there's two kinds of answers: there's the money side of just making your life work.
That's stability. You need to eat.
And then you think about our culture more broadly, and you ask: Who do we make into heroes?
And, you know, what I want is to see the magazine cover that is the person who is the heroic caregiver.
Or the Netflix series that dramatizes the person who makes all of our other lives work so we can do the things we do.
Let's make heroes out of those people.
That's the Netflix show that I would binge.
And we've had chroniclers of this before -- Studs Terkel, the oral history of the working experience in the United States.
And what we need is the experience of needing one another and being connected to each other.
Maybe that's the answer for how we all fit as a society.
And the thought exercise, to me, is: if you were to go back 100 years and have people -- my grandparents, great-grandparents, a tailor, worked in a mine -- they look at what all of us do for a living and say, "That's not work."
We sit there and type and talk, and there's no danger of getting hurt.
And my guess is that if you were to imagine 100 years from now, we'll still be doing things for each other.
We'll still need one another.
And we just will think of it as work.
The entire thing I'm trying to say is that dignity should not just be about having a job.
Because if you say you need a job to have dignity, which many people say, the second you say that, you say to all the parents and all the teachers and all the caregivers that all of a sudden, because they're not being paid for what they're doing, it somehow lacks this essential human quality.
To me, that's the great puzzle of our time: Can we figure out how to provide that stability throughout life, and then can we figure out how to create an inclusive, not just racially, gender, but multigenerationally inclusive -- I mean, every different human experience included -- in this way of understanding how we can be needed by one another.
BF: Thank you. RB: Thank you.
BF: Thank you very much for your participation.
(Applause)
About 18 months ago, I had a really bad week.
I was on my way home from work one night, and it was one of those hot evenings where the traffic was at a standstill, and as I walked down the road, and the cars crawled next to me, some guys started shouting out of their car windows about my legs, about the things that they'd like to do to me.
And I ignored them, and I carried on home, and I got on with it, like you do.
Then a few nights later, I was on the way home, on the bus, quite late at night, and I was on the phone to my mom.
I thought, at first, that the guy next to me just accidentally brushed my leg with his hand.
And I carried on talking to my mom.
Then I realized that, actually, he was grabbing and groping my leg and moving his hand up towards my crotch.
I stood up to move away, but because I was on the phone, I vocalized it, in a way I don't think I would have done otherwise.
I said, "On the bus, this guy's groping me."
Everybody on that bus looked out the window, or down at their feet, or at their phone.
Certainly nobody stepped in, but more than that, there was a real sense of, "Why make a fuss about this, woman?
This is your issue, deal with it; don't make us have to think about it."
That immediately made me feel ashamed.
It made me feel like I'd done something wrong, or I shouldn't have been out that late, or I shouldn't have been wearing what I was wearing, and all of those thoughts that that reaction triggers.
And again, I carried on.
I went home, I didn't mention it. I got on with it, like you do.
Then a couple days later, I was walking down the street in broad daylight.
There was a big truck being unloaded, scaffolding was coming off the back of it, and there were two guys working together.
As I walked past, one of them turned to the other and said, "Look at the tits on that."
Not "her," "that."
They started discussing me as if I wasn't there, even though I was one meter away, and I could really clearly hear them.
The thing that really hit me about these three incidents was if they hadn't happened in the same week, I never would have thought twice about any one of them.
I started asking myself why that was: Why was this so normal? Why was I so used to them?
I started thinking back about hundreds of incidents that had happened over the weeks and months and years that I'd never said anything about to anyone, because it was normal.
I started talking to other women and asking - the women I knew, older women, younger women, women I met - saying, "Have you ever experienced anything like this?"
And I honestly thought that one or two women would have a story.
That one or two people would say, "Yes, a few years ago this happened," or, "I once had a job where this happened."
But it wasn't like that.
It was every woman I spoke to.
And it wasn't a few years ago, this one incident.
It was hundreds of things.
"It was on my way here, this happened, yesterday this happened, most days this happens."
But just like me, until I asked them, they'd never told those stories to anyone.
Because they were used to it, because it was normal.
I started trying to speak up about this, because I was realizing there was this huge problem, and I started trying to talk about it, and again and again, I got the same response.
People said, "Stop making a fuss.
Women are equal now, more or less."
If women are equal now, then to talk about sexism, to complain about sexism, must be overreacting.
Or maybe you don't have a sense of humor, or maybe you need to learn to take a compliment, or maybe you're a bit frigid or uptight and you need to learn to take a joke.
I thought, maybe they were right, maybe women are equal now, more or less; perhaps I was overreacting.
I thought I'd look into it, I'd interrogate that claim and I did.
These are some of the things that I found: Women are equal now, more or less.
Except in our Houses of Parliament, where the policies that affect all of us are debated and defined, less than one in four MPs is a woman.
Women make up one fifth of the membership of the House of Lords.
The UK comes joint 57th in the world for gender equality in Parliament.
Then I looked into the law, and I found that just four out of 35 Lord Justices of Appeal, and just 18 out of 108 High Court judges are women.
I decided to look at the arts.
I found that it was reported in 2010, that out of 2,300 works, one of our most prestigious art institutions, the National Gallery, had paintings by just ten women.
I found that at the Royal Opera House, it's been over 13 years since a female choreographer was commissioned to create a piece for the main stage.
And that out of 573 listed statues up and down the UK commemorating people of interest, just 15 per cent of them are of women.
I found that fewer than one in ten of our engineers is female, less than half the proportion of France or Spain; that our Royal Society, one of our most prestigious scientific institutions, has never had a female president, and just five per cent of the current fellowship are women.
And that whilst women make up 50 per cent of chemistry undergraduates, there're only six per cent of professors.
I found that women write only one fifth of front page newspaper articles, but 84 per cent of those articles are dominated by male subjects or experts.
That women directed just five per cent of the 250 major films of 2011, and that only one in five UK architects is female, yet 63 per cent of them report experiencing sexual harassment in the workplace during the course of their career.
And then I looked into the crime statistics.
Women are equal now, more or less.
Except that in the UK over two women a week are killed by a current or former partner.
There's a phone call to the police every minute about domestic violence.
Every six or seven minutes, a woman is raped, adding up to over 85,000 rapes and 400,000 sexual assaults every year.
In the UK, a woman has a one in four chance of becoming a victim of domestic violence, and has a one in five chance of being a victim of a sexual offense.
Worldwide, one in three women on the planet will be raped or beaten in her lifetime.
I decided that that argument that women were equal now and we shouldn't be making a fuss, really didn't stand up to scrutiny.
In fact, it seemed to me that it really was time to make a fuss.
So I set up a simple website because I realized we couldn't solve a problem if people refused even to acknowledge that it existed, and that what I really wanted people to have was that experience that I'd had of seeing these things kind of rolled out in front of them like a map, and realizing how much there was and how bad it still was.
I set up a very simple website called "The Everyday Sexism Project," and I asked women and men to add their experiences of gender imbalance on a daily basis; anything from the tiny niggling normalized things, all the way up the scale.
I didn't have any funding or any way of publicizing it, so I thought that maybe 20 or 30 women would add their stories, and I hoped it would build a sense of solidarity, and help to raise awareness.
But instead, things took off a little more than I expected.
[75,000 Women To Take A Stand Against Sexism] 50,000 women from all over the world added their stories in 18 months.
They were women and men from countries everywhere, people of all ages, races, ethnicities, sexual orientations, gender identities, religious and non-religious, disabled and non-disabled, employed and unemployed.
We heard from a seven-year-old disabled girl in a wheelchair and a 74-year-old women in a mobility scooter who encountered almost identical experiences of screamed abuse about "female drivers."
A female Reverend in the Church of England was asked if there was a man available to perform the wedding or funeral service - "Nothing personal."
A man was congratulated for babysitting his own children.
A woman working in the city was asked if she would sit on her bosses lap if she wanted her Christmas bonus.
A woman who worked in a video store found that every time she went up the ladder to the storeroom, her boss would smack her on the bum, and when she came down he looked down her top and say: "You know why I hired you."
A waitress was told to make a choice between having an abortion or resigning when she fell pregnant.
A 15-year-old girl wrote that she knew that she was clever and funny, and she could do anything she wanted to do, but really it didn't matter if she became a doctor or a lawyer, because she knew from the world around her and from the media, that the only thing that really mattered was whether she was sexy, whether her breasts grew and her waist narrowed, and whether boys found her attractive.
A 13-year-old girl wrote to say that she'd been showed a video of sex, at school on a boy's mobile phone, a video of porn, and that now she's scared to have sex, she cries every night, because she didn't realize that what sex was was the woman hurting and crying.
A woman in Pakistan talked about hiding abuse for the sake of family honor.
A woman in Brazil tried to ignore three men who catcalled her only to find that they tried to drag her into their car.
In Mexico a woman was told by her university professor: "Calladita te ves más bonita", "You look prettier when you shut up."
This is what happened when I gave a speech about politics - [I think Laura should just get her tits out so we can judge for ourselves.] [I'm not sexist or anything but she may be keeping a nice pair...] This was what I got on a daily basis.
But not just once a day, up to 200 times a day, just for speaking out.
Ironically these people sending messages because they wanted to shut the project down were showing how vital and needed it was.
[fuck you stupid slut] The fact that it was so scary for some people, for somebody just to want to talk about equality, just to want to raise women's voices and give their stories a platform, that they had to tell me exactly how they wanted to disembowel me, and with exactly which weapons and in what order, and not just that I should be raped, but exactly how I should be raped, and in which our orifices, and where and when.
Then something else started to happen.
After we'd received about ten thousand stories, we started getting some which had a very different tone.
We started getting success stories.
We started hearing from women like one who said that she was a keen runner, who often experienced harassment, but she thought it was just the way things were.
Then after reading the stories on the website, she realized other women were standing up to this, and other people were acknowledging that this shouldn't be normal, and it wasn't okay.
The next time she went running, a guy happened to call her over from his car and ask for directions.
So she went over and helped him, and then he reached out of the car window and grabbed her breasts really hard, really hurt her.
She said she felt all of the experiences, the feelings wash over her that she normally felt in that situation - terror, embarrassment, shame, the urge to run - but she also felt something she hadn't felt before, and it was that feeling of those women behind her standing up, and it gave her the strength, just for a moment, to stop and take down the guy's car number plate, and now he's been charged with assault.
We were able to take 2,000 of the stories we collected that specifically described women's experiences of harassment and assault on public transport to the British Transport Police when they decided to look at the way that they police sexual offences.
We were able to break them down, to hear from women's own voices why they haven't felt able to report, and then work with the British Transport Police to send out the message to people everywhere that they were taking this seriously and they could report it.
So far we know that that project - Project Guardian - has raised reports of harassment and assault on the tube by up to 20 per cent.
We were able to start talking to girls at universities about the UK definition of sexual assault, which is very simple.
Under UK law, if someone touches you anywhere on your body, and the touching is sexual, and you don't consent, and they don't have reason to believe that you consent, it's a form of sexual assault.
Girls came up to me saying, "That can't be sexual assault because it's normal."
"That can't be sexual assault because that happens when I go out with my friends."
"It can't be sexual assault because I won't be able to call it that, people won't take me seriously, I couldn't go to the police."
We were able to start to change that attitude and able to start to get reports of people who'd reported things that previously, they'd had no idea they had the right to object to.
We also started hearing people's individual stories of standing up, and that was really fascinating and crucial, because these weren't stories of waving banners or going on marches - as valuable as those are - they were stories of women and men around the world finding that own very unique and individual ways to stand up that worked for them and made a difference in their lives.
We heard from a woman who was being sexually harassed in the office, who printed off a copy of her workplace sexual harassment policy and put it on every single person's desk, and the harassment stopped.
We heard from a woman who said that she was sick of cold callers ringing.
She was a single mom and sick of them ringing and asking to speak to the man of the house.
Now she puts them on to her six-year old son, (Laughter) and apparently he sings them, "I'm sexy and I know it."
(Laughter) We heard from a guy who was walking past a building site, when two builders screamed at two women across the road, "Get your tits out!"
So he lifted up his T-shirt instead.
We heard from a woman who said that every time someone screams "Nice tits!" at her in the street, she looks down at them, and screams as if she'd never seen them before.
(Laughter) (Applause) We heard from a man who said that he'd never really thought about harassment before, but after reading the stories it gave him new insight into what it actually felt like for women, and the next time he saw another guy in the street harassing two women, he ran after him, tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Sorry, can I just ask you, why did you do that?"
And the other guy had no answer, because he'd never been asked that question before, because it was just normal, for him too.
He'd grown up in a world where that was just normal and something that men did.
That's the really important thing here, because sadly and frustratingly, we can no longer point to one specific policy change or piece of legislation that we need to solve this problem.
Particularly in the UK, we have excellent legislation now, a really good example is workplace sexual harassment law, which is fantastic.
The single biggest category of entries that we receive is from women being harassed in the workplace, being assaulted in the workplace, being discriminated against in the workplace.
What we need is a cultural and a social shift in our attitudes towards women, and towards violence against women.
Because it's people in the workplace that laugh along and call it "banter" and just joke around when someone grabs her breasts that make her feel unable to report.
In a way that's the exciting thing, because it means that we can all be part of the solution.
If the Everyday Sexism Project has shown anything, it's that this is a continuum.
All of these things are connected.
The same ideas and attitudes about women that underlie those more "minor" incidents of sexism and harassment, that we're often told to brush off and not make a fuss about, are the same ideas and attitudes about women that underlie the more serious incidents of assault and rape.
What that means is that by helping to contribute to a cultural shift in the way women are perceived - whether it's in the media, in the professional sphere, in the social or economic sphere - we help to shift the way that they're perceived and treated in the other spheres as well.
So that does mean that every one of us can be part of the change.
It's not necessarily about targeting perpetrators, and it's certainly not about telling victims that they should be behaving in a certain way or reacting in a certain way.
It's about the people in the office that made it difficult for that woman to feel able to speak out; it's about the people on that bus that day that looked out of the window.
Be part of the change.
Be the cool aunt or uncle who buys a chemistry set for their niece, or a play cooker for their nephew.
Be the teenager that tells his friends that actually it's not okay or funny to refer to women as sluts or whores.
Be the person that lets somebody who's been groped realize that it will be taken seriously, and they have the right to report it.
Be the tabloid editor who commissions an article that isn't illustrated with a picture of a pair of women's tits.
Be the person at the bus stop that steps in when they see a woman being harassed.
Or be the person on the bus that stands up and says it isn't okay.
Because our voices are the loudest when we raise them together.
(Applause)
I was eight years old.
I remember that day clearly like it happened just yesterday.
My mother is a bidi roller.
She hand-rolls country cigarettes to sustain our family.
She is a hard worker and spent 10 to 12 hours every day rolling bidis.
That particular day she came home and showed me her bidi-rolling wage book.
She asked me how much money she has earned that week.
I went through that book, and what caught my eyes were her thumbprints on each page.
My mother has never been to school.
She uses her thumbprints instead of a signature to keep a record of her earnings.
On that day, for some reason, I wanted to teach her how to hold a pen and write her name.
She was reluctant at first.
She smiled innocently and said no.
But deep down, I was sure she wanted to give it a try.
With a little bit of perseverance and a lot of effort, we managed to write her name.
Her hands were trembling, and her face was beaming with pride.
As I watched her do this, for the first time in my life, I had a priceless feeling: that I could be of some use to this world.
That feeling was very special, because I am not meant to be useful.
In rural India, girls are generally considered worthless.
They're a liability or a burden.
If they are considered useful, it is only to cook dishes, keep the house clean or raise children.
As a second daughter of my conservative Indian family, I was fairly clear from a very early age that no one expected anything from me.
I was conditioned to believe that the three identities that defined me -- poor village girl -- meant that I was to live a life of no voice and no choice.
These three identities forced me to think that I should never have been born.
Yet, I was.
All throughout my childhood, as I rolled bidis alongside my mother, I would wonder: What did my future hold?
I often asked my mother, with a lot of anxiety, "Amma, will my life be different from yours?
Will I have a chance to choose my life?
Will I go to college?"
And she would reply back, "Try to finish high school first."
I am sure my mother did not mean to discourage me.
She only wanted me to understand that my dreams might be too big for a girl in my village.
When I was 13, I found the autobiography of Helen Keller.
Helen became my inspiration.
I admired her indomitable spirit.
I wanted to have a college degree like her, so I fought with my father and my relatives to be sent to college, and it worked.
During my final year of my undergraduate degree, I desperately wanted to escape from being forced into marriage, so I applied to a fellowship program in Delhi, which is about 1,600 miles away from my village.
(Laughter) In fact, I recall that the only way I could fill out the application was during my commute to college.
I did not have access to computers, so I had to borrow a college junior's cell phone.
As a woman, I could not be seen with a cell phone, so I used to huddle his phone under my shawl and type as slowly as possible to ensure that I would not be heard.
After many rounds of interviews, I got into the fellowship program with a full scholarship.
My father was confused, my mother was worried -- (Applause) My father was confused, my mother was worried, but I felt butterflies in my stomach because I was going to step out of my village for the first time to study in the national capital.
Of the 97 fellows selected that year, I was the only rural college graduate.
There was no one there who looked like me or spoke like me.
I felt alienated, intimidated and judged by many.
One fellow called me "Coconut Girl."
Can you guess why?
Anyone?
That's because I applied a lot of coconut oil to my hair.
(Laughter) Another asked me where I had learned to speak English, and some of my peers did not prefer to have me on their assignment teams because they thought I would not be able to contribute to their discussion.
I felt that many of my peers believed that a person from rural India could not supply anything of value, yet the majority of Indian population today is rural.
I realized that stories like mine were considered to be an exception and never the expectation.
I believe that all of us are born into a reality that we blindly accept until something awakens us and a new world opens up.
When I saw my mother's first signature on her bidi-rolling wage book, when I felt the hot Delhi air against my face after a 50-hour train journey, when I finally felt free and let myself be, I saw a glimpse of that new world I longed for, a world where a girl like me is no longer a liability or a burden but a person of use, a person of value and a person of worthiness.
By the time my fellowship ended, my life had changed.
Not only had I traced my lost voice, but also had a choice to make myself useful.
I was 22.
I came back to my village to set up the Bodhi Tree Foundation, an institution that supports rural youth by providing them with education, life skills and opportunities.
We work closely with our rural youth to change their life and to benefit our communities.
How do I know my institution is working?
Well, six months ago, we had a new joinee.
Her name is Kaviarasi.
I first spotted her in a local college in Tirunelveli during one of my training sessions.
As you can see, she has a smile which you can never forget.
We guided her to get an opportunity to study at Ashoka University, Delhi.
The best part of her story is that she is now back at Bodhi Tree as a trainer working with dedication to make a change in the lives of others like her.
Kaviarasi doesn't want to feel like an exception.
She wants to be of use to others in this world.
Recently, Kaviarasi mentored Anitha, who also comes from a remote, rural village, lives in a 10-foot-by-10-foot home, her parents are also farm laborers.
Kaviarasi helped Anitha secure admission in a prestigious undergraduate program in a top university in India with a full scholarship.
When Anitha's parents were reluctant to send her that far, we asked the district administration officials to speak to Anitha's parents, and it worked.
And then there is Padma.
Padma and I went to college together.
She's the first in her entire village to attend graduation.
She had been working with me at Bodhi Tree until one day she decides to go to graduate school.
I asked her why.
She told me that she wanted to make sure that she would never be a liability or a burden to anyone at any point in her life.
Padma, Anitha and Kaviarasi grew up in the most tough families and communities one could only imagine.
Yet the journey of finding my usefulness in this world served them in finding their usefulness to this world.
Of course there are challenges.
I'm aware change does not happen overnight.
A lot of my work involves working with families and communities to help them understand why getting an education is useful for everyone.
The quickest way to convince them is by doing.
When they see their kids getting a real education, getting a real job, they begin to change.
The best example is what happened at my home.
I was recently given an award in recognition of my social work by the chief minister of my state.
That meant I was going to be on television.
(Laughter) Everyone was hooked on to the television that morning, including my parents.
I would like to believe that seeing her daughter on television made my mother feel useful too.
Hopefully, she will stop pressuring me to get married now.
(Laughter) Finding my use has helped me to break free from the identities society thrusts on me -- poor village girl.
Finding my use has helped me to break free from being boxed, caged and bottled.
Finding my use has helped me to find my voice, my self-worth and my freedom.
I leave you with this thought: Where do you feel useful to this world?
Because the answer to that question is where you will find your voice and your freedom.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So let me with start with Roy Amara.
Roy's argument is that most new technologies tend to be overestimated in their impact to begin with, and then they get underestimated in the long term because we get used to them.
These really are days of miracle and wonder.
You remember that wonderful song by Paul Simon?
There were two lines in it.
So what was it that was considered miraculous back then?
Slowing down things -- slow motion -- and the long-distance call.
Because, of course, you used to get interrupted by operators who'd tell you, "Long distance calling. Do you want to hang up?"
And now we think nothing of calling all over the world.
Well, something similar may be happening with reading and programming life.
But before I unpack that, let's just talk about telescopes.
Telescopes were overestimated originally in their impact.
This is one of Galileo's early models.
People thought it was just going to ruin all religion.
(Laughter) So we're not paying that much attention to telescopes.
But, of course, telescopes launched 10 years ago, as you just heard, could take this Volkswagen, fly it to the moon, and you could see the lights on that Volkswagen light up on the moon.
And that's the kind of resolution power that allowed you to see little specks of dust floating around distant suns.
Imagine for a second that this was a sun a billion light years away, and you had a little speck of dust that came in front of it.
That's what detecting an exoplanet is like.
And the cool thing is, the telescopes that are now being launched would allow you to see a single candle lit on the moon.
And if you separated it by one plate, you could see two candles separately at that distance.
And that's the kind of resolution that you need to begin to image that little speck of dust as it comes around the sun and see if it has a blue-green signature.
And if it does have a blue-green signature, it means that life is common in the universe.
The first time you ever see a blue-green signature on a distant planet, it means there's photosynthesis there, there's water there, and the chances that you saw the only other planet with photosynthesis are about zero.
And that's a calendar-changing event.
There's a before and after we were alone in the universe: forget about the discovery of whatever continent.
So as you're thinking about this, we're now beginning to be able to image most of the universe.
And that is a time of miracle and wonder.
And we kind of take that for granted.
Something similar is happening in life.
So we're hearing about life in these little bits and pieces.
We hear about CRISPR, and we hear about this technology, and we hear about this technology.
But the bottom line on life is that life turns out to be code.
And life as code is a really important concept because it means, just in the same way as you can write a sentence in English or in French or Chinese, just in the same way as you can copy a sentence, just in the same way as you can edit a sentence, just in the same way as you can print a sentence, you're beginning to be able to do that with life.
It means that we're beginning to learn how to read this language.
And this, of course, is the language that is used by this orange.
So how does this orange execute code?
It doesn't do it in ones and zeroes like a computer does.
It sits on a tree, and one day it does: plop!
And that means: execute.
AATCAAG: make me a little root.
TCGACC: make me a little stem.
GAC: make me some leaves. AGC: make me some flowers.
And then GCAA: make me some more oranges.
If I edit a sentence in English on a word processor, then what happens is you can go from this word to that word.
If I edit something in this orange and put in GCAAC, using CRISPR or something else that you've heard of, then this orange becomes a lemon, or it becomes a grapefruit, or it becomes a tangerine.
And if I edit one in a thousand letters, you become the person sitting next to you today.
Be more careful where you sit.
(Laughter) What's happening on this stuff is it was really expensive to begin with.
It was like long-distance calls.
But the cost of this is dropping 50 percent faster than Moore's law.
The first $200 full genome was announced yesterday by Veritas.
And so as you're looking at these systems, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter, and then it does.
So let me just give you the map view of this stuff.
This is a big discovery.
There's 23 chromosomes.
Cool.
Let's now start using a telescope version, but instead of using a telescope, let's use a microscope to zoom in on the inferior of those chromosomes, which is the Y chromosome.
It's a third the size of the X. It's recessive and mutant.
But hey, just a male.
And as you're looking at this stuff, here's kind of a country view at a 400 base pair resolution level, and then you zoom in to 550, and then you zoom in to 850, and you can begin to identify more and more genes as you zoom in.
Then you zoom in to the state level, and you can begin to tell who's got leukemia, how did they get leukemia, what kind of leukemia do they have, what shifted from what place to what place.
And then you zoom in to the Google street view level.
So this is what happens if you have colorectal cancer for a very specific patient on the letter-by-letter resolution.
So what we're doing in this stuff is we're gathering information and just generating enormous amounts of information.
This is one of the largest databases on the planet and it's growing faster than we can build computers to store it.
You can create some incredible maps with this stuff.
You want to understand the plague and why one plague is bubonic and the other one is a different kind of plague and the other one is a different kind of plague?
Well, here's a map of the plague.
Some are absolutely deadly to humans, some are not.
And note, by the way, as you go to the bottom of this, how does it compare to tuberculosis?
So this is the difference between tuberculosis and various kinds of plagues, and you can play detective with this stuff, because you can take a very specific kind of cholera that affected Haiti, and you can look at which country it came from, which region it came from, and probably which soldier took that from that African country to Haiti.
Zoom out.
It's not just zooming in.
This is one of the coolest maps ever done by human beings.
What they've done is taken all the genetic information they have about all the species, and they've put a tree of life on a single page that you can zoom in and out of.
So this is what came first, how did it diversify, how did it branch, how large is that genome, on a single page.
It's kind of the universe of life on Earth, and it's being constantly updated and completed.
And so as you're looking at this stuff, the really important change is the old biology used to be reactive.
You used to have a lot of biologists that had microscopes, and they had magnifying glasses and they were out observing animals.
The new biology is proactive.
You don't just observe stuff, you make stuff.
And that's a really big change because it allows us to do things like this.
And I know you're really excited by this picture.
(Laughter) It only took us four years and 40 million dollars to be able to take this picture.
(Laughter) And what we did is we took the full gene code out of a cell -- not a gene, not two genes, the full gene code out of a cell -- built a completely new gene code, inserted it into the cell, figured out a way to have the cell execute that code and built a completely new species.
So this is the world's first synthetic life form.
And so what do you do with this stuff?
Well, this stuff is going to change the world.
Let me give you three short-term trends in terms of how it's going to change the world.
The first is we're going to see a new industrial revolution.
And I actually mean that literally.
So in the same way as Switzerland and Germany and Britain changed the world with machines like the one you see in this lobby, created power -- in the same way CERN is changing the world, using new instruments and our concept of the universe -- programmable life forms are also going to change the world because once you can program cells in the same way as you program your computer chip, then you can make almost anything.
So your computer chip can produce photographs, can produce music, can produce film, can produce love letters, can produce spreadsheets.
It's just ones and zeroes flying through there.
If you can flow ATCGs through cells, then this software makes its own hardware, which means it scales very quickly.
No matter what happens, if you leave your cell phone by your bedside, you will not have a billion cell phones in the morning.
But if you do that with living organisms, you can make this stuff at a very large scale.
One of the things you can do is you can start producing close to carbon-neutral fuels on a commercial scale by 2025, which we're doing with Exxon.
But you can also substitute for agricultural lands.
Instead of having 100 hectares to make oils or to make proteins, you can make it in these vats at 10 or 100 times the productivity per hectare.
Or you can store information, or you can make all the world's vaccines in those three vats.
Or you can store most of the information that's held at CERN in those three vats.
DNA is a really powerful information storage device.
Second turn: you're beginning to see the rise of theoretical biology.
So, medical school departments are one of the most conservative places on earth.
The way they teach anatomy is similar to the way they taught anatomy 100 years ago.
"Welcome, student. Here's your cadaver."
One of the things medical schools are not good at is creating new departments, which is why this is so unusual.
Isaac Kohane has now created a department based on informatics, data, knowledge at Harvard Medical School.
And in a sense, what's beginning to happen is biology is beginning to get enough data that it can begin to follow the steps of physics, which used to be observational physics and experimental physicists, and then started creating theoretical biology.
Well, that's what you're beginning to see because you have so many medical records, because you have so much data about people: you've got their genomes, you've got their viromes, you've got their microbiomes.
And as this information stacks, you can begin to make predictions.
The third thing that's happening is this is coming to the consumer.
So you, too, can get your genes sequenced.
And this is beginning to create companies like 23andMe, and companies like 23andMe are going to be giving you more and more and more data, not just about your relatives, but about you and your body, and it's going to compare stuff, and it's going to compare stuff across time, and these are going to become very large databases.
But it's also beginning to affect a series of other businesses in unexpected ways.
Normally, when you advertise something, you really don't want the consumer to take your advertisement into the bathroom to pee on.
Unless, of course, if you're IKEA.
Because when you rip this out of a magazine and you pee on it, it'll turn blue if you're pregnant.
(Laughter) And they'll give you a discount on your crib.
(Laughter) Right? So when I say consumer empowerment, and this is spreading beyond biotech, I actually really mean that.
We're now beginning to produce, at Synthetic Genomics, desktop printers that allow you to design a cell, print a cell, execute the program on the cell.
We can now print vaccines real time as an airplane takes off before it lands.
We're shipping 78 of these machines this year.
This is not theoretical biology. This is printing biology.
Let me talk about two long-term trends that are coming at you over a longer time period.
The first one is, we're starting to redesign species.
And you've heard about that, right?
We're redesigning trees. We're redesigning flowers.
We're redesigning yogurt, cheese, whatever else you want.
And that, of course, brings up the interesting question: How and when should we redesign humans?
And a lot of us think, "Oh no, we never want to redesign humans."
Unless, of course, if your child has a Huntington's gene and is condemned to death.
Or, unless if you're passing on a cystic fibrosis gene, in which case, you don't just want to redesign yourself, you want to redesign your children and their children.
And these are complicated debates and they're going to happen in real time.
I'll give you one current example.
One of the debates going on at the National Academies today is you have the power to put a gene drive into mosquitoes so that you will kill all the malaria-carrying mosquitoes.
Now, some people say, "That's going to affect the environment in an extreme way, don't do it."
Other people say, "This is one of the things that's killing millions of people yearly.
Who are you to tell me that I can't save the kids in my country?"
And why is this debate so complicated?
Because as soon as you let this loose in Brazil or in Southern Florida -- mosquitoes don't respect walls.
You're making a decision for the world when you put a gene drive into the air.
This wonderful man won a Nobel Prize, and after winning the Nobel Prize he's been worrying about how did life get started on this planet and how likely is it that it's in other places?
So what he's been doing is going around to this graduate students and saying to his graduate students, "Build me life but don't use any modern chemicals or instruments.
Build me stuff that was here three billion years ago.
You can't use lasers. You can't use this. You can't use that."
He gave me a vial of what he's built about three weeks ago.
What has he built?
He's built basically what looked like soap bubbles that are made out of lipids.
He's built a precursor of RNA.
He's had the precursor of the RNA be absorbed by the cell and then he's had the cells divide.
We may not be that far -- call it a decade, maybe two decades -- from generating life from scratch out of proto-communities.
Second long-term trend: we've been living and are living through the digital age -- we're starting to live through the age of the genome and biology and CRISPR and synthetic biology -- and all of that is going to merge into the age of the brain.
So we're getting to the point where we can rebuild most of our body parts, in the same way as if you break a bone or burn your skin, it regrows.
We're beginning to learn how to regrow our tracheas or how to regrow our bladders.
Both of those have been implanted in humans.
Tony Atala is working on 32 different organs.
But the core is going to be this, because this is you and the rest is just packaging.
Nobody's going to live beyond 120, 130, 140 years unless if we fix this.
And that's the most interesting challenge.
That's the next frontier, along with: "How common is life in the universe?"
"Where did we come from?"
and questions like that.
Let me end this with an apocryphal quote from Einstein.
[You can live as if everything is a miracle, or you can live as if nothing is a miracle.] It's your choice.
You can focus on the bad, you can focus on the scary, and certainly there's a lot of scary out there.
But use 10 percent of your brain to focus on that, or maybe 20 percent, or maybe 30 percent.
But just remember, we really are living in an age of miracle and wonder.
We're lucky to be alive today. We're lucky to see this stuff.
We're lucky to be able to interact with folks like the folks who are building all the stuff in this room.
So thank you to all of you, for all you do.
(Applause)
We know about our universe’s past: the Big Bang theory predicts that all matter, time, and space began in an incredibly tiny, compact state about 14 billion years ago.
And we know about the present: scientists’ observations of the movement of galaxies tell us that the universe is expanding at an accelerated rate.
But what about the future?
Do we know how our universe is going to end?
Cosmologists have three possible answers for this question, called the Big Freeze, the Big Rip and the Big Crunch.
To understand these three scenarios, imagine two objects representing galaxies.
A short, tight rubber band is holding them together— that’s the attractive force of gravity.
Meanwhile, two hooks are pulling them apart— that’s the repulsive force expanding the universe.
Copy this system over and over again, and you have something approximating the real universe.
The outcome of the battle between these two opposing forces determines how the end of the universe will play out.
The Big Freeze scenario is what happens if the force pulling the objects apart is just strong enough to stretch the rubber band until it loses its elasticity.
The expansion wouldn’t be able to accelerate anymore, but the universe would keep getting bigger.
Clusters of galaxies would separate.
The objects within the galaxies– suns, planets, and solar systems would move away from each other, until galaxies dissolved into lonely objects floating separately in the vast space.
The light they emit would be redshifted to long wavelengths with very low, faint energies, and the gas emanating from them would be too thin to create new stars.
The universe would become darker and colder, approaching a frozen state also known as the Big Chill, or the Heat Death of the Universe.
But what if the repulsive force is so strong that it stretches the rubber band past its elastic limit, and actually tears it?
If the expansion of the universe continues to accelerate, it will eventually overcome not only the gravitational force – tearing apart galaxies and solar systems– but also the electromagnetic, weak, and strong nuclear forces which hold atoms and nuclei together.
As a result, the matter that makes up stars breaks into tiny pieces.
Even atoms and subatomic particles will be destroyed.
That’s the Big Rip.
What about the third scenario, where the rubber band wins out?
That corresponds to a possible future in which the force of gravity brings the universe’s expansion to a halt— and then reverses it.
Galaxies would start rushing towards each other, and as they clumped together their gravitational pull would get even stronger.
Stars too would hurtle together and collide.
Temperatures would rise as space would get tighter and tighter.
The size of the universe would plummet until everything compressed into such a small space that even atoms and subatomic particles would have to crunch together.
The result would be an incredibly dense, hot, compact universe — a lot like the state that preceded the Big Bang.
This is the Big Crunch.
Could this tiny point of matter explode in another Big Bang?
Could the universe expand and contract over and over again, repeating its entire history?
The theory describing such a universe is known as the Big Bounce.
In fact, there’s no way to tell how many bounces could’ve already happened— or how many might happen in the future.
Each bounce would wipe away any record of the universe’s previous history.
Which one of those scenarios will be the real one?
The answer depends on the exact shape of the universe, the amount of dark energy it holds, and changes in its expansion rate.
As of now, our observations suggest that we’re heading for a Big Freeze.
But the good news is that we’ve probably got about 10 to the 100th power years before the chill sets in — so don’t start stocking up on mittens just yet.
A fact came out of MIT, couple of years ago. Ken Hale, who's a linguist, said that of the 6,000 languages spoken on Earth right now, 3,000 aren't spoken by the children.
So that in one generation, we're going to halve our cultural diversity.
He went on to say that every two weeks, an elder goes to the grave carrying the last spoken word of that culture.
So an entire philosophy, a body of knowledge about the natural world that had been empirically gleaned over centuries, goes away.
And this happens every two weeks.
So for the last 20 years, since my dental experience, I have been traveling the world and coming back with stories about some of these people.
What I'd like to do right now is share some of those stories with you.
This is Tamdin.
She is a 69-year-old nun.
She was thrown in prison in Tibet for two years for putting up a little tiny placard protesting the occupation of her country.
And when I met her, she had just taken a walk over the Himalayas from Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, into Nepal, across to India -- 30 days -- to meet her leader, the Dalai Lama.
The Dalai Lama lives in Dharamsala, India.
So I took this picture three days after she arrived, and she had this beat-up pair of tennis shoes on, with her toes sticking out.
And she crossed in March, and there's a lot of snow at 18,500 feet in March.
This is Paldin.
Paldin is a 62-year-old monk.
And he spent 33 years in prison.
His whole monastery was thrown into prison at the time of the uprising, when the Dalai Lama had to leave Tibet.
And he was beaten, starved, tortured -- lost all his teeth while in prison.
And when I met him, he was a kind gentle old man.
And it really impressed me -- I met him two weeks after he got out of prison -- that he went through that experience, and ended up with the demeanor that he had.
So I was in Dharamsala meeting these people, and I'd spent about five weeks there, and I was hearing these similar stories of these refugees that had poured out of Tibet into Dharamsala.
And it just so happened, on the fifth week, there was a public teaching by the Dalai Lama.
And I was watching this crowd of monks and nuns, many of which I had just interviewed, and heard their stories, and I watched their faces, and they gave us a little FM radio, and we could listen to the translation of his teachings.
And what he said was: treat your enemies as if they were precious jewels, because it's your enemies that build your tolerance and patience on the road to your enlightenment.
That hit me so hard, telling these people that had been through this experience.
So, two months later, I went into Tibet, and I started interviewing the people there, taking my photographs. That's what I do.
I interview and do portraits.
And this is a little girl.
I took her portrait up on top of the Jokhang Temple.
And I'd snuck in -- because it's totally illegal to have a picture of the Dalai Lama in Tibet -- it's the quickest way you can get arrested.
So I snuck in a bunch of little wallet-sized pictures of the Dalai Lama, and I would hand them out.
And when I gave them to the people, they'd either hold them to their heart, or they'd hold them up to their head and just stay there.
And this is -- well, at the time -- I did this 10 years ago -- that was 36 years after the Dalai Lama had left.
So I was going in, interviewing these people and doing their portraits.
This is Jigme and her sister, Sonam.
And they live up on the Chang Tang, the Tibetan Plateau, way in the western part of the country.
This is at 17,000 feet.
And they had just come down from the high pastures, at 18,000 feet.
Same thing: gave her a picture, she held it up to her forehead.
And I usually hand out Polaroids when I do these, because I'm setting up lights, and checking my lights, and when I showed her her Polaroid, she screamed and ran into her tent.
This is Tenzin Gyatso; he was found to be the Buddha of Compassion at the age of two, out in a peasant's house, way out in the middle of nowhere.
At the age of four, he was installed as the 14th Dalai Lama.
As a teenager, he faced the invasion of his country, and had to deal with it -- he was the leader of the country.
Eight years later, when they discovered there was a plot to kill him, they dressed him up like a beggar and snuck him out of the country on horseback, and took the same trip that Tamdin did.
And he's never been back to his country since.
And if you think about this man, 46 years later, still sticking to this non-violent response to a severe political and human rights issue.
And the young people, young Tibetans, are starting to say, listen, this doesn't work.
You know, violence as a political tool is all the rage right now.
And he still is holding this line.
So this is our icon to non-violence in our world -- one of our living icons.
This is another leader of his people.
This is Moi. This is in the Ecuadorian Amazon.
And Moi is 35 years old.
And this area of the Ecuadorian Amazon -- oil was discovered in 1972.
And in this period of time -- since that time -- as much oil, or twice as much oil as was spilled in the Exxon Valdez accident, was spilled in this little area of the Amazon, and the tribes in this area have constantly had to move.
And Moi belongs to the Huaorani tribe, and they're known as very fierce, they're known as "auca."
And they've managed to keep out the seismologists and the oil workers with spears and blowguns.
And we spent -- I was with a team -- two weeks with these guys out in the jungle watching them hunt.
This was on a monkey hunt, hunting with curare-tipped darts.
And the knowledge that these people have about the natural environment is incredible.
They could hear things, smell things, see things I couldn't see.
And I couldn't even see the monkeys that they were getting with these darts.
This is Yadira, and Yadira is five years old. She's in a tribe that's neighboring the Huaorani.
And her tribe has had to move three times in the last 10 years because of the oil spills.
And we never hear about that. And the latest infraction against these people is, as part of Plan Colombia, we're spraying Paraquat or Round Up, whatever it is -- we're defoliating thousands of acres of the Ecuadorian Amazon in our war on drugs.
And these people are the people who take the brunt of it.
This is Mengatoue.
He's the shaman of the Huaorani, and he said to us, you know, I'm an older man now; I'm getting tired, you know; I'm tired of spearing these oil workers.
I wish they would just go away.
And I was -- I usually travel alone when I do my work, but I did this -- I hosted a program for Discovery, and when I went down with the team, I was quite concerned about going in with a whole bunch of people, especially into the Huaorani, deep into the Huaorani tribe.
And as it turned out, these guys really taught me a thing or two about blending in with the locals.
(Laughter) One of the things I did just before 9/11 -- August of 2001 -- I took my son, Dax, who was 16 at the time, and I took him to Pakistan.
Because at first I wanted -- you know, I've taken him on a couple of trips, but I wanted him to see people that live on a dollar a day or less.
I wanted him to get an experience in the Islamic world and I also wanted him to -- I was going there to work with a group, do a story on a group called the Kalash, that are a group of animists, 3,000 animists, that live -- very small area -- surrounded by Islam -- there's 3,000 of these Kalash left; they're incredible people.
So it was a great experience for him. He stayed up all night with them, drumming and dancing.
And he brought a soccer ball, and we had soccer every night in this little village.
And then we went up and met their shaman.
By the way, Mengatoue was the shaman of his tribe as well.
And this is John Doolikahn, who's the shaman of the Kalash.
And he's up in the mountains, right on the border with Afghanistan.
In fact, on that other side is the area, Tora Bora, the area where Osama bin Laden's supposed to be. This is the tribal area.
And we watched and stayed with John Doolikahn.
And the shaman -- I did a whole series on shamanism, which is an interesting phenomenon.
But around the world, they go into trance in different ways, and in Pakistan, the way they do it is they burn juniper leaves and they sacrifice an animal, pour the blood of the animal on the leaves and then inhale the smoke.
And they're all praying to the mountain gods as they go into trance.
You know, getting kids used to different realities, I think, is so important. What Dan Dennett said the other day -- having a curriculum where they study different religions, just to make a mental flexibility, give them a mental flexibility in different belief systems -- I think this is so necessary in our world today as you see these clash of beliefs taking place.
And all the security issues they cause us.
So, one thing we did five years ago: we started a program that links kids in indigenous communities with kids in the United States.
So we first hooked up a spot in the Navajo Nation with a classroom in Seattle.
We now have 15 sites.
We have one in Kathmandu, Nepal; Dharamsala, India; Takaungu, Kenya -- Takaungu is one-third Christian, one-third Muslim and one-third animist, the community is -- Ollantaytambo, Peru, and Arctic Village, Alaska.
This is Daniel; he's one of our students in Arctic Village, Alaska.
He lives in this log cabin -- no running water, no heat other than -- no windows and high-speed Internet connection.
And this is -- I see this rolling out all over -- this is our site in Ollantaytambo, Peru, four years ago, where they first saw their first computers; now they have computers in their classrooms.
And the way we've done this -- we teach digital storytelling to these kids.
And we have them tell stories about issues in their community in their community that they care about.
And this is in Peru, where the kids told the story about a river that they cleaned up.
And the way we do it is, we do it in workshops, and we bring people who want to learn digital workflow and storytelling, and have them work with the kids.
And just this last year we've taken a group of teenagers in, and this has worked the best.
So our dream is to bring teenagers together, so they'll have a community service experience as well as a cross-cultural experience, as they teach kids in these areas and help them build their communication infrastructure.
This is teaching Photoshop in the Tibetan children's village in Dharamsala.
We have the website, where the kids all get their homepage.
This is all their movies. We've got about 60 movies that these kids have made, and they're quite incredible.
The one I want to show you -- after we get them to make the movies, we have a night where we show the movies to the community.
And this is in Takaungu -- we've got a generator and a digital projector, and we're projecting it up against a barn, and showing one of the movies that they made.
And if you get a chance, you can go to our website, and you'll see the incredible work these kids do.
The other thing: I wanted to give indigenous people a voice.
That was one of the big motivating factors.
But the other motivating factor is the insular nature of our country.
National Geographic just did a Roper Study of 18 to 26 year olds in our country and in nine other industrialized countries.
It was a two million dollar study.
United States came in second to last in geographic knowledge.
70 percent of the kids couldn't find Afghanistan or Iraq on a map; 60 percent couldn't find India; 30 percent couldn't find the Pacific Ocean.
And this is a study that was just done a couple of years ago.
So what I'd like to show you now, in the couple of minutes I have left, is a film that a student made in Guatemala.
We just had a workshop in Guatemala.
A week before we got to the workshop, a massive landslide, caused by Hurricane Stan, last October, came in and buried 600 people alive in their village.
And this kid lived in the village -- he wasn't there at the time -- and this is the little movie he put together about that.
And he hadn't seen a computer before we did this movie. We taught him Photoshop and -- yeah, we can play it.
This is an old Mayan funeral chant that he got from his grandfather.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Good afternoon, good evening, whatever.
We can go, jambo, guten Abend, bonsoir, but we can also ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh.
That is the call that chimpanzees make before they go to sleep in the evening.
You hear it going from one side of the valley to the other, from one group of nests to the next.
And I want to pick up with my talk this evening from where Zeray left off yesterday.
He was talking about this amazing, three-year-old Australopithecine child, Selam.
And we've also been hearing about the history, the family tree, of mankind through DNA genetic profiling.
And it was a paleontologist, the late Louis Leakey, who actually set me on the path for studying chimpanzees.
And it was pretty extraordinary, way back then.
It's kind of commonplace now, but his argument was -- because he'd been searching for the fossilized remains of early humans in Africa.
And you can tell an awful lot about what those beings looked like from the fossils, from the shape of the muscle attachments, something about the way they lived from the various artifacts found with them.
But what about how they behaved? That's what he wanted to know.
And of course, behavior doesn't fossilize.
He argued -- and it's now a fairly common theory -- that if we found behavior patterns similar or the same in our closest living relatives, the great apes, and humans today, then maybe those behaviors were present in the ape-like, human-like ancestor some seven million years ago.
And therefore, perhaps we had brought those characteristics with us from that ancient, ancient past.
Well, if you look in textbooks today that deal with human evolution, you very often find people speculating about how early humans may have behaved, based on the behavior of chimpanzees.
They are more like us than any other living creature, and we've heard about that during this TED Conference.
So it remains for me to comment on the ways in which chimpanzees are so like us, in certain aspects of their behavior.
Every chimpanzee has his or her own personality.
Of course, I gave them names. They can live to be 60 years or more, although we think most of them probably don't make it to 60 in the wild.
Mr. Wurzel. The female has her first baby when she's 11 or 12.
Thereafter, she has one baby only every five or six years, a long period of childhood dependency when the child is nursing, sleeping with the mother at night, and riding on her back.
And we believe that this long period of childhood is important for chimpanzees, just as it is for us, in relation to learning.
As the brain becomes ever more complex during evolution in different forms of animals, so we find that learning plays an ever more important role in an individual's life history.
And young chimpanzees spend a lot of time watching what their elders do.
We know now that they're capable of imitating behaviors that they see.
And we believe that it's in this way that the different tool-using behaviors -- that have now been seen in all the different chimpanzee populations studied in Africa -- how these are passed from one generation to the next, through observation, imitation and practice, so that we can describe these tool-using behaviors as primitive culture.
Chimpanzees don't have a spoken language. We've talked about that.
They do have a very rich repertoire of postures and gestures, many of which are similar, or even identical, to ours and formed in the same context. Greeting chimpanzees embracing.
They also kiss, hold hands, pat one another on the back.
And they swagger and they throw rocks.
In chimpanzee society, we find many, many examples of compassion, precursors to love and true altruism.
Unfortunately, they, like us, have a dark side to their nature.
They're capable of extreme brutality, even a kind of primitive war.
And these really aggressive behaviors, for the most part, are directed against individuals of the neighboring social group.
They are very territorially aggressive.
Chimpanzees, I believe, more than any other living creature, have helped us to understand that, after all, there is no sharp line between humans and the rest of the animal kingdom.
It's a very blurry line, and it's getting more blurry all the time as we make even more observations.
The study that I began in 1960 is still continuing to this day.
And these chimpanzees, living their complex social lives in the wild, have helped -- more than anything else -- to make us realize we are part of, and not separated from, the amazing animals with whom we share the planet.
So it's pretty sad to find that chimpanzees, like so many other creatures around the world, are losing their habitats.
This is just one photograph from the air, and it shows you the forested highlands of Gombe.
And it was when I flew over the whole area, about 16 years ago, and realized that outside the park, this forest, which in 1960 had stretched almost unbroken along the eastern shore of Lake Tanganyika, which is where the tiny, 30-square-mile Gombe National Park lies, that a question came to my mind.
"How can we even try to save these famous chimpanzees, when the people living around the National Park are struggling to survive?"
More people are living there than the land could possibly support.
The numbers increased by refugees pouring in from Burundi and over the lake from Congo.
And very poor people -- they couldn't afford to buy food from elsewhere.
This led to a program, which we call TACARE.
It's a very holistic way of improving the lives of the people living in the villages around the park.
It started small with 12 villages. It's now in 24.
There isn't time to go into it, but it's including things like tree nurseries, methods of farming most suitable to this now very degraded, almost desert-like land up in these mountains.
Ways of controlling, preventing soil erosion.
Ways of reclaiming overused farmland, so that within two years they can again be productive.
Working to help the villagers obtain fresh water from wells.
Perhaps build some schoolrooms.
Most important of all, I believe, is working with small groups of women, providing them with opportunities for micro-credit loans.
And we've got, as is the case around the world, about 95 percent of all loans returned.
Empowering women, working with education, providing scholarships for girls so they can finish secondary school, in the clear understanding that, all around the world, as women's education improves, family size drops.
We provide information about family planning and about HIV/AIDS.
And as a result of this program, something's happening for conservation.
What's happening for conservation is that the farmers living in these 24 villages, instead of looking on us as a bunch of white people coming to study a whole bunch of monkeys -- and by the way, many of the staff are now Tanzanian -- but when we began the TACARE program, it was a Tanzanian team going into the villages.
It was a Tanzanian team talking to the villagers, asking what they were interested in.
Were they interested in conservation? Absolutely not.
They were interested in health; they were interested in education.
And as time went on, and as their situation began to improve, they began to understand ever more about the need for conservation.
They began to understand that as the upper levels of the hills were denuded of trees, so you've got this terrible soil erosion and mudslides.
Today, we are developing what we call the Greater Gombe Ecosystem.
This is an area way outside the National Park, stretching out into all these very degraded lands.
And as these villages have a better standard of life, they are actually agreeing to put between 10 percent and 20 percent of their land in the highlands aside, so that once again, as the trees grow back, the chimpanzees will have leafy corridors through which they can travel to interact -- as they must for genetic viability -- with other remnant groups outside the National Park.
So TACARE is a success.
We're replicating it in other parts of Africa, around other wilderness areas which are faced with extreme population pressure.
The problems in Africa, however, as we've been discussing for the whole of these first couple of days of TED, are major problems.
There is a great deal of poverty.
And when you get large numbers of people living in land that is not that fertile, particularly when you cut down trees, and you leave the soil open to the wind for erosion, as desperate populations cut down more and more trees, so that they can try and grow food for themselves and their families, what's going to happen? Something's got to give.
And the other problems -- in not only Africa, but the rest of the developing world and, indeed, everywhere -- what are we doing to our planet?
You know, the famous scientist, E. O. Wilson said that if every person on this planet attains the standard of living of the average European or American, we need three new planets.
Today, they are saying four. But we don't have them. We've got one.
And what's happened? I mean, the question here is, here we are, arguably the most intelligent being that's ever walked planet Earth, with this extraordinary brain, capable of the kind of technology that is so well illustrated by these TED Conferences, and yet we're destroying the only home we have.
The indigenous people around the world, before they made a major decision, used to sit around and ask themselves, "How does this decision affect our people seven generations ahead?"
Today, major decisions -- and I'm not particularly talking about Africa here, but the developed world -- major decisions involving millions of dollars, and millions of people, are often based on, "How will this affect the next shareholders' meeting?"
And these decisions affect Africa.
As I began traveling around Africa talking about the problems faced by chimpanzees and their vanishing forests, I realized more and more how so many of Africa's problems could be laid at the door of previous colonial exploitation.
So I began traveling outside Africa, talking in Europe, talking in the United States, going to Asia.
And everywhere there were these terrible problems.
And you know the kind I'm talking about. I'm talking about pollution.
The air that we breathe that often poisons us.
The earth is poisoning our foods.
The water -- water is perhaps one of the most crucial issues that we're going to face in this century -- and everywhere water is being polluted by agricultural, industrial and household chemicals that still are being sprayed around the world, seemingly with the inability to profit from past experience.
The mangroves are being cut down; the effects of things like the tsunami get worse.
We've talked about the soil erosion.
We have the reckless burning of fossil fuels along with other greenhouse gasses, so called, leading to climate change.
Finally, all around the world, people have begun to believe that there is something going on very wrong with our climate.
All around the world climates are mixed up.
And it's the poor people who are affected worse.
It's Africa that already is affected.
In many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, the droughts are so much worse.
And when the rain does come, it so often leads to flooding and added distress, and the cycle of poverty and hunger and disease.
And the numbers of people living in an area that the land cannot support, who are too poor to buy food, who can't move away because the whole land is degraded.
And so you get desertification -- creeping, creeping, creeping -- as the last of the trees are cut down.
And this kind of thing is not just in Africa. It's all over the world.
So it wasn't surprising to me that as I was traveling around the world I met so many young people who seemed to have lost hope.
We seem to have lost wisdom, the wisdom of the indigenous people.
I asked a question. "Why?"
Well, do you think there could be some kind of disconnect between this extraordinarily clever brain, the kind of brain that the TED technologies exemplify, and the human heart? Talking about it in the non-scientific term, in terms of love and compassion. Is there some disconnect?
And these young people, when I talk to them, basically they were either depressed or apathetic, or bitter and angry. And they said more or less the same thing, "We feel this way because we feel you've compromised our future and there's nothing we can do about it."
We have compromised their future.
I've got three little grandchildren, and every time I look at them and I think how we've harmed this beautiful planet since I was their age, I feel this desperation.
And that led to this program we call Roots and Shoots, which began right here in Tanzania and has now spread to 97 countries around the world.
It's symbolic. Roots make a firm foundation.
Shoots seem tiny; to reach the sun they can break through a brick wall.
See the brick wall as all these problems we've inflicted on the planet, environmental and social. It's a message of hope.
Hundreds and thousands of young people around the world can break through and can make this a better world for all living things.
The most important message of Roots and Shoots: every single one of us makes a difference, every single day.
We have a choice. Every one of us in this room, we have a choice as to what kind of difference we want to make.
The very poor have no choice. It's up to us to change things so that the poor have choice as well.
The Roots and Shoots groups all choose three projects.
It depends on how old they are, and which country, whether they're in a city or rural, as to what kinds of projects.
But basically, we have programs now from preschool right through university, with more and more adults starting their own Roots and Shoots groups.
And every group chooses, between them, three different kinds of project to make this a better world, recognizing that all these different problems are interconnected and impinge on each other.
So one of their projects will be to help their own human community.
And then, if they're able, they may raise money to help communities in other parts of the world.
One of their projects will be to help animals -- not just wildlife, domestic animals as well.
And one of their projects will be to help the environment that we all share.
And woven throughout all of this is a message of learning to live in peace and harmony within ourselves, in our families, in our communities, between nations, between cultures, between religions and between us and the natural world.
We need the natural world. We cannot go on destroying it at the rate we are.
We not do have more than this one planet.
Just picking one or two of the projects right here in Africa that the Roots and Shoots groups are doing, one or two projects only -- in Tanzania, in Uganda, Kenya, South Africa, Congo-Brazzaville, Sierra Leone, Cameroon and other groups. And as I say, it's in 97 countries around the world.
Of course, they're planting trees. They're growing organic vegetables.
They're working in the refugee camps, with chickens and selling the eggs for a little amount of money, or just using them to feed their families, and feeling a sense of pride and empowerment, because they're no longer helpless and depending on others with their vegetables and their chickens.
It's being used in Uganda to give some psychological help to ex-child soldiers.
Doing projects like this is bringing them out of themselves.
Once again, they're useful members of society.
We have this program in prisons as well.
So, there's no time for more Roots and Shoots now.
But -- oh, they're also working on HIV/AIDS.
That's a very important component of Roots and Shoots, with older kids talking to younger ones.
And unwanted pregnancies and things like that, which young people listen to better from other youth, rather than adults.
Hope. That's the question I get asked as I'm going around the world: "Jane, you've seen so many terrible things, you've seen your chimpanzees decrease in number from about one million, at the turn of the century, to no more than 150,000 now, and the same with so many other animals.
Forests disappearing, deserts where once there was forest.
Do you really have hope?" Well, yes.
You can't come to a conference like TED and not have hope, can you?
And of course, there's hope. One is this amazing human brain.
And I mean, think of the technologies.
And I've just been so thrilled, finally, to come to people talking about compost latrines.
It's one of my hobbyhorses.
We just flush all this water down the lavatory, it's terrible.
And then talking about renewable energy -- desperately important.
Do we care about the planet for our children?
How many of us have children or grandchildren, nieces, nephews?
Do we care about their future?
And if we care about their future, we, as the elite around the world, we can do something about it. We can make choices as to how we live each day.
What we buy. What we wear.
And choose to make these choices with the question, how will this affect the environment around me?
How will it affect the life of my child when he or she grows up?
Or my grandchild, or whatever it is.
So the human brain, coupled with the human heart, and we join hands around the world.
And that's what TED is helping so well with, and Google who help us, and Esri are helping us with mapping in Gombe National Park.
All of these technologies we can use.
Now let's link them, and it's beginning to happen, isn't it?
You've heard about it this afternoon. It's beginning to happen.
This change, this change. To see change that we must have if we care about the future.
And the next reason for hope -- nature is amazingly resilient.
You can take an area that's absolutely destroyed, with time and perhaps some help it can regenerate.
And an example is the TACARE program.
I told you, where a seemingly dead tree stump -- if you stop hacking them for firewood, which you don't need to because you have wood lots, then in five years you can have a 30-foot tree.
And animals, almost on the brink of extinction, can be given a second chance. That's my next book.
It's inspiring. And it brings me to my last category of hope, and we've heard about this so much in the last two days: this indomitable human spirit. This determination of people, the resilience of the human spirit, So that people who you would think would be battered by poverty, or disease, or whatever, can pull themselves up out of it, sometimes with a helping hand, and take their part in society, and take their part in changing the world.
And just to think of one or two people out of Africa who are just really inspiring.
We could make a very long list, but obviously Nelson Mandela, emerging from 17 years of hard physical labor, 23 years of imprisonment, with this amazing ability to forgive, so that he could lead his nation out the evil regime of apartheid without a bloodbath.
Ken Saro-Wiwa, in Nigeria, who took on the giant oil companies, and although people around the world tried their best, was executed.
People like this are so inspirational.
People like this are the role models we need for young Africans.
And we need some environmental role models as well, and I've been hearing some of them today.
So I'm really grateful for this opportunity to share this message again, with everyone at TED.
And I hope that some of us can get together and talk about some of these things, especially the Roots and Shoots program.
And just a last word on that -- the young woman who's running this entire conference center, I met her today.
She came up so excited, with her certificate. She was [in] Roots and Shoots.
She was in the leadership in Dar es Salaam.
She said it's helped her to do what she's doing.
And it was very, very exciting for me to meet her and see just one example of how young people, when they are empowered, given the opportunity to take action, to make the world a better place, truly are our hope for tomorrow.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Suppose that two American friends are traveling together in Italy.
They go to see Michelangelo's "David," and when they finally come face-to-face with the statue, they both freeze dead in their tracks.
The first guy -- we'll call him Adam -- is transfixed by the beauty of the perfect human form.
The second guy -- we'll call him Bill -- is transfixed by embarrassment, at staring at the thing there in the center.
So here's my question for you: Which one of these two guys was more likely to have voted for George Bush, which for Al Gore?
I don't need a show of hands, because we all have the same political stereotypes.
We all know that it's Bill.
And in this case, the stereotype corresponds to reality.
It really is a fact that liberals are much higher than conservatives on a major personality trait called openness to experience.
People who are high in openness to experience just crave novelty, variety, diversity, new ideas, travel.
People low on it like things that are familiar, that are safe and dependable.
If you know about this trait, you can understand a lot of puzzles about human behavior, like why artists are so different from accountants.
You can predict what kinds of books they like to read, what kinds of places they like to travel to and what kinds of food they like to eat.
Once you understand this trait, you can understand why anybody would eat at Applebee's, but not anybody that you know.
(Laughter) This trait also tells us a lot about politics.
The main researcher of this trait, Robert McCrae, says that "Open individuals have an affinity for liberal, progressive, left-wing political views ..."
They like a society which is open and changing, "... whereas closed individuals prefer conservative, traditional, right-wing views."
This trait also tells us a lot about the kinds of groups people join.
Here's the description of a group I found on the web.
What kinds of people would join "a global community ... welcoming people from every discipline and culture, who seek a deeper understanding of the world, and who hope to turn that understanding into a better future for us all"?
This is from some guy named Ted.
Well, let's see now.
If openness predicts who becomes liberal, and openness predicts who becomes a TEDster, then might we predict that most TEDsters are liberal?
Let's find out.
I'll ask you to raise your hand, whether you are liberal, left of center -- on social issues, primarily -- or conservative.
And I'll give a third option, because I know there are libertarians in the audience.
So please raise your hand -- in the simulcast rooms too.
Let's let everybody see who's here.
Please raise your hand if you'd say that you're liberal or left of center.
Please raise your hand high right now. OK.
Please raise your hand if you'd say you're libertarian.
OK. About two dozen.
And please raise your hand if you'd say you are right of center or conservative.
One, two, three, four, five -- about eight or 10.
OK.
Because if our goal is to seek a deeper understanding of the world, our general lack of moral diversity here is going to make it harder.
Because when people all share values, when people all share morals, they become a team.
And once you engage the psychology of teams, it shuts down open-minded thinking.
When the liberal team loses, [United States of Canada / Jesusland] as it did in 2004, and as it almost did in 2000, we comfort ourselves.
(Laughter) We try to explain why half of America voted for the other team.
We think they must be blinded by religion [Post-election US map: America / Dumbf*ckistan] or by simple stupidity.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) So if you think that half of America votes Republican because they are blinded in this way, then my message to you is that you're trapped in a moral Matrix, in a particular moral Matrix.
And by "the Matrix," I mean literally the Matrix, like the movie "The Matrix."
But I'm here today to give you a choice.
You can either take the blue pill and stick to your comforting delusions, or you can take the red pill, learn some moral psychology and step outside the moral Matrix.
Now, because I know -- (Applause) I assume that answers my question.
I was going to ask which one you picked, but no need.
You're all high in openness to experience, and it looks like it might even taste good, and you're all epicures.
Anyway, let's go with the red pill, study some moral psychology and see where it takes us.
Let's start at the beginning: What is morality, where does it come from?
The worst idea in all of psychology is the idea that the mind is a blank slate at birth.
Developmental psychology has shown that kids come into the world already knowing so much about the physical and social worlds and programmed to make it really easy for them to learn certain things and hard to learn others.
The best definition of innateness I've seen, which clarifies so many things for me, is from the brain scientist Gary Marcus.
He says, "The initial organization of the brain does not depend that much on experience.
Nature provides a first draft, which experience then revises.
'Built-in' doesn't mean unmalleable; it means organized in advance of experience."
OK, so what's on the first draft of the moral mind?
To find out, my colleague Craig Joseph and I read through the literature on anthropology, on culture variation in morality and also on evolutionary psychology, looking for matches: What sorts of things do people talk about across disciplines that you find across cultures and even species?
We found five best matches, which we call the five foundations of morality.
The first one is harm/care.
We're all mammals here, we all have a lot of neural and hormonal programming that makes us really bond with others, care for others, feel compassion for others, especially the weak and vulnerable.
It gives us very strong feelings about those who cause harm.
This moral foundation underlies about 70 percent of the moral statements I've heard here at TED.
The second foundation is fairness/reciprocity.
There's actually ambiguous evidence as to whether you find reciprocity in other animals, but the evidence for people could not be clearer.
This Norman Rockwell painting is called "The Golden Rule" -- as we heard from Karen Armstrong, it's the foundation of many religions.
That second foundation underlies the other 30 percent of the moral statements I've heard here at TED.
The third foundation is in-group/loyalty.
You do find cooperative groups in the animal kingdom, but these groups are always either very small or they're all siblings.
It's only among humans that you find very large groups of people who are able to cooperate and join together into groups, but in this case, groups that are united to fight other groups.
This probably comes from our long history of tribal living, of tribal psychology.
And this tribal psychology is so deeply pleasurable that even when we don't have tribes, we go ahead and make them, because it's fun.
(Laughter) Sports is to war as pornography is to sex.
We get to exercise some ancient drives.
The fourth foundation is authority/respect.
Here you see submissive gestures from two members of very closely related species.
But authority in humans is not so closely based on power and brutality as it is in other primates.
It's based on more voluntary deference and even elements of love, at times.
The fifth foundation is purity/sanctity.
This painting is called "The Allegory Of Chastity," but purity is not just about suppressing female sexuality.
It's about any kind of ideology, any kind of idea that tells you that you can attain virtue by controlling what you do with your body and what you put into your body.
And while the political right may moralize sex much more, the political left is doing a lot of it with food.
Food is becoming extremely moralized nowadays.
A lot of it is ideas about purity, about what you're willing to touch or put into your body.
I believe these are the five best candidates for what's written on the first draft of the moral mind.
I think this is what we come with, a preparedness to learn all these things.
But as my son Max grows up in a liberal college town, how is this first draft going to get revised?
And how will it end up being different from a kid born 60 miles south of us, in Lynchburg, Virginia?
To think about culture variation, let's try a different metaphor.
If there really are five systems at work in the mind, five sources of intuitions and emotions, then we can think of the moral mind as one of those audio equalizers that has five channels, where you can set it to a different setting on every channel.
My colleagues Brian Nosek and Jesse Graham and I made a questionnaire, which we put up on the web at www.YourMorals.org.
And so far, 30,000 people have taken this questionnaire, and you can, too.
Here are the results from about 23,000 American citizens.
On the left are the scores for liberals; on the right, conservatives; in the middle, moderates.
The blue line shows people's responses on the average of all the harm questions.
So as you see, people care about harm and care issues.
They highly endorse these sorts of statements all across the board, but as you also see, liberals care about it a little more than conservatives; the line slopes down.
Same story for fairness.
But look at the other three lines.
For liberals, the scores are very low.
They're basically saying, "This is not morality.
In-group, authority, purity -- this has nothing to do with morality. I reject it."
But as people get more conservative, the values rise.
We can say liberals have a two-channel or two-foundation morality.
Conservatives have more of a five-foundation, or five-channel morality.
We find this in every country we look at.
Here's the data for 1,100 Canadians. I'll flip through a few other slides.
The UK, Australia, New Zealand, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Latin America, the Middle East, East Asia and South Asia.
Notice also that on all of these graphs, the slope is steeper on in-group, authority, purity, which shows that, within any country, the disagreement isn't over harm and fairness.
I mean, we debate over what's fair, but everybody agrees that harm and fairness matter.
Moral arguments within cultures are especially about issues of in-group, authority, purity.
This effect is so robust, we find it no matter how we ask the question.
In a recent study, we asked people, suppose you're about to get a dog, you picked a particular breed, learned about the breed.
Suppose you learn that this particular breed is independent-minded and relates to its owner as a friend and an equal.
If you're a liberal, you say, "That's great!"
because liberals like to say, "Fetch! Please."
(Laughter) But if you're a conservative, that's not so attractive.
If you're conservative and learn that a dog's extremely loyal to its home and family and doesn't warm up to strangers, for conservatives, loyalty is good; dogs ought to be loyal.
But to a liberal, it sounds like this dog is running for the Republican nomination.
(Laughter) You might say, OK, there are differences between liberals and conservatives, but what makes the three other foundations moral?
Aren't they the foundations of xenophobia, authoritarianism and puritanism?
What makes them moral?
The answer, I think, is contained in this incredible triptych from Hieronymus Bosch, "The Garden of Earthly Delights."
All is ordered, all is beautiful, all the people and animals are doing what they're supposed to be doing, are where they're supposed to be.
But then, given the way of the world, things change.
We get every person doing whatever he wants, with every aperture of every other person and every other animal.
Some of you might recognize this as the '60s.
(Laughter) But the '60s inevitably gives way to the '70s, where the cuttings of the apertures hurt a little bit more.
Of course, Bosch called this hell.
So this triptych, these three panels, portray the timeless truth that order tends to decay.
The truth of social entropy.
But lest you think this is just some part of the Christian imagination where Christians have this weird problem with pleasure, here's the same story, the same progression, told in a paper that was published in "Nature" a few years ago, in which Ernst Fehr and Simon Gächter had people play a commons dilemma, a game in which you give people money, and then, on each round of the game, they can put money into a common pot, then the experimenter doubles what's there, and then it's all divided among the players.
So it's a nice analog for all sorts of environmental issues, where we're asking people to make a sacrifice and they don't really benefit from their own sacrifice.
You really want everybody else to sacrifice, but everybody has a temptation to free ride.
What happens is that, at first, people start off reasonably cooperative.
This is all played anonymously.
On the first round, people give about half of the money that they can.
But they quickly see other people aren't doing so much.
"I don't want to be a sucker. I won't cooperate."
So cooperation quickly decays from reasonably good down to close to zero.
But then -- and here's the trick -- Fehr and Gächter, on the seventh round, told people, "You know what? New rule.
If you want to give some of your own money to punish people who aren't contributing, you can do that."
And as soon as people heard about the punishment issue going on, cooperation shoots up.
It shoots up and it keeps going up.
Lots of research shows that to solve cooperative problems, it really helps.
It's not enough to appeal to people's good motives.
It helps to have some sort of punishment.
Even if it's just shame or embarrassment or gossip, you need some sort of punishment to bring people, when they're in large groups, to cooperate.
There's even some recent research suggesting that religion -- priming God, making people think about God -- often, in some situations, leads to more cooperative, more pro-social behavior.
Some people think that religion is an adaptation evolved both by cultural and biological evolution to make groups to cohere, in part for the purpose of trusting each other and being more effective at competing with other groups.
That's probably right, although this is a controversial issue.
But I'm particularly interested in religion and the origin of religion and in what it does to us and for us, because I think the greatest wonder in the world is not the Grand Canyon.
The Grand Canyon is really simple -- a lot of rock and a lot of water and wind and a lot of time, and you get the Grand Canyon.
It's not that complicated.
This is what's complicated: that people lived in places like the Grand Canyon, cooperating with each other, or on the savannahs of Africa or the frozen shores of Alaska.
And some of these villages grew into the mighty cities of Babylon and Rome and Tenochtitlan.
How did this happen?
It's an absolute miracle, much harder to explain than the Grand Canyon.
The answer, I think, is that they used every tool in the toolbox.
It took all of our moral psychology to create these cooperative groups.
Yes, you need to be concerned about harm, you need a psychology of justice.
But it helps to organize a group if you have subgroups, and if those subgroups have some internal structure, and if you have some ideology that tells people to suppress their carnality -- to pursue higher, nobler ends.
Now we get to the crux of the disagreement between liberals and conservatives: liberals reject three of these foundations.
They say, "Let's celebrate diversity, not common in-group membership," and, "Let's question authority," and, "Keep your laws off my body."
Liberals have very noble motives for doing this.
Traditional authority and morality can be quite repressive and restrictive to those at the bottom, to women, to people who don't fit in.
Liberals speak for the weak and oppressed.
They want change and justice, even at the risk of chaos.
This shirt says, "Stop bitching, start a revolution."
If you're high in openness to experience, revolution is good; it's change, it's fun.
Conservatives, on the other hand, speak for institutions and traditions.
They want order, even at some cost, to those at the bottom.
The great conservative insight is that order is really hard to achieve.
It's precious, and it's really easy to lose.
So as Edmund Burke said, "The restraints on men, as well as their liberties, are to be reckoned among their rights."
This was after the chaos of the French Revolution.
Once you see that liberals and conservatives both have something to contribute, that they form a balance on change versus stability, then I think the way is open to step outside the moral Matrix.
This is the great insight that all the Asian religions have attained.
Think about yin and yang.
Yin and yang aren't enemies; they don't hate each other.
Yin and yang are both necessary, like night and day, for the functioning of the world.
You find the same thing in Hinduism.
There are many high gods in Hinduism.
Two of them are Vishnu, the preserver, and Shiva, the destroyer.
This image, actually, is both of those gods sharing the same body.
You have the markings of Vishnu on the left, so we could think of Vishnu as the conservative god.
You have the markings of Shiva on the right -- Shiva's the liberal god.
And they work together.
These two stanzas contain, I think, the deepest insights that have ever been attained into moral psychology.
From the Zen master Sēngcàn: "If you want the truth to stand clear before you, never be 'for' or 'against.' The struggle between 'for' and 'against' is the mind's worst disease."
Unfortunately, it's a disease that has been caught by many of the world's leaders.
But before you feel superior to George Bush, before you throw a stone, ask yourself: Do you accept this?
Do you accept stepping out of the battle of good and evil?
Can you be not for or against anything?
So what's the point? What should you do?
Well, if you take the greatest insights from ancient Asian philosophies and religions and combine them with the latest research on moral psychology, I think you come to these conclusions: that our righteous minds were designed by evolution to unite us into teams, to divide us against other teams and then to blind us to the truth.
So what should you do?
Am I telling you to embrace Sēngcàn and stop, stop with the struggle of for and against?
No, absolutely not. I'm not saying that.
This is an amazing group of people who are doing so much, using so much of their talent, their brilliance, their energy, their money, to make the world a better place, to fight wrongs, to solve problems.
But as we learned from Samantha Power in her story about Sérgio Vieira de Mello, you can't just go charging in, saying, "You're wrong, and I'm right," because, as we just heard, everybody thinks they are right.
A lot of the problems we have to solve are problems that require us to change other people.
And if you want to change other people, a much better way to do it is to first understand who we are -- understand our moral psychology, understand that we all think we're right -- and then step out, even if it's just for a moment, step out -- check in with Sēngcàn.
Step out of the moral Matrix, just try to see it as a struggle playing out, in which everybody thinks they're right, and even if you disagree with them, everybody has some reasons for what they're doing.
Step out.
And if you do that, that's the essential move to cultivate moral humility, to get yourself out of this self-righteousness, which is the normal human condition.
Think about the enormous moral authority of the Dalai Lama.
It comes from his moral humility.
So I think the point -- the point of my talk and, I think, the point of TED -- is that this is a group that is passionately engaged in the pursuit of changing the world for the better.
People here are passionately engaged in trying to make the world a better place.
But there is also a passionate commitment to the truth.
And so I think the answer is to use that passionate commitment to the truth to try to turn it into a better future for us all.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to start by telling you two things about myself before I get into the full talk.
And the first is that I've been writing about manners and civility for more than 20 years, as a book author and as a magazine columnist.
The second is, my friends know to be very wary of inviting me over for dinner because any faux pas that happens at the table is likely to wind up in print.
(Laughter) So, I'm watching, I can see back there and I can see through the portals, too.
(Laughter) So, speaking of dinner parties, I want to take you back to 2015 and a dinner party that I went to.
To place this in time, this was when Caitlyn Jenner was first coming out, shedding her identity as a Kardashian and moving into her life as a transgender activist.
I wrote a column in People magazine at the time, talking about the importance of names and how names are our identity.
And that to misuse them or not to use them erases us in a certain way.
And especially with Caitlyn Jenner, I talked about Caitlyn, but also the use of her pronouns.
Her pronouns.
So I'm at this dinner -- delicious, wonderful, fun -- when my host goes on a rant about Caitlyn Jenner.
And she is saying that it is disrespectful for Caitlyn Jenner to force her to use a new name and to use these new pronouns.
She's not buying it, and I'm listening, and because I do meditation, I took my sacred pause before I responded.
(Laughter) And I reminded her that when she got married, she changed her name, and that she took the name of her husband.
And that's the name all of us now use.
We don't use it just because it's her legal name, but we use it because it's respectful.
Ditto for Miss Jenner.
She didn't buy it and we didn't speak for years.
(Laughter) So ...
I am known as the Civilist.
And it's probably a word that you're not that familiar with.
It's not in common parlance and it comes from the Latin and the French, and it means an individual who tries to live by a moral code, who is striving to be a good citizen.
The word "civility" is derived from that, and the original definition of civility is citizens willing to give of themselves for the good of the city, for the good of the commonwealth, for the larger good.
So, in this talk, you're going to learn three new ways to be civil, I hope, and it will be according to the original definition of civility.
My first problem is: civility is an obsolete word.
My second problem is: civility has become a dirty word in this country.
And that is whether you lean right or whether you lean left.
And in part, that's because modern usage equates civility with decorum, with formal politeness, formal behavior.
We've gotten away from the idea of citizenship.
So, let me start by talking a little bit about my friends on the right, who have conflated civility with what they call political correctness.
And to them, callouts for civility are really very much like what George Orwell wrote in "1984" -- he called it "newspeak."
And this was an attempt to change the way we talk by forcibly changing the language that we use.
To change our ideas by changing the meaning of words.
And I think my dinner host might have had some of that rattling around there.
And I first personally understood, though, the right's problem with civility when I wrote a column about then-candidate Donald Trump.
And he had just said he did not have time for total political correctness, and he did not believe the country did either.
And I took that to heart, it was very -- The audience was very engaged about that online, as you can imagine.
There was a thousand responses, and this one stood out to me because it was representative: "Political correctness is a pathological system that lets liberals dominate a conversation, label, demonize and shout down the opposition."
So I think, to the right, civility translates into censure.
So that's the right.
Now, my friends on the left also have a problem with it.
And for example, there have been those who have harassed Trump administration officials who support the President's border wall.
They've been called out as rude, they've been called out as nasty, they've been called out as worse.
And after one such incident last year, even the Washington Post -- you know, left-leaning Washington Post -- wrote an editorial and sided with decorum.
And they argued that officials should be allowed to dine in peace.
Hm.
"You know, the wall is the real incivility here.
The tear-gassing of kids, the separation of families."
That's what the protestors say.
And imagine if we had sided, in this country, with decorum and courtesy throughout our history.
You know, I think about the suffragettes.
They marched, they picketed.
They were chastised, they were arrested for pursuing the vote for women in the 1920s.
You know, I also think about the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., the father of American nonviolent civil disobedience.
He was labeled as uncivil in his attempt to promote racial and economic justice.
So I think you get a sense of why civility has become a problem, a dirty word, here.
Now, does this mean we can't disagree, that we can't speak our minds?
Absolutely not.
I recently spoke with Dr. Carolyn Lukensmeyer.
She's kind of the guru of civility in this country, and the executive director of a body called the National Institute for Civil Discourse.
And she told me, "Civility does not mean appeasement or avoiding important differences.
It means listening and talking about those differences with respect."
In a healthy democracy, we need to do that.
And I call that respectful engagement.
But civil discourse also needs rules, it needs boundaries.
For instance, there's a difference between language that is simply rude or demeaning, and speech that invokes hatred and intolerance.
And specifically of groups.
And I'm thinking of racial and ethnic groups, I'm thinking of the LGBTQ community, I'm thinking of the disabled.
We snowflakes call this speech "hate speech."
And hate speech can lead to violence.
So, to that point, in the fall of 2018, I wrote a column about Dr. Christine Blasey Ford.
You may remember her, she was one of the women who accused Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault.
And among the responses, I received this message, a personal message, which you can see here on the slide.
It's been largely redacted.
(Laughter) This message was 50 words long. 10 of them were the f-bomb.
And the Democrats were called out, President Obama was called out, and I was referred to in a pretty darn vulgar and coarse way.
There was an explicit threat in that message, and that is why my editors at The Post sent it to authorities.
This came shortly before the pipe bombs were sent to other media outlets, so everybody was really kind of on guard there.
And the larger context was, only a few months before, five staffers had been killed at a Maryland newspaper.
They had been shot dead by a reader with a grudge.
"Shut up or else."
And it was around that same time that a different reader of mine started stalking me online.
And at first, it was ...
I'll call it light and fluffy.
It was around this time last year and I still had my Christmas decorations up and he sent me a message saying, "You should take your Christmas decorations down."
And then he noticed that my dog was off leash one day, and then he commented that I had gone to the market.
And then he wrote me one that said, "If anyone were to shoot and kill you, it would not be a loss at all."
I wish that were the end of the story.
Because then, a few months later, he came to my door, my front door, in a rage and tried to break the door down.
I now own mace, a security system and a Louisville Slugger baseball bat.
(Sighs) "Shut up or else."
So, what's to be done to forestall civility from turning ugly, from turning violent?
My first rule is to deescalate language.
And I've stopped using trigger words in print.
And by trigger words, I mean "homophobe," I mean "racist," I mean "xenophobe," I mean "sexist."
All of those words.
They set people off.
They're incendiary and they do not allow us to find common ground.
And so to this point, when John McCain died in 2018, his supporters noted that he never made personal attacks.
But his opponents agreed as well, and I though that was what was really noteworthy.
He challenged people's policies, he challenged their positions, but he never made it personal.
And so that's the second rule.
So the problem of civility is not only an American one.
In the Netherlands, there are calls for a civility offensive right now, and as one Dutch philosopher has put it, the country has fallen under a spell of "verhuftering."
Now, this is not a word that I knew before and I did quite a bit of research.
It loosely means bullying and the disappearance of good manners.
It actually means much worse than that, but that's what I'm saying here.
When you have a specific word, though, to describe a problem like that, you know you really have a problem.
And in the United Kingdom, the [2016] Brexit vote ...
you know, has divided a nation even more so.
And one critic of the breakup called those who favor it -- I just love this phrase -- "the frightened parochial lizard brain of Britain."
The frightened parochial lizard brain of Britain.
That's personal.
And it makes me miss "Downton Abbey" and its patina of civility.
But therein lies the third rule: don't mistake decorum for civility.
Even if you have a dowager countess as fabulous as Dame Maggie Smith.
(Laughter) [Don't be defeatist. It's so middle class.] So let me end with one last story.
Not that long ago, I was at a bakery, and they make these amazing scones.
So, long line -- there are a lot of scones.
And one by one, the scones were disappearing until there was one woman in between me and that last scone.
(Laughter) Praise the Lord, she said, "I'll have a croissant."
(Laughter) So when it became my turn, I said, "I'll take that scone."
The guy behind me -- I'd never turned around, never seen him -- he shouted, "That's my scone!
I've been waiting in line 20 minutes."
And I was like, "Who are you?
I've been waiting in line 20 minutes, and you're behind me."
So, I grew up here in New York, and went to high school not that far from here.
And I may seem, you know, very civil here and so on, but I can hip check anybody for a taxicab in this room, on these streets.
So I was surprised when I said to this guy ...
"Would you like half?"
"Would you like half?"
I didn't think about it, it just came out.
And then, he was very puzzled, and I could see his face change and he said to me, "Well, how about if I buy another pastry and we'll share both of them?"
And he did, and we did.
And we sat and talked.
We had nothing in common.
(Laughter) We had nothing in common: nationality, sexual orientation, occupation.
But through this moment of kindness, through this moment of connection, we developed a friendship, we have stayed in touch.
(Laughter) Although he was appalled to learn that I'm called the Civilist after that.
(Laughter) But I call this the joy of civility.
And it led me to wonder, what is the good we forgo, not just the trouble we avoid, when we choose to be uncivil.
And by good, I mean friendship, I mean connection.
I mean sharing 1000 calories.
But I also mean it in a larger way.
You know, as communities and as a country and as a world.
What are we missing out on?
So, today, we are engaged in a great civil war of ideas and identity.
And we have no rules for them.
You know, there are rules for war.
Think about the Geneva Conventions.
They ensure that every soldier is treated humanely, on and off the battlefield.
So, frankly, I think we need a Geneva Convention of civility, to set the rules for discourse for the parameters of that.
To help us become better citizens of our communities and of our countries.
And if I have anything to say about it, I would base those rules on the original definition of civility, from the Latin and from the French.
Civility: citizens willing to give of themselves for the greater good.
For the good of the city.
So I think civility, with that understanding, is not a dirty word.
And I hope the civilist will not become, or will not stay, obsolete.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Applause) David Gallo: This is Bill Lange. I'm Dave Gallo.
And we're going to tell you some stories from the sea here in video.
We've got some of the most incredible video of Titanic that's ever been seen, and we're not going to show you any of it.
(Laughter) The truth of the matter is that the Titanic -- even though it's breaking all sorts of box office records -- it's not the most exciting story from the sea.
And the problem, I think, is that we take the ocean for granted.
When you think about it, the oceans are 75 percent of the planet.
Most of the planet is ocean water.
The average depth is about two miles.
Part of the problem, I think, is we stand at the beach, or we see images like this of the ocean, and you look out at this great big blue expanse, and it's shimmering and it's moving and there's waves and there's surf and there's tides, but you have no idea for what lies in there.
And in the oceans, there are the longest mountain ranges on the planet.
Most of the animals are in the oceans.
Most of the earthquakes and volcanoes are in the sea, at the bottom of the sea.
The biodiversity and the biodensity in the ocean is higher, in places, than it is in the rainforests.
It's mostly unexplored, and yet there are beautiful sights like this that captivate us and make us become familiar with it.
But when you're standing at the beach, I want you to think that you're standing at the edge of a very unfamiliar world.
We have to have a very special technology to get into that unfamiliar world.
We use the submarine Alvin and we use cameras, and the cameras are something that Bill Lange has developed with the help of Sony.
Marcel Proust said, "The true voyage of discovery is not so much in seeking new landscapes as in having new eyes."
People that have partnered with us have given us new eyes, not only on what exists -- the new landscapes at the bottom of the sea -- but also how we think about life on the planet itself.
Here's a jelly.
It's one of my favorites, because it's got all sorts of working parts.
This turns out to be the longest creature in the oceans.
It gets up to about 150 feet long.
But see all those different working things?
I love that kind of stuff.
It's got these fishing lures on the bottom. They're going up and down.
It's got tentacles dangling, swirling around like that.
It's a colonial animal.
These are all individual animals banding together to make this one creature.
And it's got these jet thrusters up in front that it'll use in a moment, and a little light.
If you take all the big fish and schooling fish and all that, put them on one side of the scale, put all the jelly-type of animals on the other side, those guys win hands down.
Most of the biomass in the ocean is made out of creatures like this.
Here's the X-wing death jelly.
(Laughter) The bioluminescence -- they use the lights for attracting mates and attracting prey and communicating.
We couldn't begin to show you our archival stuff from the jellies.
They come in all different sizes and shapes.
Bill Lange: We tend to forget about the fact that the ocean is miles deep on average, and that we're real familiar with the animals that are in the first 200 or 300 feet, but we're not familiar with what exists from there all the way down to the bottom.
And these are the types of animals that live in that three-dimensional space, that micro-gravity environment that we really haven't explored.
You hear about giant squid and things like that, but some of these animals get up to be approximately 140, 160 feet long.
They're very little understood.
DG: This is one of them, another one of our favorites, because it's a little octopod.
You can actually see through his head.
And here he is, flapping with his ears and very gracefully going up.
We see those at all depths and even at the greatest depths.
They go from a couple of inches to a couple of feet.
They come right up to the submarine -- they'll put their eyes right up to the window and peek inside the sub.
This is really a world within a world, and we're going to show you two.
In this case, we're passing down through the mid-ocean and we see creatures like this.
This is kind of like an undersea rooster.
This guy, that looks incredibly formal, in a way.
And then one of my favorites. What a face!
This is basically scientific data that you're looking at.
It's footage that we've collected for scientific purposes.
And that's one of the things that Bill's been doing, is providing scientists with this first view of animals like this, in the world where they belong.
They don't catch them in a net.
They're actually looking at them down in that world.
We're going to take a joystick, sit in front of our computer, on the Earth, and press the joystick forward, and fly around the planet.
We're going to look at the mid-ocean ridge, a 40,000-mile long mountain range.
The average depth at the top of it is about a mile and a half.
And we're over the Atlantic -- that's the ridge right there -- but we're going to go across the Caribbean, Central America, and end up against the Pacific, nine degrees north.
We make maps of these mountain ranges with sound, with sonar, and this is one of those mountain ranges.
We're coming around a cliff here on the right.
The height of these mountains on either side of this valley is greater than the Alps in most cases.
And there's tens of thousands of those mountains out there that haven't been mapped yet.
This is a volcanic ridge.
We're getting down further and further in scale.
And eventually, we can come up with something like this.
This is an icon of our robot, Jason, it's called.
And you can sit in a room like this, with a joystick and a headset, and drive a robot like that around the bottom of the ocean in real time.
One of the things we're trying to do at Woods Hole with our partners is to bring this virtual world -- this world, this unexplored region -- back to the laboratory.
Because we see it in bits and pieces right now.
We see it either as sound, or we see it as video, or we see it as photographs, or we see it as chemical sensors, but we never have yet put it all together into one interesting picture.
Here's where Bill's cameras really do shine.
This is what's called a hydrothermal vent.
And what you're seeing here is a cloud of densely packed, hydrogen-sulfide-rich water coming out of a volcanic axis on the sea floor.
Gets up to 600, 700 degrees F, somewhere in that range.
So that's all water under the sea -- a mile and a half, two miles, three miles down.
And we knew it was volcanic back in the '60s, '70s.
And then we had some hint that these things existed all along the axis of it, because if you've got volcanism, water's going to get down from the sea into cracks in the sea floor, come in contact with magma, and come shooting out hot.
We weren't really aware that it would be so rich with sulfides, hydrogen sulfides.
We didn't have any idea about these things, which we call chimneys.
This is one of these hydrothermal vents.
Six hundred degree F water coming out of the Earth.
On either side of us are mountain ranges that are higher than the Alps, so the setting here is very dramatic.
BL: The white material is a type of bacteria that thrives at 180 degrees C.
DG: I think that's one of the greatest stories right now that we're seeing from the bottom of the sea, is that the first thing we see coming out of the sea floor after a volcanic eruption is bacteria.
And we started to wonder for a long time, how did it all get down there?
What we find out now is that it's probably coming from inside the Earth.
Not only is it coming out of the Earth -- so, biogenesis made from volcanic activity -- but that bacteria supports these colonies of life.
The pressure here is 4,000 pounds per square inch.
A mile and a half from the surface to two miles to three miles -- no sun has ever gotten down here.
All the energy to support these life forms is coming from inside the Earth -- so, chemosynthesis.
And you can see how dense the population is.
These are called tube worms.
BL: These worms have no digestive system. They have no mouth.
But they have two types of gill structures.
One for extracting oxygen out of the deep-sea water, another one which houses this chemosynthetic bacteria, which takes the hydrothermal fluid -- that hot water that you saw coming out of the bottom -- and converts that into simple sugars that the tube worm can digest.
DG: You can see, here's a crab that lives down there.
He's managed to grab a tip of these worms.
Now, they normally retract as soon as a crab touches them.
Oh! Good going.
So, as soon as a crab touches them, they retract down into their shells, just like your fingernails.
There's a whole story being played out here that we're just now beginning to have some idea of because of this new camera technology.
BL: These worms live in a real temperature extreme.
Their foot is at about 200 degrees C and their head is out at three degrees C, so it's like having your hand in boiling water and your foot in freezing water.
That's how they like to live.
(Laughter) DG: This is a female of this kind of worm.
And here's a male.
You watch. It doesn't take long before two guys here -- this one and one that will show up over here -- start to fight.
Everything you see is played out in the pitch black of the deep sea.
There are never any lights there, except the lights that we bring.
Here they go.
On one of the last dive series, we counted 200 species in these areas -- 198 were new, new species.
BL: One of the big problems is that for the biologists working at these sites, it's rather difficult to collect these animals.
And they disintegrate on the way up, so the imagery is critical for the science.
DG: Two octopods at about two miles depth.
This pressure thing really amazes me -- that these animals can exist there at a depth with pressure enough to crush the Titanic like an empty Pepsi can.
What we saw up till now was from the Pacific.
This is from the Atlantic. Even greater depth.
You can see this shrimp is harassing this poor little guy here, and he'll bat it away with his claw. Whack!
(Laughter) And the same thing's going on over here.
What they're getting at is that -- on the back of this crab -- the foodstuff here is this very strange bacteria that lives on the backs of all these animals.
And what these shrimp are trying to do is actually harvest the bacteria from the backs of these animals.
And the crabs don't like it at all.
These long filaments that you see on the back of the crab are actually created by the product of that bacteria.
So, the bacteria grows hair on the crab.
On the back, you see this again.
The red dot is the laser light of the submarine Alvin to give us an idea about how far away we are from the vents.
Those are all shrimp.
You see the hot water over here, here and here, coming out.
They're clinging to a rock face and actually scraping bacteria off that rock face.
Here's a tiny, little vent that's come out of the side of that pillar.
Those pillars get up to several stories.
So here, you've got this valley with this incredible alien landscape of pillars and hot springs and volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, inhabited by these very strange animals that live only on chemical energy coming out of the ground.
They don't need the sun at all.
BL: You see this white V-shaped mark on the back of the shrimp?
It's actually a light-sensing organ.
It's how they find the hydrothermal vents.
The vents are emitting a black body radiation -- an IR signature -- and so they're able to find these vents at considerable distances.
DG: All this stuff is happening along that 40,000-mile long mountain range that we're calling the ribbon of life, because just even today, as we speak, there's life being generated there from volcanic activity.
This is the first time we've ever tried this any place.
We're going to try to show you high definition from the Pacific.
We're moving up one of these pillars.
This one's several stories tall.
In it, you'll see that it's a habitat for a lot of different animals.
There's a funny kind of hot plate here, with vent water coming out of it.
So all of these are individual homes for worms.
Now here's a closer view of that community.
Here's crabs here, worms here.
There are smaller animals crawling around.
Here's pagoda structures.
I think this is the neatest-looking thing.
I just can't get over this -- that you've got these little chimneys sitting here smoking away.
This stuff is toxic as hell, by the way.
You could never get a permit to dump this in the ocean, and it's coming out all from it.
(Laughter) It's unbelievable. It's basically sulfuric acid, and it's being just dumped out, at incredible rates.
And animals are thriving -- and we probably came from here.
That's probably where we evolved from.
BL: This bacteria that we've been talking about turns out to be the most simplest form of life found.
There are a number of groups that are proposing that life evolved at these vent sites.
Although the vent sites are short-lived -- an individual site may last only 10 years or so -- as an ecosystem they've been stable for millions -- well, billions -- of years.
DG: It works too well. You see there're some fish inside here as well.
There's a fish sitting here.
Here's a crab with his claw right at the end of that tube worm, waiting for that worm to stick his head out.
(Laughter) BL: The biologists right now cannot explain why these animals are so active.
The worms are growing inches per week!
DG: I already said that this site, from a human perspective, is toxic as hell.
Not only that, but on top -- the lifeblood -- that plumbing system turns off every year or so.
Their plumbing system turns off, so the sites have to move.
And then there's earthquakes, and then volcanic eruptions, on the order of one every five years, that completely wipes the area out.
Despite that, these animals grow back in about a year's time.
You're talking about biodensities and biodiversity, again, higher than the rainforest that just springs back to life.
Is it sensitive? Yes.
Is it fragile? No, it's not really very fragile.
I'll end up with saying one thing.
There's a story in the sea, in the waters of the sea, in the sediments and the rocks of the sea floor.
It's an incredible story.
What we see when we look back in time, in those sediments and rocks, is a record of Earth history.
Everything on this planet -- everything -- works by cycles and rhythms.
The continents move apart. They come back together.
Oceans come and go. Mountains come and go. Glaciers come and go.
El Nino comes and goes. It's not a disaster, it's rhythmic.
What we're learning now, it's almost like a symphony.
It's just like music -- it really is just like music.
And what we're learning now is that you can't listen to a five-billion-year long symphony, get to today and say, "Stop! We want tomorrow's note to be the same as it was today."
It's absurd. It's just absurd.
So, what we've got to learn now is to find out where this planet's going at all these different scales and work with it.
Learn to manage it.
The concept of preservation is futile.
Conservation's tougher, but we can probably get there.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Over the course of the 1960s, the FBI amassed almost two thousand documents in an investigation into one of America’s most celebrated minds.
The subject of this inquiry was a writer named James Baldwin.
At the time, the FBI investigated many artists and thinkers, but most of their files were a fraction the size of Baldwin’s.
During the years when the FBI hounded him, he became one of the best-selling black authors in the world.
So what made James Baldwin loom so large in the imaginations of both the public and the authorities?
Born in Harlem in 1924, he was the oldest of nine children.
At age fourteen, he began to work as a preacher.
By delivering sermons, he developed his voice as a writer, but also grew conflicted about the Church’s stance on racial inequality and homosexuality.
After high school, he began writing novels and essays while taking a series of odd jobs.
But the issues that had driven him away from the Church were still inescapable in his daily life.
Constantly confronted with racism and homophobia, he was angry and disillusioned, and yearned for a less restricted life.
So in 1948, at the age of 24, he moved to Paris on a writing fellowship.
From France, he published his first novel, "Go Tell it on the Mountain," in 1953.
Set in Harlem, the book explores the Church as a source of both repression and hope.
It was popular with both black and white readers.
As he earned acclaim for his fiction, Baldwin gathered his thoughts on race, class, culture and exile in his 1955 extended essay, "Notes of a Native Son."
Meanwhile, the Civil Rights movement was gaining momentum in America.
Black Americans were making incremental gains at registering to vote and voting, but were still denied basic dignities in schools, on buses, in the work force, and in the armed services.
Though he lived primarily in France for the rest of his life, Baldwin was deeply invested in the movement, and keenly aware of his country’s unfulfilled promise.
He had seen family, friends, and neighbors spiral into addiction, incarceration and suicide.
He believed their fates originated from the constraints of a segregated society.
In 1963, he published "The Fire Next Time," an arresting portrait of racial strife in which he held white America accountable, but he also went further, arguing that racism hurt white people too.
In his view, everyone was inextricably enmeshed in the same social fabric.
He had long believed that: “People are trapped in history and history is trapped in them.” Baldwin’s role in the Civil Rights movement went beyond observing and reporting.
He also traveled through the American South attending rallies giving lectures of his own.
He debated both white politicians and black activists, including Malcolm X, and served as a liaison between black activists and intellectuals and white establishment leaders like Robert Kennedy.
Because of Baldwin’s unique ability to articulate the causes of social turbulence in a way that white audiences were willing to hear, Kennedy and others tended to see him as an ambassador for black Americans — a label Baldwin rejected.
And at the same time, his faculty with words led the FBI to view him as a threat.
Even within the Civil Rights movement, Baldwin could sometimes feel like an outsider for his choice to live abroad, as well as his sexuality, which he explored openly in his writing at a time when homophobia ran rampant.
Throughout his life, Baldwin considered it his role to bear witness.
Unlike many of his peers, he lived to see some of the victories of the Civil Rights movement, but the continuing racial inequalities in the United States weighed heavily on him.
Though he may have felt trapped in his moment in history, his words have made generations of people feel known, while guiding them toward a more nuanced understanding of society’s most complex issues.
So, a little while ago, members of my family had three bits of minor surgery, about a half hour each, and we got three sets of bills.
For the first one, the anesthesia bill alone was 2,000 dollars; the second one, 2,000 dollars; the third one, 6,000 dollars.
So I'm a journalist. I'm like, what's up with that?
I found out that I was actually, for the expensive one, being charged 1,419 dollars for a generic anti-nausea drug that I could buy online for two dollars and forty-nine cents.
I had a long and unsatisfactory argument with the hospital, the insurer and my employer.
Everybody agreed that this was totally fine.
But it got me thinking, and the more I talked to people, the more I realized: nobody has any idea what stuff costs in health care.
Not before, during or after that procedure or test do you have any idea what it's going to cost.
It's only months later that you get an "explanation of benefits" that explains exactly nothing.
So this came back to me a little while later.
I had volunteered for a buyout from the New York Times, where I had worked for more than 20 years as a journalist.
I was looking for my next act.
It turned out that next act was to build a company telling people what stuff costs in health care.
I won a "Shark Tank"-type pitch contest to do just that.
Health costs ate up almost 18 percent of our gross domestic product last year, but nobody has any idea what stuff costs.
But what if we did know?
So we started out small.
We called doctors and hospitals and asked them what they would accept as a cash payment for simple procedures.
Some people were helpful.
A lot of people hung up on us.
Some people were just plain rude.
They said, "We don't know," or, "Our lawyers won't let us tell you that," though we did get a lot of information.
We found, for example, that here in the New York area, you could get an echocardiogram for 200 dollars in Brooklyn or for 2,150 dollars in Manhattan, just a few miles away.
New Orleans, the same simple blood test, 19 dollars over here, 522 dollars just a few blocks away.
San Francisco, the same MRI, 475 dollars or 6,221 dollars just 25 miles away.
These pricing variations existed for all the procedures and all the cities that we surveyed.
Then we started to ask people to tell us their health bills.
In partnership with public radio station WNYC here in New York, we asked women to tell us the prices of their mammograms.
People told us nobody would do that, that it was too personal.
But in the space of three weeks, 400 women told us about their prices.
Then we started to make it easier for people to share their data into our online searchable database.
It's sort of like a mash-up of Kayak.com and the Waze traffic app for health care.
(Laughter) We call it a community-created guide to health costs.
Our survey and crowdsourcing work grew into partnerships with top newsrooms nationwide -- in New Orleans, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Miami and other places.
We used the data to tell stories about people who were suffering and how to avoid that suffering, to avoid that "gotcha" bill.
A woman in New Orleans saved nearly 4,000 dollars using our data.
A San Francisco contributor saved nearly 1,300 dollars by putting away his insurance card and paying cash.
There are a lot of people who are going to in-network hospitals and getting out-of-network bills.
And then there was the hospital that continued to bill a dead man.
We learned that thousands of people wanted to tell us their prices.
They want to learn what stuff costs, find out how to argue a bill, help us solve this problem that's hurting them and their friends and families.
We talked to people who had to sell a car to pay a health bill, go into bankruptcy, skip a treatment because of the cost.
Imagine if you could afford the diagnosis but not the cure.
We set off a huge conversation about costs involving doctors and hospitals, yes, but also their patients, or as we like to call them, people.
(Laughter) We changed policy.
A consumer protection bill that had been stalled in the Louisiana legislature for 10 years passed after we launched.
Let's face it: this huge, slow-rolling public health crisis is a national emergency.
And I don't think government's going to help us out anytime soon.
But what if the answer was really simple: make all the prices public all the time.
Would our individual bills go down? Our health premiums?
Be really clear about this: this is a United States problem.
In most of the rest of the developed world, sick people don't have to worry about money.
It's also true that price transparency will not solve every problem.
There will still be expensive treatments, huge friction from our insurance system.
There will still be fraud and a massive problem with overtreatment and overdiagnosis.
And not everything is shoppable.
Not everybody wants the cheapest appendectomy or the cheapest cancer care.
But when we talk about these clear effects, we're looking at a real issue that's actually very simple.
When we first started calling for prices, we actually felt like we were going to be arrested.
It seemed kind of transgressive to talk about medicine and health care in the same breath, and yet it became liberating, because we found not only data but also good and honest people out there in the system who want to help folks get the care they need at a price they can afford.
And it got easier to ask.
So I'll leave you with some questions.
What if we all knew what stuff cost in health care in advance?
What if, every time you Googled for an MRI, you got drop-downs telling you where to buy and for how much, the way you do when you Google for a laser printer?
What if all of the time and energy and money that's spent hiding prices was squeezed out of the system?
What if each one of us could pick the $19 test every time instead of the $522 one?
Would our individual bills go down?
Our premiums?
I don't know, but if you don't ask, you'll never know.
And you might save a ton of money.
And I've got to think that a lot of us and the system itself would be a lot healthier.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, a big question that we're facing now and have been for quite a number of years now: are we at risk of a nuclear attack?
Now, there's a bigger question that's probably actually more important than that, is the notion of permanently eliminating the possibility of a nuclear attack, eliminating the threat altogether.
And I would like to make a case to you that over the years since we first developed atomic weaponry, until this very moment, we've actually lived in a dangerous nuclear world that's characterized by two phases, which I'm going to go through with you right now.
First of all, we started off the nuclear age in 1945.
The United States had developed a couple of atomic weapons through the Manhattan Project, and the idea was very straightforward: we would use the power of the atom to end the atrocities and the horror of this unending World War II that we'd been involved in in Europe and in the Pacific.
And in 1945, we were the only nuclear power.
We had a few nuclear weapons, two of which we dropped on Japan, in Hiroshima, a few days later in Nagasaki, in August 1945, killing about 250,000 people between those two.
And for a few years, we were the only nuclear power on Earth.
But by 1949, the Soviet Union had decided it was unacceptable to have us as the only nuclear power, and they began to match what the United States had developed.
And from 1949 to 1985 was an extraordinary time of a buildup of a nuclear arsenal that no one could possibly have imagined back in the 1940s.
So by 1985 -- each of those red bombs up here is equivalent of a thousands warheads -- the world had 65,000 nuclear warheads, and seven members of something that came to be known as the "nuclear club."
And it was an extraordinary time, and I am going to go through some of the mentality that we -- that Americans and the rest of the world were experiencing.
But I want to just point out to you that 95 percent of the nuclear weapons at any particular time since 1985 -- going forward, of course -- were part of the arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union.
After 1985, and before the break up of the Soviet Union, we began to disarm from a nuclear point of view.
We began to counter-proliferate, and we dropped the number of nuclear warheads in the world to about a total of 21,000.
It's a very difficult number to deal with, because what we've done is we've quote unquote "decommissioned" some of the warheads.
They're still probably usable. They could be "re-commissioned," but the way they count things, which is very complicated, we think we have about a third of the nuclear weapons we had before.
But we also, in that period of time, added two more members to the nuclear club: Pakistan and North Korea.
So we stand today with a still fully armed nuclear arsenal among many countries around the world, but a very different set of circumstances.
So I'm going to talk about a nuclear threat story in two chapters.
Chapter one is 1949 to 1991, when the Soviet Union broke up, and what we were dealing with, at that point and through those years, was a superpowers' nuclear arms race.
It was characterized by a nation-versus-nation, very fragile standoff.
And basically, we lived for all those years, and some might argue that we still do, in a situation of being on the brink, literally, of an apocalyptic, planetary calamity.
It's incredible that we actually lived through all that.
We were totally dependent during those years on this amazing acronym, which is MAD.
It stands for mutually assured destruction.
So it meant if you attacked us, we would attack you virtually simultaneously, and the end result would be a destruction of your country and mine.
So the threat of my own destruction kept me from launching a nuclear attack on you. That's the way we lived.
And the danger of that, of course, is that a misreading of a radar screen could actually cause a counter-launch, even though the first country had not actually launched anything.
During this chapter one, there was a high level of public awareness about the potential of nuclear catastrophe, and an indelible image was implanted in our collective minds that, in fact, a nuclear holocaust would be absolutely globally destructive and could, in some ways, mean the end of civilization as we know it.
So this was chapter one.
Now the odd thing is that even though we knew that there would be that kind of civilization obliteration, we engaged in America in a series -- and in fact, in the Soviet Union -- in a series of response planning.
It was absolutely incredible.
So premise one is we'd be destroying the world, and then premise two is, why don't we get prepared for it?
So what we offered ourselves was a collection of things. I'm just going to go skim through a few things, just to jog your memories.
If you're born after 1950, this is just -- consider this entertainment, otherwise it's memory lane.
This was Bert the Turtle. (Video) This was basically an attempt to teach our schoolchildren that if we did get engaged in a nuclear confrontation and atomic war, then we wanted our school children to kind of basically duck and cover.
That was the principle. You -- there would be a nuclear conflagration about to hit us, and if you get under your desk, things would be OK.
(Laughter) I didn't do all that well in psychiatry in medical school, but I was interested, and I think this was seriously delusional.
(Laughter) Secondly, we told people to go down in their basements and build a fallout shelter.
Maybe it would be a study when we weren't having an atomic war, or you could use it as a TV room, or, as many teenagers found out, a very, very safe place for a little privacy with your girlfriend.
And actually -- so there are multiple uses of the bomb shelters.
Or you could buy a prefabricated bomb shelter that you could simply bury in the ground.
Now, the bomb shelters at that point -- let's say you bought a prefab one -- it would be a few hundred dollars, maybe up to 500, if you got a fancy one.
Yet, what percentage of Americans do you think ever had a bomb shelter in their house?
What percentage lived in a house with a bomb shelter?
Less than two percent. About 1.4 percent of the population, as far as anyone knows, did anything, either making a space in their basement or actually building a bomb shelter.
Many buildings, public buildings, around the country -- this is New York City -- had these little civil defense signs, and the idea was that you would run into one of these shelters and be safe from the nuclear weaponry.
And one of the greatest governmental delusions of all time was something that happened in the early days of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA, as we now know, and are well aware of their behaviors from Katrina.
Here is their first big public announcement.
They would propose -- actually there were about six volumes written on this -- a crisis relocation plan that was dependent upon the United States having three to four days warning that the Soviets were going to attack us.
So the goal was to evacuate the target cities.
We would move people out of the target cities into the countryside.
And I'm telling you, I actually testified at the Senate about the absolute ludicrous idea that we would actually evacuate, and actually have three or four days' warning.
It was just completely off the wall.
Turns out that they had another idea behind it, even though this was -- they were telling the public it was to save us.
The idea was that we would force the Soviets to re-target their nuclear weapons -- very expensive -- and potentially double their arsenal, to not only take out the original site, but take out sites where people were going.
This was what apparently, as it turns out, was behind all this.
It was just really, really frightening.
The main point here is we were dealing with a complete disconnect from reality.
The civil defense programs were disconnected from the reality of what we'd see in all-out nuclear war.
So organizations like Physicians for Social Responsibility, around 1979, started saying this a lot publicly.
They would do a bombing run. They'd go to your city, and they'd say, "Here's a map of your city.
Here's what's going to happen if we get a nuclear hit."
So no possibility of medical response to, or meaningful preparedness for all-out nuclear war.
So we had to prevent nuclear war if we expected to survive.
This disconnect was never actually resolved.
And what happened was -- when we get in to chapter two of the nuclear threat era, which started back in 1945.
Chapter two starts in 1991.
When the Soviet Union broke up, we effectively lost that adversary as a potential attacker of the United States, for the most part.
It's not completely gone. I'm going to come back to that.
But from 1991 through the present time, emphasized by the attacks of 2001, the idea of an all-out nuclear war has diminished and the idea of a single event, act of nuclear terrorism is what we have instead.
Although the scenario has changed very considerably, the fact is that we haven't changed our mental image of what a nuclear war means.
So I'm going to tell you what the implications of that are in just a second.
So, what is a nuclear terror threat?
And there's four key ingredients to describing that.
First thing is that the global nuclear weapons, in the stockpiles that I showed you in those original maps, happen to be not uniformly secure.
And it's particularly not secure in the former Soviet Union, now in Russia.
There are many, many sites where warheads are stored and, in fact, lots of sites where fissionable materials, like highly enriched uranium and plutonium, are absolutely not safe.
They're available to be bought, stolen, whatever.
They're acquirable, let me put it that way.
From 1993 through 2006, the International Atomic Energy Agency documented 175 cases of nuclear theft, 18 of which involved highly enriched uranium or plutonium, the key ingredients to make a nuclear weapon.
The global stockpile of highly enriched uranium is about 1,300, at the low end, to about 2,100 metric tons.
More than 100 megatons of this is stored in particularly insecure Russian facilities.
How much of that do you think it would take to actually build a 10-kiloton bomb?
Well, you need about 75 pounds of it.
So, what I'd like to show you is what it would take to hold 75 pounds of highly enriched uranium.
This is not a product placement. It's just -- in fact, if I was Coca Cola, I'd be pretty distressed about this -- (Laughter) -- but basically, this is it.
This is what you would need to steal or buy out of that 100-metric-ton stockpile that's relatively insecure to create the type of bomb that was used in Hiroshima.
Now you might want to look at plutonium as another fissionable material that you might use in a bomb.
That -- you'd need 10 to 13 pounds of plutonium.
Now, plutonium, 10 to 13 pounds: this. This is enough plutonium to create a Nagasaki-size atomic weapon.
Now this situation, already I -- you know, I don't really like thinking about this, although somehow I got myself a job where I have to think about it. So the point is that we're very, very insecure in terms of developing this material.
The second thing is, what about the know-how?
And there's a lot of controversy about whether terror organizations have the know-how to actually make a nuclear weapon.
Well, there's a lot of know-how out there.
There's an unbelievable amount of know-how out there.
There's detailed information on how to assemble a nuclear weapon from parts.
There's books about how to build a nuclear bomb.
There are plans for how to create a terror farm where you could actually manufacture and develop all the components and assemble it.
All of this information is relatively available.
If you have an undergraduate degree in physics, I would suggest -- although I don't, so maybe it's not even true -- but something close to that would allow you, with the information that's currently available, to actually build a nuclear weapon.
The third element of the nuclear terror threat is that, who would actually do such a thing?
Well, what we're seeing now is a level of terrorism that involves individuals who are highly organized.
They are very dedicated and committed.
They are stateless.
Somebody once said, Al Qaeda does not have a return address, so if they attack us with a nuclear weapon, what's the response, and to whom is the response?
And they're retaliation-proof.
Since there is no real retribution possible that would make any difference, since there are people willing to actually give up their lives in order to do a lot of damage to us, it becomes apparent that the whole notion of this mutually assured destruction would not work.
Here is Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, and Sulaiman was a key lieutenant of Osama Bin Laden.
He wrote many, many times statements to this effect: "we have the right to kill four million Americans, two million of whom should be children."
And we don't have to go overseas to find people willing to do harm, for whatever their reasons.
McVeigh and Nichols, and the Oklahoma City attack in the 1990s was a good example of homegrown terrorists.
What if they had gotten their hands on a nuclear weapon?
The fourth element is that the high-value U.S. targets are accessible, soft and plentiful.
This would be a talk for another day, but the level of the preparedness that the United States has achieved since 9/11 of '01 is unbelievably inadequate.
What you saw after Katrina is a very good indicator of how little prepared the United States is for any kind of major attack.
Seven million ship cargo containers come into the United States every year.
Five to seven percent only are inspected -- five to seven percent.
This is Alexander Lebed, who was a general that worked with Yeltsin, who talked about, and presented to Congress, this idea that the Russians had developed -- these suitcase bombs. They were very low yield -- 0.1 to one kiloton, Hiroshima was around 13 kilotons -- but enough to do an unbelievable amount of damage.
And Lebed came to the United States and told us that many, many -- more than 80 of the suitcase bombs were actually not accountable.
And they look like this. They're basically very simple arrangements.
You put the elements into a suitcase.
It becomes very portable.
The suitcase can be conveniently dropped in your trunk of your car.
You take it wherever you want to take it, and you can detonate it.
You don't want to build a suitcase bomb, and you happen to get one of those insecure nuclear warheads that exist.
This is the size of the "Little Boy" bomb that was dropped at Hiroshima.
It was 9.8 feet long, weighed 8,800 pounds. You go down to your local rent-a-truck and for 50 bucks or so, you rent a truck that's got the right capacity, and you take your bomb, you put it in the truck and you're ready to go.
It could happen. But what it would mean and who would survive?
You can't get an exact number for that kind of probability, but what I'm trying to say is that we have all the elements of that happening.
Anybody who dismisses the thought of a nuclear weapon being used by a terrorist is kidding themselves.
I think there's a lot of people in the intelligence community -- a lot of people who deal with this work in general think it's almost inevitable, unless we do certain things to really try to defuse the risk, like better interdiction, better prevention, better fixing, you know, better screening of cargo containers that are coming into the country and so forth.
There's a lot that can be done to make us a lot safer.
At this particular moment, we actually could end up seeing a nuclear detonation in one of our cities.
I don't think we would see an all-out nuclear war any time soon, although even that is not completely off the table.
There's still enough nuclear weapons in the arsenals of the superpowers to destroy the Earth many, many times over.
There are flash points in India and Pakistan, in the Middle East, in North Korea, other places where the use of nuclear weapons, while initially locally, could very rapidly go into a situation where we'd be facing all-out nuclear war.
It's very unsettling.
Here we go. OK.
I'm back in my truck, and we drove over the Brooklyn Bridge.
We're coming down, and we bring that truck that you just saw somewhere in here, in the Financial District.
This is a 10-kiloton bomb, slightly smaller than was used in Hiroshima. And I want to just conclude this by just giving you some information. I think -- "news you could use" kind of concept here.
So, first of all, this would be horrific beyond anything we can possibly imagine.
This is the ultimate.
And if you're in the half-mile radius of where this bomb went off, you have a 90 percent chance of not making it.
If you're right where the bomb went off, you will be vaporized. And that's -- I'm just telling you, this is not good.
(Laughter) You assume that.
Two-mile radius, you have a 50 percent chance of being killed, and up to about eight miles away -- now I'm talking about killed instantly -- somewhere between a 10 and 20 percent chance of getting killed.
The thing about this is that the experience of the nuclear detonation is -- first of all, tens of millions of degrees Fahrenheit at the core here, where it goes off, and an extraordinary amount of energy in the form of heat, acute radiation and blast effects.
An enormous hurricane-like wind, and destruction of buildings almost totally, within this yellow circle here.
And what I'm going to focus on, as I come to conclusion here, is that, what happens to you if you're in here?
Well, if we're talking about the old days of an all-out nuclear attack, you, up here, are as dead as the people here. So it was a moot point.
My point now, though, is that there is a lot that we could do for you who are in here, if you've survived the initial blast.
You have, when the blast goes off -- and by the way, if it ever comes up, don't look at it.
(Laughter) If you look at it, you're going to be blind, either temporarily or permanently.
So if there's any way that you can avoid, like, avert your eyes, that would be a good thing.
If you find yourself alive, but you're in the vicinity of a nuclear weapon, you have -- that's gone off -- you have 10 to 20 minutes, depending on the size and exactly where it went off, to get out of the way before a lethal amount of radiation comes straight down from the mushroom cloud that goes up.
In that 10 to 15 minutes, all you have to do -- and I mean this seriously -- is go about a mile away from the blast.
And what happens is -- this is -- I'm going to show you now some fallout plumes. Within 20 minutes, it comes straight down. Within 24 hours, lethal radiation is going out with prevailing winds, and it's mostly in this particular direction -- it's going northeast.
And if you're in this vicinity, you've got to get away.
So you're feeling the wind -- and there's tremendous wind now that you're going to be feeling -- and you want to go perpendicular to the wind [not upwind or downwind].
if you are in fact able to see where the blast was in front of you.
You've got to get out of there.
If you don't get out of there, you're going to be exposed to lethal radiation in very short order.
If you can't get out of there, we want you to go into a shelter and stay there.
Now, in a shelter in an urban area means you have to be either in a basement as deep as possible, or you have to be on a floor -- on a high floor -- if it's a ground burst explosion, which it would be, higher than the ninth floor. So you have to be tenth floor or higher, or in the basement.
But basically, you've got to get out of town as quickly as possible.
And if you do that, you actually can survive a nuclear blast.
Over the next few days to a week, there will be a radiation cloud, again, going with the wind, and settling down for another 15 or 20 miles out -- in this case, over Long Island.
And if you're in the direct fallout zone here, you really have to either be sheltered or you have to get out of there, and that's clear. But if you are sheltered, you can actually survive.
The difference between knowing information of what you're going to do personally, and not knowing information, can save your life, and it could mean the difference between 150,000 to 200,000 fatalities from something like this and half a million to 700,000 fatalities.
So, response planning in the twenty-first century is both possible and is essential.
But in 2008, there isn't one single American city that has done effective plans to deal with a nuclear detonation disaster.
Part of the problem is that the emergency planners themselves, personally, are overwhelmed psychologically by the thought of nuclear catastrophe.
They are paralyzed.
You say "nuclear" to them, and they're thinking, "Oh my God, we're all gone. What's the point? It's futile."
And we're trying to tell them, "It's not futile.
We can change the survival rates by doing some commonsensical things."
So the goal here is to minimize fatalities.
And I just want to leave you with the personal points that I think you might be interested in.
The key to surviving a nuclear blast is getting out, and not going into harm's way.
That's basically all we're going to be talking about here.
And the farther you are away in distance, the longer it is in time from the initial blast; and the more separation between you and the outside atmosphere, the better.
So separation -- hopefully with dirt or concrete, or being in a basement -- distance and time is what will save you.
So here's what you do. First of all, as I said, don't stare at the light flash, if you can. I don't know you could possibly resist doing that.
But let's assume, theoretically, you want to do that.
You want to keep your mouth open, so your eardrums don't burst from the pressures.
If you're very close to what happened, you actually do have to duck and cover, like Bert told you, Bert the Turtle.
And you want to get under something so that you're not injured or killed by objects, if that's at all possible.
You want to get away from the initial fallout mushroom cloud, I said, in just a few minutes.
And shelter and place. You want to move [only] crosswind for 1.2 miles.
You know, if you're out there and you see buildings horribly destroyed and down in that direction, less destroyed here, then you know that it was over there, the blast, and you're going this way, as long as you're going crosswise to the wind.
Once you're out and evacuating, you want to keep as much of your skin, your mouth and nose covered, as long as that covering doesn't impede you moving and getting out of there.
And finally, you want to get decontaminated as soon as possible.
And if you're wearing clothing, you've taken off your clothing, you're going to get showered down some place and remove the radiation that would be -- the radioactive material that might be on you.
And then you want to stay in shelter for 48 to 72 hours minimum, but you're going to wait hopefully -- you'll have your little wind-up, battery-less radio, and you'll be waiting for people to tell you when it's safe to go outside. That's what you need to do.
In conclusion, nuclear war is less likely than before, but by no means out of the question, and it's not survivable.
Nuclear terrorism is possible -- it may be probable -- but is survivable.
And this is Jack Geiger, who's one of the heroes of the U.S. public health community.
And Jack said the only way to deal with nuclear anything, whether it's war or terrorism, is abolition of nuclear weapons.
And you want something to work on once you've fixed global warming, I urge you to think about the fact that we have to do something about this unacceptable, inhumane reality of nuclear weapons in our world.
Now, this is my favorite civil defense slide, and I -- (Laughter) -- I don't want to be indelicate, but this -- he's no longer in office. We don't really care, OK.
This was sent to me by somebody who is an aficionado of civil defense procedures, but the fact of the matter is that America's gone through a very hard time.
We've not been focused, we've not done what we had to do, and now we're facing the potential of bad, hell on Earth.
Thank you.
[SHIT] This is arguably the back end of the design of animals.
(Laughter) But the reason I put this up here is because when I was in Africa last year, my wife and I were driving around, we had this wonderful guide, who showed us something that surprised both of us, and it was very revealing in terms of the fascination that comes with the design of animals.
It turns out that in about the 1880s, the missionaries came to Africa to spread the word of Christianity, to teach English to the natives.
And they brought blackboards and chalk.
And I'd like you to imagine that that's a blackboard, and I just used some chalk on there.
And they brought quite a bit of this stuff.
But over the years, the blackboards were fine, but they ran out of chalk.
And this is a real crisis for them.
And that's where the hyena comes in.
The hyena is probably the most perfectly designed scavenging animal in the world.
It strip-mines carcasses, and it has amazing teeth, because it enables the hyena to essentially eat bones.
Now, the end product of that action is up on the board here.
What the missionaries would do is, they'd walk around and they'd pick up hyena shit.
And the incredible thing about hyena shit is, it makes great chalk.
(Laughter) That's not what I'm here to talk about, but it is a fascinating aspect of animal design.
What I'm here to talk about is the camel.
When I started talking to Richard about what I was going to speak about, I had recently come back from Jordan, where I had an amazing experience with a camel.
(Laughter) And we were in the desert.
Richard Wurman: That's the end! Keith Bellows: Yeah, yeah.
We were in the desert, in Wadi Rum, in a small Jeep.
There were four of us, two Bedouin drivers.
You can just imagine, this expanse is an ocean of sand, 105 degrees, one water bottle.
And we were driving in what they told us was their very, very best Jeep.
Didn't look like it to me.
And as we started to go through the desert, the Jeep broke down.
The guys got out, they put the hood up, they started working under the hood, got it going again.
About a hundred yards, it broke down.
This went on about 6-7 times, we were getting more and more alarmed, we were also getting deeper and deeper into the desert.
And eventually, our worst nightmare happened: they flooded the engine.
And they said, "Ah, no problem! We just get out and walk."
And we said, "We get out and walk?"
One water bottle, remember, guys, four people.
And they said, "Yeah, yeah, we'll walk. We'll find some camels."
We got out and walked, and sure enough, about half a mile, we came over the crest of this hill, and there was a huge gathering of Bedouin with their camels.
The guy went up and started dickering, and 10 dollars later, we had four camels.
They went down like elevators; we got on them.
They went back up, and the Bedouin, each Bedouin, four of them, got behind each of the camels with a little whip.
And they started slashing away at the back of the camels, and they started galloping.
And if you've ever been on a camel, it is a very, very uncomfortable ride.
There's also one other aspect about these camels.
About every 10 steps, they lean back and try to take a chunk out of your leg.
(Laughter) So we kept on going, and this camel kept on trying to take a chunk out of my leg.
And eventually, three miles later, we arrived at our destination, where a Jeep was supposed to meet us.
And the camels come down again like elevators, we sort of clumsily get off, and they, obviously, try to take another chunk out of my leg.
And I've developed a very wonderful relationship with this creature by this point, and I've realized that this is a mean son of a bitch.
And much meaner, by the way, than the Bedouin who greeted me and tried to sell me one of his 26 daughters to take back to the States.
So as we talked, Richard and I, I said, "You know, maybe I should bring a camel.
It's the best designed animal in the world."
He went, "Nah. I don't think we want to be bringing a camel."
And you should be really glad we decided not to bring the camel.
So I did the next best thing.
I went to the Washington Zoo.
Richard said, "I want you to get up close and personal with this camel.
I want you to inspect its mouth, look at its teeth.
Go underneath it. Go above it. Go around it.
Pull its tail up; take a look in there.
I want you to get as close to that camel as you possibly can."
So, I got a National Geographic film crew.
We went down there, and I took one look at this camel.
It is a 2,000 pound creature who is in rut.
(Laughter) Now, if you've ever seen a 2,000 pound camel in rut, it is a scary, scary thing to behold.
And if Richard thought I was getting in the ring with that camel, someone was smoking Bedouin high grade.
(Laughter) So we got as close to it as possible, and I'm going to share this.
Chris, if you want to roll this film.
Then I'm going to show you a little bit more about the design of camels.
Do you want to roll the film?
(Adventure music) (Video) Hello. This is Keith Bellows with the TED National Geographic Camel Investigation Unit.
I'm here to look at the ultimate desert machine.
(Music continues) Keith Bellows: And you'll note I started chewing gum because I was around this camel all day.
(Video) That's it, OK. No!
See, now he's getting a little overexcited.
So we'll need to be very careful around him. Don't let him get you.
Now, you can see copious amounts of saliva in there.
I always called myself the unstable stable boy.
Their nose, you can see his nose is flared right now.
When they're in rut, they're similar to seals in the way, like, a seal has to open its nose to breathe.
And they're similar. They have to consciously open their nose.
KB: Ears?
SK: They are small. But they have excellent hearing.
But not big; for instance, in zebras, they have a huge ear that's very mobile, so they can actually turn them both around.
And they use them in the same way we use our binocular vision.
They use that to pinpoint sound.
The desert's extremely windy as well as being very cold.
So not only do they have the very long eyelashes, but there's the secondary -- I guess you'd call it the [unclear] or whatever.
It's this hair that's above the eyes, and below it, it's longer.
Most people think that the humps store water.
They don't. They store fat.
Now, I'm not a chemist, but basically what happens is the fat is oxidized by their breathing.
And that will turn it into actually usable water.
Like a lot of predators, they walk on their toes.
But there's a big fat pad in there that squishes out.
They're like sun shoes, but, you know, with sand.
Hooves? They don't have traditional hooves, but they do have one, like, big nail.
(Audience laughter) You can't really see too clear. The fur's kind of grown over.
But they use their tails a lot, especially in rut.
He will urinate and spin his tail to spread the urine around and make him more attractive.
I don't know why that would be, but it works for them.
So, what the hell.
(Audience laughter) Now, they will also defecate in certain areas.
Generally, they poop wherever they want to, but during their rut, they will defecate in perimeter areas.
I don't know if you've read or heard about the sub-sonic sounds from elephants, you know what I mean, like, "Br-r-r!"
These big, big rumbling sounds. He will do the same thing.
You can actually see, right here, it will vibrate.
We weigh our animals.
Unfortunately, he's a very aggressive animal, so he's actually destroyed some of the scales.
We had these big things that I weigh the bison on, for instance.
I'm guessing that he's at least 1,600 pounds.
But I would put him closer to 2,000.
He's basically a walking mulch pile.
We're kind of like buds, but I'm also a male as well.
KB: He sees you as competition? Senior Keeper: Yeah, exactly.
And it makes him very dangerous at this time of year.
Don't even think about it. Don't think about it!
But now, we're going to meet. Out!
Out! Out!
No.
Out!
(Music) (Applause) KB: What I didn't show you was, you got that swinging thing going?
Well, and you're glad I didn't show you this.
One of the other things about the camel's beautiful design is that its penis points backwards.
That way the camel can dip its tail in the stream, and just whacker the entire area around him.
And that's how he really marks his territory.
Now, what you also didn't see was that -- and you may have noticed in the pen beside him and, by the way, the camel's name is Suki.
In the pen beside him is Jasmine.
Jasmine has been his mate for some time.
But on this particular occasion, it was very, very clear that as horny as Suki was, Jasmine was having none of it.
And so we started thinking.
Well, if poor old Suki is in search of a mate, what would Suki do to find the perfect mate?
I'm going to show you another film.
But before I do, I just want to mention that this animal truly is a sort of the SUV of the sand, the ship of the desert.
It's so vital to the inhabitants of the areas in which the camel is found, largely Mongolia and Sahara, that there are 160 words in Arabic to describe the camel.
And if this is a creature that was designed by committee, it's certainly been like no committee I've ever been on.
So here's what Suki would do in search of a mate.
Can you roll it, please?
Camel seeking camel Lusty beast desires attractive and sincere mate.
I'm seven feet, 2,000 lbs., with brown hair and eyes, long legs -- and I'm very well ... hung.
I'm TED Camel.
The perfect desert machine.
I'm smartly designed.
Eyelashes that keep out sand and a third eyelash that works like a windshield wiper.
A distinguished nose -- with nostrils lined to filter out sand and dust and a groove that catches moisture.
Amazingly full lips -- that allow me to eat practically anything that grows.
Callouses on my knees that let me kneel comfortably.
Leathery chest pads that beat the heat.
Short fur that keeps my skin cool.
Long legs that allow heat to escape.
And my hump?
Ogden Nash once wrote: "The camel has a single hump; the dromedary two, or else the other way around. I'm never sure. Are you?"
Here's a hint: Bactarian.
Dromedary.
My hump contains up to 80 lbs. of fat, but doesn't store H2O.
I'm built to last.
I'm the go-to animal when the oasis is dry.
I usually won't sweat until my body reaches 105 ºF, enough to fry an egg.
I'm able to lose 40% of my weight without dying.
(Most animals would if they lost half that much.) I'll drink 5 to 7 gallons of water a day.
But go without for more than a month.
I'm powerful.
Able to pack up to 400 lbs. of cargo.
Outrun a horse -- And cover 26 miles on a good day.
Camelot.
Jackie O. once said that traveling by camel made riding an elephant seem like taking a jet plane.
Yet my large, soft feet allow me to navigate sand.
(Is that why the Bedouin claim I can dance?) I'm a good provider, too.
Bedouins call the camel the Gift of God.
No surprise.
Tents and rugs are made of my hair.
My dried bones are prized as a sort of ivory.
My dung is burned as fuel. My milk is used for cheese.
"Camels are like angels," a Bedouin once said.
(Applause) Thank you. I just want to leave you with one last thought, which is probably the most important thing to take away.
Humans, the animal, are pretty lucky creatures because, by and large, we really don't have to adapt to our environment; we adapt our environment to us.
And we've seen that repeatedly through this conference, not just this year, but in past years.
But this creature that you've just seen ultimately adapts, and keeps adapting and adapting.
I think when you look at the animal kingdom, that is one of the most remarkable things.
It doesn't have an environment that adapts to it; it has to adapt to the environment.
Ricky, thank you very much for having me.
RW: That's terrific. Thank you.
We really need to put the best we have to offer within reach of our children.
If we don't do that, we're going to get the generation we deserve.
They're going to learn from whatever it is they have around them.
And we, as now the elite, parents, librarians, professionals, whatever it is, a bunch of our activities are, in fact, in trying to get the best we have to offer within reach of those around us, or as broadly as we can.
I'm going to start and end this talk with a couple things that are carved in stone.
One is what's on the Boston Public Library.
Carved above their door is, "Free to All."
It's kind of an inspiring statement, and I'll go back at the end of this.
I'm a librarian, and what I'm trying to do is bring all of the works of knowledge to as many people as want to read it.
And the idea of using technology is perfect for us.
I think we have the opportunity to one-up the Greeks.
It's not easy to one-up the Greeks. But with the industriousness of the Egyptians, they were able to build the Library of Alexandria -- the idea of a copy of every book of all the peoples of the world.
The problem was you actually had to go to Alexandria to go to it.
On the other hand, if you did, then great things happened.
I think we can one-up the Greeks and achieve something.
And I'm going to try to argue only one point today: that universal access to all knowledge is within our grasp.
So if I'm successful, then you'll actually come away thinking, yeah, we could actually achieve the great vision of everything ever published, everything that was ever meant for distribution, available to anybody in the world that's ever wanted to have access to it.
Yes, there's issues about how money should be distributed, and that's still being refigured out.
But I'd say there's plenty of money, and there's plenty of demand, so we can actually achieve that.
But I'm going to go over the technological, social and sort of where are we as a whole, trying to get to that particular vision.
And the way I'm going to try to do this is do it like the Amazon.com website, the books, music, video and just go step -- media type by media type, just go and say, all right, how're we doing on this?
So if we start with books, you know, sort of where are we?
Well, first you have to, as an engineer, scope the problem. How big is it?
If you wanted to put all of the published works online so that anybody could have it available, well, how big a problem is it?
Well, we don't really know, but the largest print library in the world is the Library of Congress. It's 26 million volumes, 26 million volumes.
It is, by far and away, the largest print library in the world.
And a book, if you had a book, is about a megabyte, so -- you know, if you had it in Microsoft Word.
So a megabyte, 26 million megabytes is 26 terabytes -- it goes mega-, giga-, tera-. 26 terabytes.
26 terabytes fits in a computer system that's about this big, on spinning Linux drives, and it costs about 60,000 dollars.
So for the cost of a house -- or around here, a garage -- you can put, you can have spinning all of the words in the Library of Congress.
That's pretty neat.
Then the question is, what do you get?
You know, is it worth trying to get there?
Do you actually want it online?
Some of the first things that people do is they make book readers that allow you to search inside the books, and that's kind of fun.
And you can download these things, and look around them in new and different ways.
And you can get at them remotely, if you happen to have a laptop.
There's starting to be some of these sort of page turn-y interfaces that look a whole lot like books in certain ways, and you can search them, make little tabs, and it's kind of cute -- still very book-like -- on your laptop.
But I don't know, reading things on a laptop -- whenever I pull up my laptop, it always feels like work.
I think that's one of the reasons why the Kindle is so great.
I don't have to feel like I'm at work to read a Kindle.
It's starting to be a little bit more specified.
But I have to say that there's older technologies that I tend to like.
I like the physical book.
And I think we can go and use our technology to go and digitize things, put them on the Net, and then download, print them and bind them, and end up with books again.
And we sort of said, well, how hard is this?
And it turns out to not be very hard.
We actually went off to make a bookmobile.
And a bookmobile -- the size of a van with a satellite dish, a printer, binder and cutter, and kids make their own books.
It costs about three dollars to download, print and bind a normal, old book.
And they actually come out kind of nice looking.
You can actually get really good-looking books for on the order of one penny per page, sort of the parts cost for doing this.
So the idea of -- this technology actually may end up putting books back in people's hands again.
There are some other bookmobiles running around.
This is Eric Eldred making books at Walden Pond -- Thoreau's works.
This is just before he got kicked out by the Parks Services, for competing with the bookstore there.
In India, they've got another couple bookmobiles running around.
And this is the opening day at the Library of Alexandria, the new Library of Alexandria, in Egypt.
It was quite popularly attended.
And kids starting to make their own books, and a happy kid with the first book that he's ever owned.
So the idea of being able to use this technology to end up with paper where I can handle sort of sounds a little retro, but I think it still has its place.
And being from the Silicon Valley, sort of utopian sort of world, we thought, if we can make this technology work in rural Uganda, we might have something.
So we actually got some funding from the World Bank to try it out.
And we found in about 30 days we could go and take a couple folks from Silicon Valley, fly them to Uganda, buy a car, set up the first Internet connection at the National Library of Uganda, figure out what they wanted, and get a program going making books in rural Uganda.
And it actually -- so technologically, it works.
What we found out of this is we didn't have the right books.
So the books were in the library. We could get it to people, if they're digitized, but we didn't know how to quite get them digitized.
Everybody thought the answer is, send things to India and China.
And so we've tried that, and I'll go over that in a moment.
There are some newer technologies for delivering that have happened that are actually quite exciting as well.
One is a print-on-demand machine that looks like a Rube Goldberg machine.
We have one of these things now. It's completely cool.
It's all conveyor belt, and it makes a book.
And it's called the "Espresso Book Machine," and in about 10 minutes, you can press a button and make a book.
Something else I'm quite excited about in this particular domain, beyond these sort of kiosk-y things where you can get books on demand, is some of these new little screens that are coming out.
And one of my favorites in this is the $100 laptop.
And I don't mean to steal any thunder here, but we've gone and used one of these things to be an e-book reader.
So here's one of the beta units and you can -- it actually turns out to be a really good-looking e-book reader.
And we have a quick hack that we did to try to put one of our books on it, and it turns out that 200 dots per inch means that you can put scanned books on them that look really good.
At 200 dots per inch, it's kind of the equivalent of a 300 dot print laser printer.
We're in good enough shape.
You actually can go and read scanned books quite easily.
So the idea of electronic books is starting to come about.
But how do you go about doing all this scanning?
So we thought, okay, well, let's try out this send books to India thing.
And there was a project with, funded by the National Science Foundation -- sent a bunch of scanners, and the American libraries were supposed to send books.
Well, they didn't. They didn't want to send their books.
So we bought 100,000 books and sent them to India.
And then we learned why you don't want to send books to India.
The lesson we learned out of this is, scan your own books.
If you really care about books, you're going to scan them better, especially if they're valuable books.
If they're new books and you can just, you know, butcher them, because you could just buy another one, that's not such a big deal in terms of doing high-quality scanning.
But do things that you love.
But the Indians have been scanning a lot of their own books -- about 300,000 now -- doing very well.
The Chinese did over a million, and the Egyptians are about 30,000.
But we sent -- thought, OK, if we're going to need to do this, let's do it in-library.
How do we go and do this, and how do we get it down so that it's a cost point that we could afford?
And we sort of picked the price point of 10 cents a page.
If it's basically the cost of xeroxing to basically digitize, OCR, package it up, make it so that you could download, print and bind it -- the whole shebang -- we would have achieved something.
So we started out trying to figure out. How do we get to 10 cents?
And we tried these robot things, and they worked pretty well -- sort of these auto-page-turning things.
If we can have Mars Rovers, you'd think you could turn pages.
But it actually turns out to be pretty hard to turn pages, and the volume isn't there.
So anyway -- so we ended up making our own book scanner, and with two digital, high-grade, professional digital cameras, controlled museum lighting, so even if it's a black and white book, you can go and get the proper intonation.
So you basically do a beautiful, respectful job.
This is not a fax, this is -- the idea is to do a beautiful job as you're going through these libraries.
And we've been able to achieve 10 cents a page if we run things in volume.
This is what it looks like at the University of Toronto.
And actually, it turns out to, you know, pay a living wage.
People seem to love it.
Yes, it's a little boring, but some people kind of get into the Zen of it.
(Laughter) And especially if it's kind of interesting books that you care about, in languages that you can read.
We actually have been able to do a pretty good job of this, at getting 10 cents a page.
So 10 cents a page, 300 pages in your average book, 30 dollars a book.
The Library of Congress, if you did the whole darn thing -- 26 million books -- is about 750 million dollars, right?
But a million books, I think, actually would be a pretty good start, and that would cost 30 million dollars. That's not that big a bill.
And what we've been able to do is get into libraries.
We've now got eight of these scanning centers in three countries, and libraries are up for having their books scanned.
The Getty here is moving their books to the UCLA, which is where we have one these scanning centers, and scanning their out-of-copyright books, which is fabulous.
So we're starting to get the institutional responsibility.
The thing we're missing is the 10 cents.
If we can get the 10 cents, all the rest of it flows.
We've scanned about 200,000 books.
Now we're scanning about 15,000 books a month, and it's starting to gear up another factor of two from there.
So all in all, that's going very well.
And we're starting to move out of the just out-of-copyright into the out-of-print world.
So I think of -- we're kind of going from the out-of-copyright, library stuff, and Amazon.com is coming from the in-print world.
And I think we'll meet in the middle some place, and have the classic thing that you have, which is a publishing system and a library system working in parallel.
And so we're starting up a program to do out-of-print works, but loaning them.
Exactly what loaning means, I'm not quite sure.
But anyway, loaning out-of-print works from the Boston Public Library, the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and a few other libraries that are starting to participate in this program, to try out this model of where does a library stop and where does the bookstore take over.
So all in all, it's possible to do this in large scale.
We're also going back over microfilm and getting that online.
So, we can do 10 cents a page, we're going 15,000 books a month and we've got about 250,000 books online, counting all the other projects that are starting to add in.
So what I wanted to argue is, books are within our grasp.
The idea of taking on the whole ball of wax is not that big a deal.
Yes, it costs tens of millions, low hundreds of millions, but one time shot and we've got basically the history of printed literature online.
And then, there's business model issues about how to try to effectively market it and get it to people.
But it is within our grasp, technologically and law-wise, at least for the out of print and out of copyright, we suggest, to be able to get the whole darn thing online.
Now let's go for audio, and I'm going to go through these.
So how much is there?
Well, as best we can tell, there are about two to three million disks having been published -- so 78s, long-playing records and CDs -- or at least that's the largest archives of published materials we've been able to sort of point at.
It costs about 10 dollars a piece to go and take a disk and put it online, if you're doing things in volume.
But we've found that the rights issues are really quite thorny.
This is a fairly heavily litigated area, so we've found that there are niches in the music world that aren't served terribly well by the classic commercial publishing system.
And we've been starting to make these available by going and offering shelf space on the Net.
In the United States, it doesn't cost you to give something away. Right?
If you give something to a charity or to the public, you get a pat on the back and a tax donation -- except on the Net, where you can go broke.
If you put up a video of your garage band, and it starts getting heavily accessed, you can lose your guitars or your house.
This doesn't make any sense.
So we've offered unlimited storage, unlimited bandwidth, forever, for free, to anybody that has something to share that belongs in a library.
And we've been getting a lot of takers. One is the rock 'n' rollers.
The rock 'n' rollers had a tradition of sharing, as long as nobody made any money. You could -- concert recordings, it's not the commercial recordings, but concert recordings, started by the Grateful Dead.
And we get about two or three bands a day signing up.
They give permission, and we get about 40 or 50 concerts a day.
We have about 40,000 concerts, everything the Grateful Dead ever did, up on the Net, so that people can see it and listen to this material.
So audio is possible to put up, but the rights issues are really pretty thorny.
We've got a lot of collections now -- a couple hundred thousand items -- and it's growing over time.
Moving images: if you think of theatrical releases, there are not that many of them.
As best we can tell, there are about 150,000 to 200,000 movies ever that are really meant for a large-scale theatrical distribution. It's just not that many.
But half of those were Indian.
But anyway, it's doable, but we've only found about a thousand of these things that -- to be out of copyright.
So we've digitized those and made those available.
But we've found that there's lots of other types of movies that haven't really seen the light of day -- archival films.
We've found, also, a lot of political films, a lot of amateur films, all sorts of things that are basically needing a home, a permanent home.
So we've been starting to make these available and it's grown to be very popular.
We're not quite a YouTube.
We tended towards longer-term things and also things that people can reuse and make into new movies, which has just been great fun.
Television comes quite a bit larger.
We started recording 20 channels of television 24 hours a day.
It's sort of the biggest TiVo box you've ever seen.
It's about a petabyte, so far, of worldwide television -- Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Iraqi, Al Jazeera, BBC, CNN, ABC, CBS, NBC -- 24 hours a day.
We only put one week up, which is mostly for cost reasons, which is the 9/11, sort of from 9/11/2001. For one week, what did the world see?
CNN was saying that Palestinians were dancing in the streets.
Were they? Let's look at the Palestinian television and find out.
How can we have critical thinking without being able to quote and being able to compare what happened in the past?
And television is dreadfully unrecorded and unquotable, except by Jon Stewart, who does a fabulous job.
So anyway, television is, I would suggest, within our grasp.
So 15 dollars per video hour, and also about 100 dollars to 150 dollars per celluloid hour, we're able to go and get materials online very inexpensively and have them up on the Net.
And we've got, now, a lot of these materials.
So we've got about 100,000 pieces up there.
So books, music, video, software. There's only 50,000 titles of it.
Mostly the issues there are legal issues and breaking copy protections.
But we've worked through some of those, but we've still got real problems in Washington.
Well, we're best known as the World Wide Web.
We've been archiving the World Wide Web since 1996.
We take a snapshot of every website and all of the pages on it, every two months.
And actually, it's really been pioneered by Alexa Internet, which donates this collection to the Internet Archive.
And it's been growing along for the last 11 years, and it's a fantastic resource.
And we've made a Wayback Machine that you can then go and see old websites kind of the way they were.
If you go and search on something -- this is Google.com, the different versions of it that we have, this is what it looks like when it was an alpha release, and this is what it looked like at Stanford.
So anyway, you've got basically an idea of where things came from.
Mostly, people want to see their old stuff out of this.
If there's one thing that we want to learn from the Library of Alexandria version one, which is probably best known for burning, is, don't just have one copy.
So we've started to -- we've made another copy of all of this and we actually put it back in the Library of Alexandria.
So this is a picture of the Internet Archive at the Library of Alexandria.
And we now have also another copy building up in Amsterdam.
So, we should put it in the San Andreas Fault Line in San Francisco, flood zone in Amsterdam and in the Middle East. Right, so anyway ...
so we're hedging our bets here.
If we go and put it in a couple more places, I think we'll be in good shape.
There's a political and social question out of this.
Is all of this, as we go digital, is it going to be public or private?
There's some large companies that have seen this vision, that are doing large-scale digitization, but they're locking up the public domain.
The question is, is that the world that we really want to live in?
What's the role of the public versus the private as things go forward?
How do we go and have a world where we both have libraries and publishing in the future, just as we basically benefited as we were growing up?
So universal access to all knowledge -- I think it can be one of the greatest achievements of humankind, like the man on the moon, or the Gutenberg Bible, or the Library of Alexandria.
It could be something that we're remembered for, for millennia, for having achieved.
And as I said before, I'll end with something that's carved above the door of the Carnegie Library.
Carnegie -- one of the great capitalists of this country -- carved above his legacy, "Free to the People."
Thank you very much.
When I knew I was going to come to speak to you, I thought, "I gotta call my mother."
I have a little Cuban mother -- she's about that big.
Four feet. Nothing larger than the sum of her figurative parts.
You still with me? (Laughter) I called her up.
"Hello, how're you doing, baby?"
"Hey, ma, I got to talk to you."
"You're talking to me already. What's the matter?"
I said, "I've got to talk to a bunch of nice people."
"You're always talking to nice people, except when you went to the White House."
"Ma, don't start!"
And I told her I was coming to TED, and she said, "What's the problem?"
And I said, "Well, I'm not sure."
I said, "I have to talk to them about stories.
It's 'Technology, Entertainment and Design.'" And she said, "Well, you design a story when you make it up, it's entertainment when you tell it, and you're going to use a microphone."
(Laughter) I said, "You're a peach, ma. Pop there?"
"What's the matter? The pearls of wisdom leaping from my lips like lemmings is no good for you?"
(Laughter) Then my pop got on there.
My pop, he's one of the old souls, you know -- old Cuban man from Camaguey.
Camaguey is a province in Cuba.
He's from Florida.
He was born there in 1924.
He grew up in a bohio of dirt floors, and the structure was the kind used by the Tainos, our old Arawak ancestors.
My father is at once quick-witted, wickedly funny, and then poignancy turns on a dime and leaves you breathless.
"Papi, help."
"I already heard your mother. I think she's right."
(Laughter) "After what I just told you?"
My whole life, my father's been there.
So we talked for a few minutes, and he said, "Why don't you tell them what you believe?"
I love that, but we don't have the time.
Good storytelling is crafting a story that someone wants to listen to.
Great story is the art of letting go.
So I'm going to tell you a little story.
Remember, this tradition comes to us not from the mists of Avalon, back in time, but further still, before we were scratching out these stories on papyrus, or we were doing the pictographs on walls in moist, damp caves.
Back then, we had an urge, a need, to tell the story.
When Lexus wants to sell you a car, they're telling you a story.
Have you been watching the commercials?
Because every one of us has this desire, for once -- just once -- to tell our story and have it heard.
There are stories you tell from stages.
There's stories that you may tell in a small group of people with some good wine.
And there's stories you tell late at night to a friend, maybe once in your life.
And then there are stories that we whisper into a Stygian darkness.
I'm not telling you that story.
I'm telling you this one.
It's called, "You're Going to Miss Me."
It's about human connection.
My Cuban mother, which I just briefly introduced you to in that short character sketch, came to the United States one thousand years ago.
I was born in 19 -- I forget, and I came to this country with them in the aftermath of the Cuban revolution.
We went from Havana, Cuba to Decatur, Georgia.
And Decatur, Georgia's a small Southern town.
And in that little Southern town, I grew up, and grew up hearing these stories.
But this story only happened a few years ago.
I called my mom.
It was a Saturday morning.
And I was calling about how to make ajiaco. It's a Cuban meal.
It's delicious. It's savory.
It makes spit froth in the little corners of your mouth -- is that enough? It makes your armpits juicy, you know?
That kind of food, yeah.
This is the sensory part of the program, people.
I called my mother, and she said, "Carmen, I need you to come, please.
I need to go to the mall, and you know your father now, he takes a nap in the afternoon, and I got to go.
I got an errand to run."
Let me parenthetically pause here and tell you -- Esther, my mother, had stopped driving several years ago, to the collective relief of the entire city of Atlanta.
Any vehicular outing with that woman from the time I was a young child, guys, naturally included flashing, blue lights.
But she'd become adept at dodging the boys in blue, and when she did meet them, oh, she had wonderful, well, rapport.
"Ma'am, did you know that was a light you just ran?"
(Spanish) "You don't speak English?"
"No."
(Laughter) But eventually, every dog has its day, and she ended up in traffic court, where she bartered with the judge for a discount.
There's a historical marker.
But now she was a septuagenarian, she'd stopped driving.
And that meant that everyone in the family had to sign up to take her to have her hair dyed, you know, that peculiar color of blue that matches her polyester pants suit, you know, same color as the Buick.
Anybody? All right.
Little picks on the legs, where she does her needlepoint, and leaves little loops.
Rockports -- they're for this.
That's why they call them that.
(Laughter) This is her ensemble.
And this is the woman that wants me to come on a Saturday morning when I have a lot to do, but it doesn't take long because Cuban guilt is a weighty thing.
I'm not going political on you but ... And so, I go to my mother's.
I show up. She's in the carport.
Of course, they have a carport.
The kind with the corrugated roof, you know.
The Buick's parked outside, and she's jingling, jangling a pair of keys.
"I got a surprise for you, baby!"
"We taking your car?"
"Not we, I."
And she reaches into her pocket and pulls out a catastrophe.
Somebody's storytelling. Interactive art. You can talk to me.
Oh, a driver's license, a perfectly valid driver's license.
Issued, evidently, by the DMV in her own county of Gwinnett.
Blithering fucking idiots.
(Laughter) I said, "Is that thing real?"
"I think so."
"Can you even see?"
"I guess I must."
She gets into the car -- she's sitting on two phone books.
I can't even make this part up because she's that tiny.
She's engineered an umbrella so she can -- bam! -- slam the door.
Her daughter, me, the village idiot with the ice cream cone in the middle of her forehead, is still standing there, slack-jawed.
"You coming? You no coming?"
"Oh, my God." I said, "OK, fine. Does pop know you're driving?"
"Are you kidding me?"
"How are you doing it?"
"He's got to sleep sometime."
And so we left my father fast asleep, because I knew he'd kill me if I let her go by herself, and we get in the car.
Puts it in reverse. Fifty-five out of the driveway, in reverse.
I am buckling in seatbelts from the front.
I'm yanking them in from the back. I'm doing double knots.
I mean, I've got a mouth as dry as the Kalahari Desert.
I've got a white-knuckle grip on the door. You know what I'm talking about?
And she's whistling, and finally I do the kind of birth breathing -- you know, that one?
Only a couple of women are going uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. Right.
And I said, "Ma, would you slow down?"
Because now she's picked up the Highway 285, the perimeter around Atlanta, which encompasses now -- there's seven lanes, she's on all of them, y'all.
I said, "Ma, pick a lane!"
"They give you seven lanes, they expect you to use them."
And there she goes, right.
I don't believe for a minute she has been out and not been stopped.
So, I think, hey, we can talk. It'll be a diversion.
It'll help my breathing. It'll do something for my pulse, maybe.
"Mommy, I know you have been stopped."
"No, no, what you talking about?"
"You have a license. How long have you been driving?"
"Four or five days."
"Yeah. And you haven't been stopped?"
"I did not get a ticket."
I said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, but come on, come on, come on."
"OK, so I stopped at a light and there's a guy, you know, in the back."
"Would this guy have, like, a blue uniform and a terrified look on his face?"
"You weren't there, don't start."
"Come on. You got a ticket?"
"No." She explained, "The man" -- I have to tell you as she did, because it loses something if I don't, you know -- "he come to the window, and he does a thing like this, which tells me he's pretty old, you know.
So I look up and I'm thinking, maybe he's still going to think I'm kind of cute."
"Ma, are you still doing that?"
"If it works, it works, baby.
So, I say, 'Perdon, yo no hablo ingles.' Well, wouldn't you know, he had been in Honduras for the Peace Corps."
(Laughter) So he's talking to her, and at some point she says, "Then, you know, it was it. That was it. It was done."
"Yeah? What?
He gave you a ticket? He didn't give you a ticket? What?"
"No, I look up, and the light, she change."
(Laughter) You should be terrified.
Now, I don't know if she's toying with me, kind of like a cat batting back a mouse, batting back a mouse -- left paw, right paw, left paw, right paw -- but by now, we've reached the mall.
Now, you have all been at a mall during the holidays, yes?
Talk to me. Yes. Yes. You can say yes.
Audience: Yes.
Carmen Agra Deedy: All right, then you know that you have now entered parking lot purgatory, praying to that saint of perpetual availability that as you join that serpentine line of cars crawling along, some guy's going to turn on the brake lights just as you pull up behind him.
But that doesn't happen most of the time, right?
So, first I say, "Ma, why are we here?"
"You mean, like, in the car?"
"No, don't -- why are we here today?
It's Saturday. It's the holidays."
"Because I have to exchange your father's underwear."
Now, see, this is the kind of Machiavellian thinking, that you really have to -- you know, in my mind, it's a rabbit's warren, this woman's mind.
Do I want to walk in, because unless I have Ariadne's thread to anchor -- enough metaphors for you? -- somewhere, I may not get out.
But you know.
(Laughter) "Why do we have to take pop's underwear back now?
And why? What is wrong with his underwear?"
"It will upset you."
"It won't upset me. Why? What? Is something wrong with him?"
"No, no, no. The only thing with him is, he's an idiot.
I sent him to the store, which was my first mistake, and he went to buy underwear, and he bought the grippers, and he's supposed to buy the boxers."
"Why?"
"I read it on the Intersnet. You cannot have children."
"Oh, my God!"
(Laughter) Olivia? Huh? Huh?
By now, we have now crawled another four feet, and my mother finally says to me, "I knew it, I knew it.
I'm an immigrant. We make a space. What I tell you? Right there."
And she points out the passenger window, and I look out, and three -- three -- aisles down, "Look, the Chevy."
You want to laugh, but you don't know -- you're that politically corrected, have you noticed?
Correct the other direction now, it's OK.
"Look, the Chevy -- he's coming this way."
"Mama, mama, mama, wait, wait, wait. The Chevy is three aisles away."
She looks at me like I'm her, you know, her moron child, the cretin, the one she's got to speak to very slowly and distinctly.
"I know that, honey. Get out of the car and go stand in the parking space till I get there."
OK, I want a vote. Come on, come on. No, no.
How many of you once in your -- you were a kid, you were an adult -- you stood in a parking space to hold it for someone?
See, we're a secret club with a secret handshake.
(Laughter) And years of therapy later, we're doing great.
We're doing great. We're doing fine.
Well, I stood up to her.
This is -- you know, you'd think by now I'm -- and still holding?
I said, "No way, ma, you have embarrassed me my entire life."
Of course, her comeback is, "When have I embarrassed you?"
(Spanish) And she's still talking while she puts the car in park, hits the emergency brake, opens the door, and with a spryness astounding in a woman her age, she jumps out of the car, knocks out the phone books, and then she walks around -- she's carrying her cheap Kmart purse with her -- around the front of the car.
She has amazing land speed for a woman her age, too.
Before I know it, she has skiddled across the parking lot and in between the cars, and people behind me, with that kind of usual religious charity that the holidays bring us, wah-wah wah-wah.
"I'm coming." Italian hand signals follow.
I scoot over. I close the door. I leave the phone books.
This is new and fast, just so you -- are you still with us?
We'll wait for the slow ones. OK.
I start, and this is where a child says to me -- and the story doesn't work if I tell you about her before, because this is my laconic child.
A brevity, brevity of everything with this child.
You know, she eats small portions.
Language is something to be meted out in small phonemes, you know -- just little hmm, hmm-hmm.
She carries a mean spiral notebook and a pen.
She wields great power.
She listens, because that's what people who tell stories do first.
But she pauses occasionally and says, "How do you spell that? What year? OK."
When she writes the expose in about 20 years, don't believe a word of it.
But this is my daughter, Lauren, my remarkable daughter, my borderline Asperger's kid.
Bless you, Dr. Watson.
She says, "Ma, you got to look!"
Now, when this kid says I got to look, you know.
But it isn't like I haven't seen this crime scene before.
I grew up with this woman.
I said, "Lauren, you know what, give me a play-by-play. I can't."
"No, mama, you got to look."
I got to look. You got to look.
Don't you want to look?
There she is.
I look in bewildered awe: she's standing, those Rockports slightly apart, but grounded.
She's holding out that cheap Kmart purse, and she is wielding it.
She's holding back tons of steel with the sheer force of her little personality, in that crone-ish voice, saying things like, "Back it up, buddy! No, it's reserved!"
(Laughter) Ready? Brace yourselves. Here it comes.
"No, my daughter, she's coming in the Buick.
Honey, sit up so they can see you."
Oh, Jesus. Oh, Jesus.
I finally come -- and now, it's the South.
I don't know what part of the country you live in.
I think we all secretly love stories.
We all secretly want our blankie and our Boo Bear.
We want to curl up and say, "Tell it to me, tell it to me.
Come on, honey, tell it to me."
But in the South, we love a good story.
People have pulled aside, I mean, they've come out of that queue line, they have popped their trunks, pulled out lawn chairs and cool drinks.
Bets are placed.
"I'm with the little lady. Damn!"
(Laughter) And she's bringing me in with a slight salsa movement.
She is, after all, Cuban.
I'm thinking, "Accelerator, break. Accelerator, break."
Like you've never thought that in your life? Right? Yeah.
I pull in. I put the car in park.
Engine's still running -- mine, not the car.
I jump out next to her going, "Don't you move!"
"I'm not going anywhere."
She's got front seat in a Greek tragedy.
I come out, and there's Esther.
She's hugging the purse.
"Que?" Which means "what," and so much more.
(Laughter) "Ma, have you no shame?
People are watching us all around," right?
Now, some of them you've got to make up, people.
Secret of the trade.
Guess what? Some of these stories I sculpt a little, here and there.
Some, they're just right there, right there. Put them right there.
She says this to me.
After I say -- let me refresh you -- "have you no shame?"
"No. I gave it up with pantyhose -- they're both too binding."
(Laughter) (Applause) Yeah, you can clap, but then you're about 30 seconds from the end.
I'm about to snap like a brittle twig, when suddenly someone taps me on the shoulder.
Intrepid soul.
I'm thinking, "This is my kid. How dare she?
She jumped out of that car."
That's OK, because my mother yells at me, I yell at her.
It's a beautiful hierarchy, and it works.
(Laughter) I turn around, but it's not a child. It's a young woman, a little taller than I, pale green, amused eyes.
With her is a young man -- husband, brother, lover, it's not my job.
And she says, "Pardon me, ma'am" -- that's how we talk down there -- "is that your mother?"
I said, "No, I follow little old women around parking lots to see if they'll stop. Yes, it's my mother!"
The boy, now, he says. "Well, what my sister meant" -- they look at each other, it's a knowing glance -- "God, she's crazy!"
I said, (Spanish), and the young girl and the young boy say, "No, no, honey, we just want to know one more thing."
I said, "Look, please, let me take care of her, OK, because I know her, and believe me, she's like a small atomic weapon, you know, you just want to handle her really gingerly."
And the girl goes, "I know, but, I mean, I swear to God, she reminds us of our mother."
I almost miss it.
He turns to her on the heel of his shoe.
It's a half-whisper, "God, I miss her."
They turn then, shoulder to shoulder, and walk away, lost in their own reverie.
Memories of some maddening woman who was the luck of their DNA draw.
And I turn to Esther, who's rocking on those 'ports, and says, "You know what, honey?"
"What, ma?"
"I'm going to drive you crazy probably for about 14, 15 more years, if you're lucky, but after that, honey, you're going to miss me."
(Applause)
My thing with school lunch is, it's a social justice issue.
I'm the Director of Nutrition Services for the Berkeley Unified School District. I have 90 employees and 17 locations, 9,600 kids.
I'm doing 7,100 meals a day and I've been doing it for two years, trying to change how we feed kids in America.
And that's what I want to talk to you a little bit about today.
These are some of my kids with a salad bar.
I put salad bars in all of our schools when I got there.
Everyone says it couldn't be done.
Little kids couldn't eat off the salad bar, big kids would spit in it -- neither happened.
When I took over this, I tried to really figure out, like, what my vision would be.
How do we really change children's relationship to food?
And I'll tell you why we need to change it, but we absolutely have to change it.
And what I came to understand is, we needed to teach children the symbiotic relationship between a healthy planet, healthy food and healthy kids.
And that if we don't do that, the antithesis, although we've heard otherwise, is we're really going to become extinct, because we're feeding our children to death.
That's my premise.
We're seeing sick kids get sicker and sicker.
And the reason this is happening, by and large, is because of our food system and the way the government commodifies food, the way the government oversees our food, the way the USDA puts food on kids' plates that's unhealthy, and allows unhealthy food into schools.
And by -- tacitly, all of us send our kids, or grandchildren, or nieces, or nephews, to school and tell them to learn, you know, learn what's in those schools.
And when you feed these kids bad food, that's what they're learning. So that's really what this is all about.
The way we got here is because of big agribusiness.
We now live in a country where most of us don't decide, by and large, what we eat. We see big businesses, Monsanto and DuPont, who brought out Agent Orange and stain-resistant carpet.
They control 90 percent of the commercially produced seeds in our country.
These are -- 10 companies control much of what's in our grocery stores, much of what people eat. And that's really, really a problem.
So when I started thinking about these issues and how I was going to change what kids ate, I really started focusing on what we would teach them.
And the very first thing was about regional food -- trying to eat food from within our region.
And clearly, with what's going on with fossil fuel usage, or when -- as the fossil fuel is going away, as oil hits its peak oil, you know, we really have to start thinking about whether or not we should, or could, be moving food 1,500 miles before we eat it.
So we talked to kids about that, and we really start to feed kids regional food.
And then we talk about organic food.
Now, most school districts can't really afford organic food, but we, as a nation, have to start thinking about consuming, growing and feeding our children food that's not chock-full of chemicals.
We can't keep feeding our kids pesticides and herbicides and antibiotics and hormones.
We can't keep doing that.
You know, it doesn't work.
And the results of that are kids getting sick.
One of my big soapboxes right now is antibiotics.
Seventy percent of all antibiotics consumed in America is consumed in animal husbandry.
We are feeding our kids antibiotics in beef and other animal protein every day.
Seventy percent -- it's unbelievable.
And the result of it is, we have diseases.
We have things like E. coli that we can't fix, that we can't make kids better when they get sick.
And, you know, certainly antibiotics have been over-prescribed, but it's an issue in the food supply.
One of my favorite facts is that U.S. agriculture uses 1.2 billion pounds of pesticides every year.
That means every one of us, and our children, consumes what would equal a five-pound bag -- those bags you have at home. If I had one here and ripped it open, and that pile I would have on the floor is what we consume and feed our children every year because of what goes into our food supply, because of the way we consume produce in America.
The USDA allows these antibiotics, these hormones and these pesticides in our food supply, and the USDA paid for this ad in Time magazine.
Okay, we could talk about Rachel Carson and DDT, but we know it wasn't good for you and me.
And that is what the USDA allows in our food supply.
And that has to change, you know.
The USDA cannot be seen as the be-all and end-all of what we feed our kids and what's allowed.
We cannot believe that they have our best interests at heart.
The antithesis of this whole thing is sustainable food.
That's what I really try and get people to understand.
I really try and teach it to kids. I think it's the most important.
It's consuming food in a way in which we'll still have a planet, in which kids will grow up to be healthy, and which really tries to mitigate all the negative impacts we're seeing.
It really is just a new idea.
I mean, people toss around sustainability, but we have to figure out what sustainability is.
In less than 200 years, you know, just in a few generations, we've gone from being 200 -- being 100 percent, 95 percent farmers to less than 2 percent of farmers.
We now live in a country that has more prisoners than farmers -- 2.1 million prisoners, 1.9 million farmers.
And we spend 35,000 dollars on average a year keeping a prisoner in prison, and school districts spend 500 dollars a year feeding a child.
It's no wonder, you know, we have criminals.
(Laughter) And what's happening is, we're getting sick.
We're getting sick and our kids are getting sick.
It is about what we feed them.
What goes in is what we are.
We really are what we eat.
And if we continue down this path, if we continue to feed kids bad food, if we continue not to teach them what good food is, what's going to happen? You know, what is going to happen?
What's going to happen to our whole medical system?
What's going to happen is, we're going to have kids that have a life less long than our own.
The CDC, the Center for Disease Control, has said, of the children born in the year 2000 -- those seven- and eight-year-olds today -- one out of every three Caucasians, one out of every two African-Americans and Hispanics are going to have diabetes in their lifetime.
And if that's not enough, they've gone on to say, most before they graduate high school.
This means that 40 or 45 percent of all school-aged children could be insulin-dependent within a decade. Within a decade.
What's going to happen?
Well, the CDC has gone further to say that those children born in the year 2000 could be the first generation in our country's history to die at a younger age than their parents.
And it's because of what we feed them.
Because eight-year-olds don't get to decide -- and if they do, you should be in therapy.
You know, we are responsible for what kids eat.
But oops, maybe they're responsible for what kids eat.
Big companies spend 20 billion dollars a year marketing non-nutrient foods to kids.
20 billion dollars a year. 10,000 ads most kids see.
They spend 500 dollars for every one dollar -- 500 dollars marketing foods that kids shouldn't eat for every one dollar marketing healthy, nutritious food.
The result of which is kids think they're going to die if they don't have chicken nuggets.
You know that everybody thinks they should be eating more, and more, and more.
This is the USDA portion size, that little, tiny thing.
And the one over there, that's bigger than my head, is what McDonald's and Burger King and those big companies think we should eat.
And why can they serve that much?
Why can we have 29-cent Big Gulps and 99-cent double burgers?
It's because of the way the government commodifies food, and the cheap corn and cheap soy that are pushed into our food supply that makes these non-nutrient foods really, really cheap.
Which is why I say it's a social justice issue.
Now, I said I'm doing this in Berkeley, and you might think, "Oh, Berkeley. Of course you can do it in Berkeley."
Well, this is the food I found 24 months ago.
This is not even food.
This is the stuff we were feeding our kids: Extremo Burritos, corn dogs, pizza pockets, grilled cheese sandwiches.
Everything came in plastic, in cardboard.
The only kitchen tools my staff had was a box cutter.
The only working piece of equipment in my kitchen was a can crusher, because if it didn't come in a can, it came frozen in a box.
The USDA allows this.
The USDA allows all of this stuff.
In case you can't tell, that's, like, pink Danish and some kind of cupcakes.
Chicken nuggets, Tater Tots, chocolate milk with high fructose, canned fruit cocktail -- a reimbursable meal.
That's what the government says is okay to feed our kids.
It ain't okay. You know what? It is not okay.
And we, all of us, have to understand that this is about us, that we can make a difference here.
Now I don't know if any of you out there invented chicken nuggets, but I'm sure you're rich if you did.
But whoever decided that a chicken should look like a heart, a giraffe, a star?
Well, Tyson did, because there's no chicken in the chicken.
And that they could figure it out, that we could sell this stuff to kids.
You know, what's wrong with teaching kids that chicken looks like chicken?
But this is what most schools serve.
In fact, this may be what a lot of parents serve, as opposed to -- this is what we try and serve.
We really need to change this whole paradigm with kids and food.
We really have to teach children that chicken is not a giraffe.
You know, that vegetables are actually colorful, that they have flavor, that carrots grow in the ground, that strawberries grow in the ground.
There's not a strawberry tree or a carrot bush.
You know, we have to change the way we teach kids about these things.
There's a lot of stuff we can do. There's a lot of schools doing farm-to-school programs. There's a lot of schools actually getting fresh food into schools.
Now, in Berkeley, we've gone totally fresh.
We have no high-fructose corn syrup, no trans fats, no processed foods.
We're cooking from scratch every day.
We have 25 percent of our -- (Applause) thank you -- 25 percent of our stuff is organic and local. We cook.
Those are my hands. I get up at 4 a.m.
every day and go cook the food for the kids, because this is what we need to do.
We can't keep serving kids processed crap, full of chemicals, and expect these are going to be healthy citizens.
You're not going to get the next generation, or the generation after, to be able to think like this if they're not nourished.
If they're eating chemicals all the time, they're not going to be able to think.
They're not going to be smart.
You know what? They're just going to be sick.
Now one of the things that -- what happened when I went into Berkeley is I realized that, you know, this was all pretty amazing to people, very, very different, and I needed to market it.
I came up with these calendars that I sent home to every parent.
And these calendars really started to lay out my program.
Now I'm in charge of all the cooking classes and all the gardening classes in our school district.
So this is a typical menu.
This is what we're serving this week at the schools.
And you see these recipes on the side?
Those are the recipes that the kids learn in my cooking classes.
They do tastings of these ingredients in the gardening classes.
They also may be growing them. And we serve them in the cafeterias.
If we're going to change children's relationship to food, it's delicious, nutritious food in the cafeterias, hands-on experience -- you're looking in cooking and gardening classes -- and academic curriculum to tie it all together.
Now you've probably garnered that I don't love the USDA, and I don't have any idea what to do with their pyramid, this upside-down pyramid with a rainbow over the top, I don't know.
You know, run up into the end of the rainbow, I don't know what you do with it. So, I came up with my own.
This is available on my website in English and Spanish, and it's a visual way to talk to kids about food.
The really tiny hamburger, the really big vegetables.
We have to start changing this.
We have to make kids understand that their food choices make a big difference.
We have cooking classes -- we have cooking classrooms in our schools.
And why this is so important is that we now have grown a generation, maybe two, of kids where one out of every four meals is eaten in fast food, one of every four meals is eaten in a car and one out of every last four meals is eaten in front of a TV or computer.
What are kids learning? Where is the family time?
Where is socialization? Where is discussion?
Where is learning to talk?
You know, we have to change it.
I work with kids a lot. These are kids I work with in Harlem.
EATWISE -- Enlightened and Aware Teens Who Inspire Smart Eating.
We have to teach kids that Coke and Pop Tarts aren't breakfast.
We have to teach kids that if they're on a diet of refined sugar, they go up and down, just like if they're on a diet of crack.
And we have to pull it all together. We have composting in all of our schools.
We have recycling in all of our schools.
You know, the things that we maybe do at home and think are so important, we have to teach kids about in school.
It has to be so much a part of them that they really get it.
Because, you know what, many of us are sort of at the end of our careers, and we need to be giving these kids -- these young kids, the next generation -- the tools to save themselves and save the planet.
One of the things I do a lot is public-private partnerships.
I work with private companies who are willing to do R &amp; D with me, who are willing to do distribution for me, who are really willing to work to go into schools.
Schools are underfunded.
Most schools in America spend less than 7,500 dollars a year teaching a child.
That comes down to under five dollars an hour.
Most of you spend 10, 15 dollars an hour for babysitters when you have them.
So we're spending less than 5 dollars an hour on the educational system.
And if we're going to change it, and change how we feed kids, we really have to rethink that.
So, public and private partnerships, advocacy groups, working with foundations.
In our school district, the way we afford this is our school district allocates .03 percent of the general fund towards nutrition services. And I think if every school district allocated a half to one percent, we could start to really fix this program.
We really need to change it.
It's going to take more money.
Of course, it's not all about food; it's also about kids getting exercise.
And one of the simple things we can do is put recess before lunch.
It's sort of this "duh" thing.
You know, if you have kids coming into lunch and all they're going to do when they get out of lunch is go to have recess, you see them just throw away their lunch so they can run outside.
And then, at one in the afternoon, they're totally crashing.
These are your children and grandchildren that are totally melting down when you pick them up, because they haven't had lunch.
So if the only thing they'd have to do after lunch is go to class, believe me, they're going to sit there and eat their lunch.
We need to -- we need to educate.
We need to educate the kids.
We need to educate the staff.
I had 90 employees.
Two were supposed to be cooks -- none could.
And, you know, I'm not that better off now.
But we really have to educate.
We have to get academic institutions to start thinking about ways to teach people how to cook again, because, of course, they don't -- because we've had this processed food in schools and institutions for so long.
We need 40-minute lunches -- most schools have 20-minute lunches -- and lunches that are time-appropriate.
There was just a big study done, and so many schools are starting lunch at nine and 10 in the morning.
That is not lunchtime.
You know, it's crazy. It's crazy what we're doing.
And just remember, at very least tacitly, this is what we're teaching children as what they should be doing.
I think if we're going to fix this, one of the things we have to do is really change how we have oversight over the National School Lunch Program.
Instead of the National School Lunch Program being under the USDA, I think it should be under CDC.
If we started to think about food and how we feed our kids as a health initiative, and we started thinking about food as health, then I think we wouldn't have corn dogs as lunch.
Okay, Finance 101 on this, and this -- I'm sort of wrapping it up with this finance piece, because I think this is something we all have to understand.
The National School Lunch Program spends 8 billion dollars feeding 30 million children a year.
That number probably needs to double.
People say, "Oh my God, where are we going to get 8 billion?"
In this country, we're spending 110 billion dollars a year on fast food.
We spend 100 billion dollars a year on diet aids.
