You could wear mascara and body armor.
You could love CrossFit, and really like cross-stitch.
You could love to climb out of helicopters and you could also love to bake cookies.
Women live in the and every single day, and these women brought that to this mission as well.
On this life and death battlefield they never forgot that being female may have brought them to the front lines, but being a soldier is what would prove themselves there.
There was the night Amber went out on mission, and in talking to the women of the house, realized that there was a barricaded shooter lying in wait for the Afghan and American forces who were waiting to enter the home.
Another night it was Tristan who found out that there were pieces that make up explosives all around the house in which they were standing, and that in fact, explosives lay all the way between there and where they were about to head that night.
There was the night another one of their teammates proved herself to a decidedly skeptical team of SEALs, when she found the intel item they were looking for wrapped up in a baby's wet diaper.
And there was the night that Isabel, another one of their teammates, found the things that they were looking for, and received an Impact Award from the Rangers who said that without her, the things and the people they were looking for that night would never have been found.
That night and so many others, they went out to prove themselves, not only for one another, but for everybody who would come after them.
And also for the men alongside whom they served.
We talk a lot about how behind every great man is a good woman.
And in this case, next to these women stood men who wanted to see them succeed.
The Army Ranger who trained them had served 12 deployments.
And when they told him that he had to go train girls, he had no idea what to expect.
But at the end of eight days with these women in the summer of 2011, he told his fellow Ranger, "We have just witnessed history.
These may well be our own Tuskegee Airmen."
(Applause) At the heart of this team was the one person who everyone called "the best of us."
She was a petite blonde dynamo, who barely reached five-foot-three.
And she was this wild mix of Martha Stewart, and what we know as G.I. Jane.
She was someone who loved to make dinner for her husband, her Kent State ROTC sweetheart who pushed her to be her best, and to trust herself, and to test every limit she could.
She also loved to put 50 pounds of weight on her back and run for miles, and she loved to be a soldier.
She was somebody who had a bread maker in her office in Kandahar, and would bake a batch of raisin bread, and then go to the gym and bust out 25 or 30 pull-ups from a dead hang.
She was the person who, if you needed an extra pair of boots or a home-cooked dinner, would be on your speed dial.
Because she never, ever would talk to you about how good she was, but let her character speak through action.
She was famous for taking the hard right over the easy wrong.
And she was also famous for walking up to a 15-foot rope, climbing it using only her arms, and then shuffling away and apologizing, because she knew she was supposed to use both her arms and her legs, as the Rangers had trained them.
(Laughter) Some of our heroes return home to tell their stories.
And some of them don't.
And on October 22, 2011, First Lieutenant Ashley White was killed alongside two Rangers, Christopher Horns and Kristoffer Domeij.
Her death threw this program built for the shadows into a very public spotlight.
Because after all, the ban on women in combat was still very much in place.
And at her funeral, the head of Army Special Operations came, and gave a public testimony not just to the courage of Ashley White, but to all her team of sisters.
"Make no mistake about it," he said, "these women are warriors, and they have written a new chapter in what it means to be a female in the United States Army."
Ashley's mom is a teacher's aide and a school bus driver, who bakes cookies on the side.
She doesn't remember much about that overwhelming set of days, in which grief -- enormous grief -- mixed with pride.
But she does remember one moment.
A stranger with a child in her hand came up to her and she said, "Mrs. White, I brought my daughter here today, because I wanted her to know what a hero was.
And I wanted her to know that heroes could be women, too."
It is time to celebrate all the unsung heroines who reach into their guts and find the heart and the grit to keep going and to test every limit.
This very unlikely band of sisters bound forever in life and afterward did indeed become part of history, and they paved the way for so many who would come after them, as much as they stood on the shoulders of those who had come before.
These women showed that warriors come in all shapes and sizes.
And women can be heroes, too.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
This is my great uncle, my father's father's younger brother.
His name was Joe McKenna.
He was a young husband and a semi-pro basketball player and a fireman in New York City.
Family history says he loved being a fireman, and so in 1938, on one of his days off, he elected to hang out at the firehouse.
To make himself useful that day, he started polishing all the brass, the railings on the fire truck, the fittings on the walls, and one of the fire hose nozzles, a giant, heavy piece of metal, toppled off a shelf and hit him.
A few days later, his shoulder started to hurt.
Two days after that, he spiked a fever.
The fever climbed and climbed.
His wife was taking care of him, but nothing she did made a difference, and when they got the local doctor in, nothing he did mattered either.
They flagged down a cab and took him to the hospital.
The nurses there recognized right away that he had an infection, what at the time they would have called "blood poisoning," and though they probably didn't say it, they would have known right away that there was nothing they could do.
There was nothing they could do because the things we use now to cure infections didn't exist yet.
The first test of penicillin, the first antibiotic, was three years in the future.
People who got infections either recovered, if they were lucky, or they died.
My great uncle was not lucky.
He was in the hospital for a week, shaking with chills, dehydrated and delirious, sinking into a coma as his organs failed.
His condition grew so desperate that the people from his firehouse lined up to give him transfusions hoping to dilute the infection surging through his blood.
Nothing worked. He died.
He was 30 years old.
If you look back through history, most people died the way my great uncle died.
Most people didn't die of cancer or heart disease, the lifestyle diseases that afflict us in the West today.
They didn't die of those diseases because they didn't live long enough to develop them.
They died of injuries -- being gored by an ox, shot on a battlefield, crushed in one of the new factories of the Industrial Revolution -- and most of the time from infection, which finished what those injuries began.
All of that changed when antibiotics arrived.
Suddenly, infections that had been a death sentence became something you recovered from in days.
It seemed like a miracle, and ever since, we have been living inside the golden epoch of the miracle drugs.
And now, we are coming to an end of it.
My great uncle died in the last days of the pre-antibiotic era.
We stand today on the threshold of the post-antibiotic era, in the earliest days of a time when simple infections such as the one Joe had will kill people once again.
In fact, they already are.
People are dying of infections again because of a phenomenon called antibiotic resistance.
Briefly, it works like this.
Bacteria compete against each other for resources, for food, by manufacturing lethal compounds that they direct against each other.
Other bacteria, to protect themselves, evolve defenses against that chemical attack.
When we first made antibiotics, we took those compounds into the lab and made our own versions of them, and bacteria responded to our attack the way they always had.
Here is what happened next: Penicillin was distributed in 1943, and widespread penicillin resistance arrived by 1945.
Vancomycin arrived in 1972, vancomycin resistance in 1988.
Imipenem in 1985, and resistance to in 1998.
Daptomycin, one of the most recent drugs, in 2003, and resistance to it just a year later in 2004.
For 70 years, we played a game of leapfrog -- our drug and their resistance, and then another drug, and then resistance again -- and now the game is ending.
Bacteria develop resistance so quickly that pharmaceutical companies have decided making antibiotics is not in their best interest, so there are infections moving across the world for which, out of the more than 100 antibiotics available on the market, two drugs might work with side effects, or one drug, or none.
This is what that looks like.
In 2000, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the CDC, identified a single case in a hospital in North Carolina of an infection resistant to all but two drugs.
Today, that infection, known as KPC, has spread to every state but three, and to South America, Europe and the Middle East.
In 2008, doctors in Sweden diagnosed a man from India with a different infection resistant to all but one drug that time.
The gene that creates that resistance, known as NDM, has now spread from India into China, Asia, Africa, Europe and Canada, and the United States.
It would be natural to hope that these infections are extraordinary cases, but in fact, in the United States and Europe, 50,000 people a year die of infections which no drugs can help.
A project chartered by the British government known as the Review on Antimicrobial Resistance estimates that the worldwide toll right now is 700,000 deaths a year.
That is a lot of deaths, and yet, the chances are good that you don't feel at risk, that you imagine these people were hospital patients in intensive care units or nursing home residents near the ends of their lives, people whose infections are remote from us, in situations we can't identify with.
What you didn't think about, none of us do, is that antibiotics support almost all of modern life.
If we lost antibiotics, here's what else we'd lose: First, any protection for people with weakened immune systems -- cancer patients, AIDS patients, transplant recipients, premature babies.
Next, any treatment that installs foreign objects in the body: stents for stroke, pumps for diabetes, dialysis, joint replacements.
How many athletic baby boomers need new hips and knees?
A recent study estimates that without antibiotics, one out of ever six would die.
Next, we'd probably lose surgery.
Many operations are preceded by prophylactic doses of antibiotics.
Without that protection, we'd lose the ability to open the hidden spaces of the body.
So no heart operations, no prostate biopsies, no Cesarean sections.
We'd have to learn to fear infections that now seem minor.
Strep throat used to cause heart failure.
Skin infections led to amputations.
Giving birth killed, in the cleanest hospitals, almost one woman out of every 100.
Pneumonia took three children out of every 10.
More than anything else, we'd lose the confident way we live our everyday lives.
If you knew that any injury could kill you, would you ride a motorcycle, bomb down a ski slope, climb a ladder to hang your Christmas lights, let your kid slide into home plate?
After all, the first person to receive penicillin, a British policeman named Albert Alexander, who was so ravaged by infection that his scalp oozed pus and doctors had to take out an eye, was infected by doing something very simple.
He walked into his garden and scratched his face on a thorn.
That British project I mentioned which estimates that the worldwide toll right now is 700,000 deaths a year also predicts that if we can't get this under control by 2050, not long, the worldwide toll will be 10 million deaths a year.
How did we get to this point where what we have to look forward to is those terrifying numbers?
The difficult answer is, we did it to ourselves.
Resistance is an inevitable biological process, but we bear the responsibility for accelerating it.
We did this by squandering antibiotics with a heedlessness that now seems shocking.
Penicillin was sold over the counter until the 1950s.
In much of the developing world, most antibiotics still are.
In the United States, 50 percent of the antibiotics given in hospitals are unnecessary.
Forty-five percent of the prescriptions written in doctor's offices are for conditions that antibiotics cannot help.
And that's just in healthcare.
On much of the planet, most meat animals get antibiotics every day of their lives, not to cure illnesses, but to fatten them up and to protect them against the factory farm conditions they are raised in.
In the United States, possibly 80 percent of the antibiotics sold every year go to farm animals, not to humans, creating resistant bacteria that move off the farm in water, in dust, in the meat the animals become.
Aquaculture depends on antibiotics too, particularly in Asia, and fruit growing relies on antibiotics to protect apples, pears, citrus, against disease.
And because bacteria can pass their DNA to each other like a traveler handing off a suitcase at an airport, once we have encouraged that resistance into existence, there is no knowing where it will spread.
This was predictable.
In fact, it was predicted by Alexander Fleming, the man who discovered penicillin.
He was given the Nobel Prize in 1945 in recognition, and in an interview shortly after, this is what he said: "The thoughtless person playing with penicillin treatment is morally responsible for the death of a man who succumbs to infection with a pencillin-resistant organism."
He added, "I hope this evil can be averted."
Can we avert it?
There are companies working on novel antibiotics, things the superbugs have never seen before.
We need those new drugs badly, and we need incentives: discovery grants, extended patents, prizes, to lure other companies into making antibiotics again.
But that probably won't be enough.
Here's why: Evolution always wins.
Bacteria birth a new generation every 20 minutes.
It takes pharmaceutical chemistry 10 years to derive a new drug.
Every time we use an antibiotic, we give the bacteria billions of chances to crack the codes of the defenses we've constructed.
There has never yet been a drug they could not defeat.
This is asymmetric warfare, but we can change the outcome.
We could build systems to harvest data to tell us automatically and specifically how antibiotics are being used.
We could build gatekeeping into drug order systems so that every prescription gets a second look.
We could require agriculture to give up antibiotic use.
We could build surveillance systems to tell us where resistance is emerging next.
Those are the tech solutions.
They probably aren't enough either, unless we help.
Antibiotic resistance is a habit.
We all know how hard it is to change a habit.
But as a society, we've done that in the past.
People used to toss litter into the streets, used to not wear seatbelts, used to smoke inside public buildings.
We don't do those things anymore.
We don't trash the environment or court devastating accidents or expose others to the possibility of cancer, because we decided those things were expensive, destructive, not in our best interest.
We changed social norms.
We could change social norms around antibiotic use too.
I know that the scale of antibiotic resistance seems overwhelming, but if you've ever bought a fluorescent lightbulb because you were concerned about climate change, or read the label on a box of crackers because you think about the deforestation from palm oil, you already know what it feels like to take a tiny step to address an overwhelming problem.
We could take those kinds of steps for antibiotic use too.
We could forgo giving an antibiotic if we're not sure it's the right one.
We could stop insisting on a prescription for our kid's ear infection before we're sure what caused it.
We could ask every restaurant, every supermarket, where their meat comes from.
We could promise each other never again to buy chicken or shrimp or fruit raised with routine antibiotic use, and if we did those things, we could slow down the arrival of the post-antibiotic world.
But we have to do it soon.
Penicillin began the antibiotic era in 1943.
In just 70 years, we walked ourselves up to the edge of disaster.
We won't get 70 years to find our way back out again.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I grew up to study the brain because I have a brother who has been diagnosed with a brain disorder, schizophrenia.
And as a sister and later, as a scientist, I wanted to understand, why is it that I can take my dreams, I can connect them to my reality, and I can make my dreams come true?
What is it about my brother's brain and his schizophrenia that he cannot connect his dreams to a common and shared reality, so they instead become delusion?
So I dedicated my career to research into the severe mental illnesses.
And I moved from my home state of Indiana to Boston, where I was working in the lab of Dr. Francine Benes, in the Harvard Department of Psychiatry.
And in the lab, we were asking the question, "What are the biological differences between the brains of individuals who would be diagnosed as normal control, as compared with the brains of individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia, schizoaffective or bipolar disorder?"
So we were essentially mapping the microcircuitry of the brain: which cells are communicating with which cells, with which chemicals, and then in what quantities of those chemicals?
So there was a lot of meaning in my life because I was performing this type of research during the day, but then in the evenings and on the weekends, I traveled as an advocate for NAMI, the National Alliance on Mental Illness.
But on the morning of December 10, 1996, I woke up to discover that I had a brain disorder of my own.
A blood vessel exploded in the left half of my brain.
And in the course of four hours, I watched my brain completely deteriorate in its ability to process all information.
On the morning of the hemorrhage, I could not walk, talk, read, write or recall any of my life.
I essentially became an infant in a woman's body.
If you've ever seen a human brain, it's obvious that the two hemispheres are completely separate from one another.
And I have brought for you a real human brain.
(Groaning, laughter) So this is a real human brain.
This is the front of the brain, the back of brain with the spinal cord hanging down, and this is how it would be positioned inside of my head.
And when you look at the brain, it's obvious that the two cerebral cortices are completely separate from one another.
For those of you who understand computers, our right hemisphere functions like a parallel processor, while our left hemisphere functions like a serial processor.
The two hemispheres do communicate with one another through the corpus callosum, which is made up of some 300 million axonal fibers.
But other than that, the two hemispheres are completely separate.
Because they process information differently, each of our hemispheres think about different things, they care about different things, and, dare I say, they have very different personalities.
Excuse me. Thank you. It's been a joy.
(Laughter) Our right human hemisphere is all about this present moment.
It's all about "right here, right now."
Our right hemisphere, it thinks in pictures and it learns kinesthetically through the movement of our bodies.
Information, in the form of energy, streams in simultaneously through all of our sensory systems and then it explodes into this enormous collage of what this present moment looks like, what this present moment smells like and tastes like, what it feels like and what it sounds like.
I am an energy-being connected to the energy all around me through the consciousness of my right hemisphere.
We are energy-beings connected to one another through the consciousness of our right hemispheres as one human family.
And right here, right now, we are brothers and sisters on this planet, here to make the world a better place.
And in this moment we are perfect, we are whole and we are beautiful.
My left hemisphere, our left hemisphere, is a very different place.
Our left hemisphere thinks linearly and methodically.
Our left hemisphere is all about the past and it's all about the future.
Our left hemisphere is designed to take that enormous collage of the present moment and start picking out details, and more details about those details.
It then categorizes and organizes all that information, associates it with everything in the past we've ever learned, and projects into the future all of our possibilities.
And our left hemisphere thinks in language.
It's that ongoing brain chatter that connects me and my internal world to my external world.
It's that little voice that says to me, "Hey, you've got to remember to pick up bananas on your way home.
I need them in the morning."
It's that calculating intelligence that reminds me when I have to do my laundry.
But perhaps most important, it's that little voice that says to me, "I am. I am."
And as soon as my left hemisphere says to me "I am," I become separate.
I become a single solid individual, separate from the energy flow around me and separate from you.
And this was the portion of my brain that I lost on the morning of my stroke.
On the morning of the stroke, I woke up to a pounding pain behind my left eye.
And it was the kind of caustic pain that you get when you bite into ice cream.
And it just gripped me -- and then it released me.
And then it just gripped me -- and then it released me.
And it was very unusual for me to ever experience any kind of pain, so I thought, "OK, I'll just start my normal routine."
So I got up and I jumped onto my cardio glider, which is a full-body, full-exercise machine.
And I'm jamming away on this thing, and I'm realizing that my hands look like primitive claws grasping onto the bar.
And I looked down at my body and I thought, "Whoa, I'm a weird-looking thing."
And it was as though my consciousness had shifted away from my normal perception of reality, where I'm the person on the machine having the experience, to some esoteric space where I'm witnessing myself having this experience.
And it was all very peculiar, and my headache was just getting worse.
So I get off the machine, and I'm walking across my living room floor, and I realize that everything inside of my body has slowed way down.
There's no fluidity to my pace, and there's this constriction in my area of perception, so I'm just focused on internal systems.
And I'm standing in my bathroom getting ready to step into the shower, and I could actually hear the dialogue inside of my body.
I heard a little voice saying, "OK. You muscles, you've got to contract.
You muscles, you relax."
And then I lost my balance, and I'm propped up against the wall.
And I look down at my arm and I realize that I can no longer define the boundaries of my body.
I can't define where I begin and where I end, because the atoms and the molecules of my arm blended with the atoms and molecules of the wall.
And all I could detect was this energy -- energy.
And I'm asking myself, "What is wrong with me?
What is going on?"
And in that moment, my left hemisphere brain chatter went totally silent.
Just like someone took a remote control and pushed the mute button.
And at first I was shocked to find myself inside of a silent mind.
But then I was immediately captivated by the magnificence of the energy around me.
And because I could no longer identify the boundaries of my body, I felt enormous and expansive.
I felt at one with all the energy that was, and it was beautiful there.
Then all of a sudden my left hemisphere comes back online and it says to me, "Hey! We've got a problem!
We've got to get some help."
And I'm going, "Ahh! I've got a problem!"
(Laughter) So it's like, "OK, I've got a problem."
But then I immediately drifted right back out into the consciousness -- and I affectionately refer to this space as La La Land.
But it was beautiful there.
Imagine what it would be like to be totally disconnected from your brain chatter that connects you to the external world.
So here I am in this space, and my job, and any stress related to my job -- it was gone.
And I felt lighter in my body.
And imagine all of the relationships in the external world and any stressors related to any of those -- they were gone.
And I felt this sense of peacefulness.
And imagine what it would feel like to lose 37 years of emotional baggage!
(Laughter) Oh! I felt euphoria -- euphoria.
And again, my left hemisphere comes online and it says, "Hey! You've got to pay attention.
We've got to get help."
And I'm thinking, "I've got to get help. I've got to focus."
So I get out of the shower and I mechanically dress and I'm walking around my apartment, and I'm thinking, "I've got to get to work. Can I drive?"
And in that moment, my right arm went totally paralyzed by my side.
Then I realized, "Oh my gosh! I'm having a stroke!"
And the next thing my brain says to me is, Wow! This is so cool!
How many brain scientists have the opportunity to study their own brain from the inside out?"
(Laughter) And then it crosses my mind, "But I'm a very busy woman!"
(Laughter) "I don't have time for a stroke!"
So I'm like, "OK, I can't stop the stroke from happening, so I'll do this for a week or two, and then I'll get back to my routine. OK.
So I've got to call help. I've got to call work."
I couldn't remember the number at work, so I remembered, in my office I had a business card with my number.
So I go into my business room, I pull out a three-inch stack of business cards.
And I'm looking at the card on top and even though I could see clearly in my mind's eye what my business card looked like, I couldn't tell if this was my card or not, because all I could see were pixels.
And the pixels of the words blended with the pixels of the background and the pixels of the symbols, and I just couldn't tell.
And then I would wait for what I call a wave of clarity.
And in that moment, I would be able to reattach to normal reality and I could tell that's not the card... that's not the card.
It took me 45 minutes to get one inch down inside of that stack of cards.
In the meantime, for 45 minutes, the hemorrhage is getting bigger in my left hemisphere.
I do not understand numbers, I do not understand the telephone, but it's the only plan I have.
So I take the phone pad and I put it right here.
I take the business card, I put it right here, and I'm matching the shape of the squiggles on the card to the shape of the squiggles on the phone pad.
But then I would drift back out into La La Land, and not remember when I came back if I'd already dialed those numbers.
So I had to wield my paralyzed arm like a stump and cover the numbers as I went along and pushed them, so that as I would come back to normal reality, I'd be able to tell, "Yes, I've already dialed that number."
Eventually, the whole number gets dialed and I'm listening to the phone, and my colleague picks up the phone and he says to me, "Woo woo woo woo." (Laughter) (Laughter) And I think to myself, "Oh my gosh, he sounds like a Golden Retriever!"
(Laughter) And so I say to him -- clear in my mind, I say to him: "This is Jill! I need help!"
And what comes out of my voice is, "Woo woo woo woo woo."
I'm thinking, "Oh my gosh, I sound like a Golden Retriever."
So I couldn't know -- I didn't know that I couldn't speak or understand language until I tried.
So he recognizes that I need help and he gets me help.
And a little while later, I am riding in an ambulance from one hospital across Boston to [Massachusetts] General Hospital.
And I curl up into a little fetal ball.
And just like a balloon with the last bit of air, just right out of the balloon, I just felt my energy lift and just I felt my spirit surrender.
And in that moment, I knew that I was no longer the choreographer of my life.
And either the doctors rescue my body and give me a second chance at life, or this was perhaps my moment of transition.
When I woke later that afternoon, I was shocked to discover that I was still alive.
When I felt my spirit surrender, I said goodbye to my life.
And my mind was now suspended between two very opposite planes of reality.
Stimulation coming in through my sensory systems felt like pure pain.
Light burned my brain like wildfire, and sounds were so loud and chaotic that I could not pick a voice out from the background noise, and I just wanted to escape.
Because I could not identify the position of my body in space, I felt enormous and expansive, like a genie just liberated from her bottle.
And my spirit soared free, like a great whale gliding through the sea of silent euphoria.
Nirvana.
And I remember thinking, there's no way I would ever be able to squeeze the enormousness of myself back inside this tiny little body.
But then I realized, "But I'm still alive!
I'm still alive, and I have found Nirvana.
And if I have found Nirvana and I'm still alive, then everyone who is alive can find Nirvana."
And I pictured a world filled with beautiful, peaceful, compassionate, loving people who knew that they could come to this space at any time.
And that they could purposely choose to step to the right of their left hemispheres -- and find this peace.
And then I realized what a tremendous gift this experience could be, what a stroke of insight this could be to how we live our lives.
Two and a half weeks after the hemorrhage, the surgeons went in, and they removed a blood clot the size of a golf ball that was pushing on my language centers.
Here I am with my mama, who is a true angel in my life.
So who are we?
We are the life-force power of the universe, with manual dexterity and two cognitive minds.
And we have the power to choose, moment by moment, who and how we want to be in the world.
Right here, right now, I can step into the consciousness of my right hemisphere, where we are.
I am the life-force power of the universe.
I am the life-force power of the 50 trillion beautiful molecular geniuses that make up my form, at one with all that is.
Or, I can choose to step into the consciousness of my left hemisphere, where I become a single individual, a solid.
I am Dr. Jill Bolte Taylor: intellectual, neuroanatomist.
Which would you choose?
And when?
I believe that the more time we spend choosing to run the deep inner-peace circuitry of our right hemispheres, the more peace we will project into the world, and the more peaceful our planet will be.
So in 1885, Karl Benz invented the automobile.
Later that year, he took it out for the first public test drive, and -- true story -- crashed into a wall.
For the last 130 years, we've been working around that least reliable part of the car, the driver.
We've made the car stronger.
We've added seat belts, we've added air bags, and in the last decade, we've actually started trying to make the car smarter to fix that bug, the driver.
Now, today I'm going to talk to you a little bit about the difference between patching around the problem with driver assistance systems and actually having fully self-driving cars and what they can do for the world.
I'm also going to talk to you a little bit about our car and allow you to see how it sees the world and how it reacts and what it does, but first I'm going to talk a little bit about the problem.
And it's a big problem: 1.2 million people are killed on the world's roads every year.
In America alone, 33,000 people are killed each year.
To put that in perspective, that's the same as a 737 falling out of the sky every working day.
It's kind of unbelievable.
Cars are sold to us like this, but really, this is what driving's like.
Right? It's not sunny, it's rainy, and you want to do anything other than drive.
And the reason why is this: Traffic is getting worse.
In America, between 1990 and 2010, the vehicle miles traveled increased by 38 percent.
We grew by six percent of roads, so it's not in your brains.
Traffic really is substantially worse than it was not very long ago.
And all of this has a very human cost.
So if you take the average commute time in America, which is about 50 minutes, you multiply that by the 120 million workers we have, that turns out to be about six billion minutes wasted in commuting every day.
Now, that's a big number, so let's put it in perspective.
You take that six billion minutes and you divide it by the average life expectancy of a person, that turns out to be 162 lifetimes spent every day, wasted, just getting from A to B.
It's unbelievable.
And then, there are those of us who don't have the privilege of sitting in traffic.
So this is Steve.
He's an incredibly capable guy, but he just happens to be blind, and that means instead of a 30-minute drive to work in the morning, it's a two-hour ordeal of piecing together bits of public transit or asking friends and family for a ride.
He doesn't have that same freedom that you and I have to get around.
We should do something about that.
Now, conventional wisdom would say that we'll just take these driver assistance systems and we'll kind of push them and incrementally improve them, and over time, they'll turn into self-driving cars.
Well, I'm here to tell you that's like me saying that if I work really hard at jumping, one day I'll be able to fly.
We actually need to do something a little different.
And so I'm going to talk to you about three different ways that self-driving systems are different than driver assistance systems.
And I'm going to start with some of our own experience.
So back in 2013, we had the first test of a self-driving car where we let regular people use it.
Well, almost regular -- they were 100 Googlers, but they weren't working on the project.
And we gave them the car and we allowed them to use it in their daily lives.
But unlike a real self-driving car, this one had a big asterisk with it: They had to pay attention, because this was an experimental vehicle.
We tested it a lot, but it could still fail.
And so we gave them two hours of training, we put them in the car, we let them use it, and what we heard back was something awesome, as someone trying to bring a product into the world.
Every one of them told us they loved it.
In fact, we had a Porsche driver who came in and told us on the first day, "This is completely stupid. What are we thinking?"
But at the end of it, he said, "Not only should I have it, everyone else should have it, because people are terrible drivers."
So this was music to our ears, but then we started to look at what the people inside the car were doing, and this was eye-opening.
Now, my favorite story is this gentleman who looks down at his phone and realizes the battery is low, so he turns around like this in the car and digs around in his backpack, pulls out his laptop, puts it on the seat, goes in the back again, digs around, pulls out the charging cable for his phone, futzes around, puts it into the laptop, puts it on the phone.
Sure enough, the phone is charging.
All the time he's been doing 65 miles per hour down the freeway.
Right? Unbelievable.
So we thought about this and we said, it's kind of obvious, right?
The better the technology gets, the less reliable the driver is going to get.
So by just making the cars incrementally smarter, we're probably not going to see the wins we really need.
Let me talk about something a little technical for a moment here.
So we're looking at this graph, and along the bottom is how often does the car apply the brakes when it shouldn't.
You can ignore most of that axis, because if you're driving around town, and the car starts stopping randomly, you're never going to buy that car.
And the vertical axis is how often the car is going to apply the brakes when it's supposed to to help you avoid an accident.
Now, if we look at the bottom left corner here, this is your classic car.
It doesn't apply the brakes for you, it doesn't do anything goofy, but it also doesn't get you out of an accident.
Now, if we want to bring a driver assistance system into a car, say with collision mitigation braking, we're going to put some package of technology on there, and that's this curve, and it's going to have some operating properties, but it's never going to avoid all of the accidents, because it doesn't have that capability.
But we'll pick some place along the curve here, and maybe it avoids half of accidents that the human driver misses, and that's amazing, right?
There are now 17,000 less people dying every year in America.
But if we want a self-driving car, we need a technology curve that looks like this.
We're going to have to put more sensors in the vehicle, and we'll pick some operating point up here where it basically never gets into a crash.
They'll happen, but very low frequency.
Now you and I could look at this and we could argue about whether it's incremental, and I could say something like "80-20 rule," and it's really hard to move up to that new curve.
But let's look at it from a different direction for a moment.
So let's look at how often the technology has to do the right thing.
And so this green dot up here is a driver assistance system.
It turns out that human drivers make mistakes that lead to traffic accidents about once every 100,000 miles in America.
In contrast, a self-driving system is probably making decisions about 10 times per second, so order of magnitude, that's about 1,000 times per mile.
So if you compare the distance between these two, it's about 10 to the eighth, right?
Eight orders of magnitude.
That's like comparing how fast I run to the speed of light.
It doesn't matter how hard I train, I'm never actually going to get there.
So there's a pretty big gap there.
And then finally, there's how the system can handle uncertainty.
So this pedestrian here might be stepping into the road, might not be.
I can't tell, nor can any of our algorithms, but in the case of a driver assistance system, that means it can't take action, because again, if it presses the brakes unexpectedly, that's completely unacceptable.
Whereas a self-driving system can look at that pedestrian and say, I don't know what they're about to do, slow down, take a better look, and then react appropriately after that.
So it can be much safer than a driver assistance system can ever be.
So that's enough about the differences between the two.
Let's spend some time talking about how the car sees the world.
So this is our vehicle.
It starts by understanding where it is in the world, by taking a map and its sensor data and aligning the two, and then we layer on top of that what it sees in the moment.
So here, all the purple boxes you can see are other vehicles on the road, and the red thing on the side over there is a cyclist, and up in the distance, if you look really closely, you can see some cones.
Then we know where the car is in the moment, but we have to do better than that: we have to predict what's going to happen.
So here the pickup truck in top right is about to make a left lane change because the road in front of it is closed, so it needs to get out of the way.
Knowing that one pickup truck is great, but we really need to know what everybody's thinking, so it becomes quite a complicated problem.
And then given that, we can figure out how the car should respond in the moment, so what trajectory it should follow, how quickly it should slow down or speed up.
And then that all turns into just following a path: turning the steering wheel left or right, pressing the brake or gas.
It's really just two numbers at the end of the day.
So how hard can it really be?
Back when we started in 2009, this is what our system looked like.
So you can see our car in the middle and the other boxes on the road, driving down the highway.
The car needs to understand where it is and roughly where the other vehicles are.
It's really a geometric understanding of the world.
Once we started driving on neighborhood and city streets, the problem becomes a whole new level of difficulty.
You see pedestrians crossing in front of us, cars crossing in front of us, going every which way, the traffic lights, crosswalks.
It's an incredibly complicated problem by comparison.
And then once you have that problem solved, the vehicle has to be able to deal with construction.
So here are the cones on the left forcing it to drive to the right, but not just construction in isolation, of course.
It has to deal with other people moving through that construction zone as well.
And of course, if anyone's breaking the rules, the police are there and the car has to understand that that flashing light on the top of the car means that it's not just a car, it's actually a police officer.
Similarly, the orange box on the side here, it's a school bus, and we have to treat that differently as well.
When we're out on the road, other people have expectations: So, when a cyclist puts up their arm, it means they're expecting the car to yield to them and make room for them to make a lane change.
And when a police officer stood in the road, our vehicle should understand that this means stop, and when they signal to go, we should continue.
Now, the way we accomplish this is by sharing data between the vehicles.
The first, most crude model of this is when one vehicle sees a construction zone, having another know about it so it can be in the correct lane to avoid some of the difficulty.
But we actually have a much deeper understanding of this.
We could take all of the data that the cars have seen over time, the hundreds of thousands of pedestrians, cyclists, and vehicles that have been out there and understand what they look like and use that to infer what other vehicles should look like and other pedestrians should look like.
And then, even more importantly, we could take from that a model of how we expect them to move through the world.
So here the yellow box is a pedestrian crossing in front of us.
Here the blue box is a cyclist and we anticipate that they're going to nudge out and around the car to the right.
Here there's a cyclist coming down the road and we know they're going to continue to drive down the shape of the road.
Here somebody makes a right turn, and in a moment here, somebody's going to make a U-turn in front of us, and we can anticipate that behavior and respond safely.
Now, that's all well and good for things that we've seen, but of course, you encounter lots of things that you haven't seen in the world before.
And so just a couple of months ago, our vehicles were driving through Mountain View, and this is what we encountered.
This is a woman in an electric wheelchair chasing a duck in circles on the road. (Laughter) Now it turns out, there is nowhere in the DMV handbook that tells you how to deal with that, but our vehicles were able to encounter that, slow down, and drive safely.
Now, we don't have to deal with just ducks.
Watch this bird fly across in front of us. The car reacts to that.
Here we're dealing with a cyclist that you would never expect to see anywhere other than Mountain View.
And of course, we have to deal with drivers, even the very small ones.
Watch to the right as someone jumps out of this truck at us.
And now, watch the left as the car with the green box decides he needs to make a right turn at the last possible moment.
Here, as we make a lane change, the car to our left decides it wants to as well.
And here, we watch a car blow through a red light and yield to it.
And similarly, here, a cyclist blowing through that light as well.
And of course, the vehicle responds safely.
And of course, we have people who do I don't know what sometimes on the road, like this guy pulling out between two self-driving cars.
You have to ask, "What are you thinking?"
(Laughter) Now, I just fire-hosed you with a lot of stuff there, so I'm going to break one of these down pretty quickly.
So what we're looking at is the scene with the cyclist again, and you might notice in the bottom, we can't actually see the cyclist yet, but the car can: it's that little blue box up there, and that comes from the laser data.
And that's not actually really easy to understand, so what I'm going to do is I'm going to turn that laser data and look at it, and if you're really good at looking at laser data, you can see a few dots on the curve there, right there, and that blue box is that cyclist.
Now as our light is red, the cyclist's light has turned yellow already, and if you squint, you can see that in the imagery.
But the cyclist, we see, is going to proceed through the intersection.
Our light has now turned green, his is solidly red, and we now anticipate that this bike is going to come all the way across.
Unfortunately the other drivers next to us were not paying as much attention.
They started to pull forward, and fortunately for everyone, this cyclists reacts, avoids, and makes it through the intersection.
And off we go.
Now, as you can see, we've made some pretty exciting progress, and at this point we're pretty convinced this technology is going to come to market.
We do three million miles of testing in our simulators every single day, so you can imagine the experience that our vehicles have.
We are looking forward to having this technology on the road, and we think the right path is to go through the self-driving rather than driver assistance approach because the urgency is so large.
In the time I have given this talk today, 34 people have died on America's roads.
How soon can we bring it out?
Well, it's hard to say because it's a really complicated problem, but these are my two boys.
My oldest son is 11, and that means in four and a half years, he's going to be able to get his driver's license.
My team and I are committed to making sure that doesn't happen.
Thank you.
(Laughter) (Applause) Chris Anderson: Chris, I've got a question for you.
Chris Urmson: Sure.
CA: So certainly, the mind of your cars is pretty mind-boggling.
On this debate between driver-assisted and fully driverless -- I mean, there's a real debate going on out there right now.
So some of the companies, for example, Tesla, are going the driver-assisted route.
What you're saying is that that's kind of going to be a dead end because you can't just keep improving that route and get to fully driverless at some point, and then a driver is going to say, "This feels safe," and climb into the back, and something ugly will happen.
CU: Right. No, that's exactly right, and it's not to say that the driver assistance systems aren't going to be incredibly valuable.
They can save a lot of lives in the interim, but to see the transformative opportunity to help someone like Steve get around, to really get to the end case in safety, to have the opportunity to change our cities and move parking out and get rid of these urban craters we call parking lots, it's the only way to go.
CA: We will be tracking your progress with huge interest.
Thanks so much, Chris. CU: Thank you. (Applause)
The way we tell stories has naturally changed since Aristotle defined the rules of tragedy about 2,500 years ago.
According to him, the role of storytelling is to mimic life and make us feel emotions.
And that's exactly what storytelling as we know it has done very well since then.
But there is a dimension of life that storytelling could never really reproduce.
It is the notion of choices.
Choices are a very important part of our lives.
We as individuals are defined by the choices we make.
Some of our decisions can have very significant consequences and totally change the courses of our lives.
But in a play, a novel or a film, the writer makes all the decisions in advance for the characters, and as the audience, we can only watch, passively, the consequences of his decisions.
As a storyteller, I've always been fascinated with the idea of recreating this notion of choices in fiction.
My dream was to put the audience in the shoes of the main protagonists, let them make their own decisions, and by doing so, let them tell their own stories.
Finding a way to achieve this is what I did in the past 20 years of my life.
Today, I would like to introduce you to this new way of telling stories, a way that has interactivity at its heart.
Rather than exposing the theory behind it, which could have been kind of abstract and probably a little bit boring, I thought it would be a great opportunity to do a little experiment.
I would like you, the people here at TED, to tell your own story.
So I came with an interactive scene that we are going to play together.
I've asked Vicky -- hello, Vicky -- to control the main character for us.
And your role -- you, the audience -- will be to make the choices.
So Vicky and I don't know what's going to happen, because it will all be based on your decisions.
This scene comes from our next game, called "Detroit: Become Human," and we are in the near future, where technology made possible the creation of androids that look exactly like human beings.
We are in the shoes of this character called Connor, who is an android, and he can do very fancy things with coins, as you can see.
He has this blue triangle on this chest, as all androids do, and now Vicky is in control of this character.
She can walk around, she can go anywhere, she can look around, she can interact with her environment, and now she can tell her own stories by making choices.
So here we have our first choice.
There is a fish on the ground.
What should we do?
Should we save it or should we leave it?
Remember, we are under time pressure, so we'd better be fast.
What should we do?
Audience: Save it!
David Cage: Save it? Save the fish?
(Video) (Fish plops) DC: There we go.
OK, we have an android who likes animals.
OK, let's move on.
Remember, we have a hostage situation.
(Video) Woman: Please, please, you've got to save my little girl!
Wait -- you're sending an android?
Officer: All right, ma'am, you need to go.
W: You can't do that!
Why aren't you sending a real person?
DC: OK, she's not really happy.
Her daughter's been taken hostage by an android, and of course, she's in a state of shock.
Now we can continue to explore this apartment.
We see all the SWAT forces in place.
But we need to find this Captain Allen first.
That's the first thing we need to do.
So, again, we can go anywhere.
Vicky's still in control of the character.
Let's see -- oh, I think this is Captain Allen. He's on the phone.
(Video) Connor: Captain Allen, my name is Connor.
I'm the android sent by CyberLife.
Captain Allen: Let's fire at everything that moves.
It already shot down two of my men.
We could easily get it, but they're on the edge of the balcony -- it if falls, she falls.
DC: OK, now we need to decide what we want to ask the captain.
What should be our choice?
Deviant's name? Deviant's behavior? Emotional shock?
(Video) C: Has it experienced an emotional shock recently?
Capt A: I haven't got a clue. Does it matter?
C: I need information to determine the best approach.
DC: OK, a second choice. Maybe we can learn something.
What should we choose?
Audience: Behavior.
DC: OK, deviant behavior, Vicky.
(Video) C: Do you know if it's been behaving strangely before this?
Capt A: Listen ... saving that kid is all that matters.
DC: OK, we are not going to learn anything from this guy.
We need to do something.
Let's try to go back in the lobby.
Oh, wait -- there's a room over there on your right, Vicky, I think.
Maybe there's something we can learn here.
Oh, there's a tablet.
Let's have a look.
(Video) Girl: This is Daniel, the coolest android in the world.
Say "Hi," Daniel.
Daniel: Hello!
G: You're my bestie, we'll always be together!
DC: That was just one way of playing the scenes, but there are many other ways of playing it.
Depending on the choices you make, we could have seen many different actions, many different consequences, many different outcomes.
So that gives you an idea of what my work is about as an interactive writer.
Where a linear writer needs to deal with time and space, as an interactive writer, I need to deal with time, space and possibilities.
I have to manage massive tree structures, where each branch is a new variation of the story.
I need to think about all the possibilities in a given scene and try to imagine everything that can happen.
I need to deal with thousands and thousands of variables, conditions and possibilities.
As a consequence, where a film script is about 100 pages, an interactive script like this is between four and five thousand pages.
So that gives you an idea of what this work is about.
But I think, in the end, the experience is very unique, because it is the result of the collaboration between a writer creating this narrative landscape and the player making his own decisions, telling his own story and becoming the cowriter but also the coactor and the codirector of the story.
Interactive storytelling is a revolution in the way we tell stories.
With the emergence of new platforms like interactive television, virtual reality and video games, it can become a new form of entertainment and maybe even a new form of art.
I am convinced that in the coming years, we will see more and more moving and meaningful interactive experiences, created by a new generation of talents.
This is a medium waiting for its Orson Welles or its Stanley Kubrick, and I have no doubt that they will soon emerge and be recognized as such.
I believe that interactive storytelling can be what cinema was in the 20th century: an art that deeply changes its time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When you're a child, anything and everything is possible.
The challenge, so often, is hanging on to that as we grow up.
And as a four-year-old, I had the opportunity to sail for the first time.
I will never forget the excitement as we closed the coast.
I will never forget the feeling of adventure as I climbed on board the boat and stared into her tiny cabin for the first time.
But the most amazing feeling was the feeling of freedom, the feeling that I felt when we hoisted her sails.
As a four-year-old child, it was the greatest sense of freedom that I could ever imagine.
I made my mind up there and then that one day, somehow, I was going to sail around the world.
So I did what I could in my life to get closer to that dream.
Age 10, it was saving my school dinner money change.
Every single day for eight years, I had mashed potato and baked beans, which cost 4p each, and gravy was free.
Every day I would pile up the change on the top of my money box, and when that pile reached a pound, I would drop it in and cross off one of the 100 squares I'd drawn on a piece of paper.
Finally, I bought a tiny dinghy.
I spent hours sitting on it in the garden dreaming of my goal.
I read every book I could on sailing, and then eventually, having been told by my school I wasn't clever enough to be a vet, left school age 17 to begin my apprenticeship in sailing.
So imagine how it felt just four years later to be sitting in a boardroom in front of someone who I knew could make that dream come true.
I felt like my life depended on that moment, and incredibly, he said yes.
And I could barely contain my excitement as I sat in that first design meeting designing a boat on which I was going to sail solo nonstop around the world.
From that first meeting to the finish line of the race, it was everything I'd ever imagined.
Just like in my dreams, there were amazing parts and tough parts.
We missed an iceberg by 20 feet.
Nine times, I climbed to the top of her 90-foot mast.
We were blown on our side in the Southern Ocean.
But the sunsets, the wildlife, and the remoteness were absolutely breathtaking.
After three months at sea, age just 24, I finished in second position.
I'd loved it, so much so that within six months I decided to go around the world again, but this time not in a race: to try to be the fastest person ever to sail solo nonstop around the world.
Now for this, I needed a different craft: bigger, wider, faster, more powerful.
Just to give that boat some scale, I could climb inside her mast all the way to the top.
Seventy-five foot long, 60 foot wide.
I affectionately called her Moby.
She was a multihull.
When we built her, no one had ever made it solo nonstop around the world in one, though many had tried, but whilst we built her, a Frenchman took a boat 25 percent bigger than her and not only did he make it, but he took the record from 93 days right down to 72.
The bar was now much, much higher.
And these boats were exciting to sail.
This was a training sail off the French coast.
This I know well because I was one of the five crew members on board.
Five seconds is all it took from everything being fine to our world going black as the windows were thrust underwater, and that five seconds goes quickly.
Just see how far below those guys the sea is.
Imagine that alone in the Southern Ocean plunged into icy water, thousands of miles away from land.
It was Christmas Day.
I was forging into the Southern Ocean underneath Australia.
The conditions were horrendous.
I was approaching a part in the ocean which was 2,000 miles away from the nearest town.
The nearest land was Antarctica, and the nearest people would be those manning the European Space Station above me.
(Laughter) You really are in the middle of nowhere.
If you need help, and you're still alive, it takes four days for a ship to get to you and then four days for that ship to get you back to port.
No helicopter can reach you out there, and no plane can land.
We are forging ahead of a huge storm.
Within it, there was 80 knots of wind, which was far too much wind for the boat and I to cope with.
The waves were already 40 to 50 feet high, and the spray from the breaking crests was blown horizontally like snow in a blizzard.
If we didn't sail fast enough, we'd be engulfed by that storm, and either capsized or smashed to pieces.
We were quite literally hanging on for our lives and doing so on a knife edge.
The speed I so desperately needed brought with it danger.
We all know what it's like driving a car 20 miles an hour, 30, 40.
It's not too stressful. We can concentrate.
We can turn on the radio.
Take that 50, 60, 70, accelerate through to 80, 90, 100 miles an hour.
Now you have white knuckles and you're gripping the steering wheel.
Now take that car off road at night and remove the windscreen wipers, the windscreen, the headlights and the brakes.
That's what it's like in the Southern Ocean.
(Laughter) (Applause) You could imagine it would be quite difficult to sleep in that situation, even as a passenger.
But you're not a passenger.
You're alone on a boat you can barely stand up in, and you have to make every single decision on board.
I was absolutely exhausted, physically and mentally.
Eight sail changes in 12 hours.
The mainsail weighed three times my body weight, and after each change, I would collapse on the floor soaked with sweat with this freezing Southern Ocean air burning the back of my throat.
But out there, those lowest of the lows are so often contrasted with the highest of the highs.
A few days later, we came out of the back of the low.
Against all odds, we'd been able to drive ahead of the record within that depression.
The sky cleared, the rain stopped, and our heartbeat, the monstrous seas around us were transformed into the most beautiful moonlit mountains.
It's hard to explain, but you enter a different mode when you head out there.
Your boat is your entire world, and what you take with you when you leave is all you have.
If I said to you all now, "Go off into Vancouver and find everything you will need for your survival for the next three months," that's quite a task.
That's food, fuel, clothes, even toilet roll and toothpaste.
That's what we do, and when we leave we manage it down to the last drop of diesel and the last packet of food.
No experience in my life could have given me a better understanding of the definition of the word "finite."
What we have out there is all we have.
There is no more.
And never in my life had I ever translated that definition of finite that I'd felt on board to anything outside of sailing until I stepped off the boat at the finish line having broken that record.
(Applause) Suddenly I connected the dots.
Our global economy is no different.
It's entirely dependent on finite materials we only have once in the history of humanity.
And it was a bit like seeing something you weren't expecting under a stone and having two choices: I either put that stone to one side and learn more about it, or I put that stone back and I carry on with my dream job of sailing around the world.
I chose the first.
I put it to one side and I began a new journey of learning, speaking to chief executives, experts, scientists, economists to try to understand just how our global economy works.
And my curiosity took me to some extraordinary places.
This photo was taken in the burner of a coal-fired power station.
I was fascinated by coal, fundamental to our global energy needs, but also very close to my family.
My great-grandfather was a coal miner, and he spent 50 years of his life underground.
This is a photo of him, and when you see that photo, you see someone from another era.
No one wears trousers with a waistband quite that high in this day and age. (Laughter) But yet, that's me with my great-grandfather, and by the way, they are not his real ears. (Laughter) We were close. I remember sitting on his knee listening to his mining stories.
He talked of the camaraderie underground, and the fact that the miners used to save the crusts of their sandwiches to give to the ponies they worked with underground.
It was like it was yesterday.
And on my journey of learning, I went to the World Coal Association website, and there in the middle of the homepage, it said, "We have about 118 years of coal left."
And I thought to myself, well, that's well outside my lifetime, and a much greater figure than the predictions for oil.
But I did the math, and I realized that my great-grandfather had been born exactly 118 years before that year, and I sat on his knee until I was 11 years old, and I realized it's nothing in time, nor in history.
And it made me make a decision I never thought I would make: to leave the sport of solo sailing behind me and focus on the greatest challenge I'd ever come across: the future of our global economy.
And I quickly realized it wasn't just about energy.
It was also materials.
In 2008, I picked up a scientific study looking at how many years we have of valuable materials to extract from the ground: copper, 61; tin, zinc, 40; silver, 29.
These figures couldn't be exact, but we knew those materials were finite.
We only have them once.
And yet, our speed that we've used these materials has increased rapidly, exponentially.
With more people in the world with more stuff, we've effectively seen 100 years of price declines in those basic commodities erased in just 10 years.
And this affects all of us.
It's brought huge volatility in prices, so much so that in 2011, your average European car manufacturer saw a raw material price increase of 500 million Euros, wiping away half their operating profits through something they have absolutely no control over.
And the more I learned, the more I started to change my own life.
I started traveling less, doing less, using less.
It felt like actually doing less was what we had to do.
But it sat uneasy with me.
It didn't feel right.
It felt like we were buying ourselves time.
We were eking things out a bit longer.
Even if everybody changed, it wouldn't solve the problem.
It wouldn't fix the system.
It was vital in the transition, but what fascinated me was, in the transition to what? What could actually work?
It struck me that the system itself, the framework within which we live, is fundamentally flawed, and I realized ultimately that our operating system, the way our economy functions, the way our economy's been built, is a system in itself.
At sea, I had to understand complex systems.
I had to take multiple inputs, I had to process them, and I had to understand the system to win.
I had to make sense of it.
And as I looked at our global economy, I realized it too is that system, but it's a system that effectively can't run in the long term.
And I realized we've been perfecting what's effectively a linear economy for 150 years, where we take a material out of the ground, we make something out of it, and then ultimately that product gets thrown away, and yes, we do recycle some of it, but more an attempt to get out what we can at the end, not by design.
It's an economy that fundamentally can't run in the long term, and if we know that we have finite materials, why would we build an economy that would effectively use things up, that would create waste?
Life itself has existed for billions of years and has continually adapted to use materials effectively.
It's a complex system, but within it, there is no waste.
Everything is metabolized.
It's not a linear economy at all, but circular.
And I felt like the child in the garden.
For the first time on this new journey, I could see exactly where we were headed.
If we could build an economy that would use things rather than use them up, we could build a future that really could work in the long term.
I was excited.
This was something to work towards.
We knew exactly where we were headed. We just had to work out how to get there, and it was exactly with this in mind that we created the Ellen MacArthur Foundation in September 2010.
Many schools of thought fed our thinking and pointed to this model: industrial symbiosis, performance economy, sharing economy, biomimicry, and of course, cradle-to-cradle design.
Materials would be defined as either technical or biological, waste would be designed out entirely, and we would have a system that could function absolutely in the long term.
So what could this economy look like?
Maybe we wouldn't buy light fittings, but we'd pay for the service of light, and the manufacturers would recover the materials and change the light fittings when we had more efficient products.
What if packaging was so nontoxic it could dissolve in water and we could ultimately drink it? It would never become waste.
What if engines were re-manufacturable, and we could recover the component materials and significantly reduce energy demand.
What if we could recover components from circuit boards, reutilize them, and then fundamentally recover the materials within them through a second stage?
What if we could collect food waste, human waste?
What if we could turn that into fertilizer, heat, energy, ultimately reconnecting nutrients systems and rebuilding natural capital?
And cars -- what we want is to move around.
We don't need to own the materials within them.
Could cars become a service and provide us with mobility in the future?
All of this sounds amazing, but these aren't just ideas, they're real today, and these lie at the forefront of the circular economy.
What lies before us is to expand them and scale them up.
So how would you shift from linear to circular?
Well, the team and I at the foundation thought you might want to work with the top universities in the world, with leading businesses within the world, with the biggest convening platforms in the world, and with governments.
We thought you might want to work with the best analysts and ask them the question, "Can the circular economy decouple growth from resource constraints?
Is the circular economy able to rebuild natural capital?
Could the circular economy replace current chemical fertilizer use?"
Yes was the answer to the decoupling, but also yes, we could replace current fertilizer use by a staggering 2.7 times.
But what inspired me most about the circular economy was its ability to inspire young people.
When young people see the economy through a circular lens, they see brand new opportunities on exactly the same horizon.
They can use their creativity and knowledge to rebuild the entire system, and it's there for the taking right now, and the faster we do this, the better.
So could we achieve this in their lifetimes?
Is it actually possible?
I believe yes.
When you look at the lifetime of my great-grandfather, anything's possible.
When he was born, there were only 25 cars in the world; they had only just been invented.
When he was 14, we flew for the first time in history.
Now there are 100,000 charter flights every single day.
When he was 45, we built the first computer.
Many said it wouldn't catch on, but it did, and just 20 years later we turned it into a microchip of which there will be thousands in this room here today.
Ten years before he died, we built the first mobile phone.
It wasn't that mobile, to be fair, but now it really is, and as my great-grandfather left this Earth, the Internet arrived.
Now we can do anything, but more importantly, now we have a plan.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As a matter of fact, I was trying to think about my career since I left the White House, and the best example I have is a cartoon in The New Yorker a couple of years ago.
This little boy is looking up at his father, and he says, "Daddy, when I grow up, I want to be a former president."
(Laughter) Well, I have had a great blessing as a former president, because I have had an access that very few other people in the world have ever had to get to know so many people around this whole universe.
Not only am I familiar with the 50 states in the United States, but also my wife and I have visited more than 145 countries in the world, and the Carter Center has had full-time programs in 80 nations on Earth.
And a lot of times, when we go into a country, we not only the meet the king or the president, but we also meet the villagers who live in the most remote areas of Africa.
So our overall commitment at the Carter Center is to promote human rights, and knowing the world as I do, I can tell you without any equivocation that the number one abuse of human rights on Earth is, strangely, not addressed quite often, is the abuse of women and girls.
(Applause) There are a couple of reasons for this that I'll mention to begin with.
First of all is the misinterpretation of religious scriptures, holy scriptures, in the Bible, Old Testament, New Testament, Quran and so forth, and these have been misinterpreted by men who are now in the ascendant positions in the synagogues and the churches and in the mosques.
And they interpret these rules to make sure that women are ordinarily relegated to a secondary position compared to men in the eyes of God.
This is a very serious problem. It's ordinarily not addressed.
A number of years ago, in the year 2000, I had been a Baptist, a Southern Baptist for 70 years -- I tell you, I still teach Sunday school every Sunday; I'll be teaching this Sunday as well -- but the Southern Baptist Convention in the year 2000 decided that women should play a secondary position, a subservient position to men.
So they issued an edict, in effect, that prevents women from being priests, pastors, deacons in the church, or chaplains in the military, and if a woman teaches a classroom in a Southern Baptist seminary, they cannot teach if a boy is in the room, because you can find verses in the Bible, there's over 30,000 verses in the Bible, that say that a woman shouldn't teach a man, and so forth.
But the basic thing is the scriptures are misinterpreted to keep men in an ascendant position.
That is an all-pervasive problem, because men can exert that power and if an abusive husband or an employer, for instance, wants to cheat women, they can say that if women are not equal in the eyes of God, why should I treat them as equals myself?
Why should I pay them equal pay for doing the same kind of work?
The other very serious blight that causes this problem is the excessive resort to violence, and that is increasing tremendously around the world.
In the United States of America, for instance, we have had an enormous increase in abuse of poor people, mostly black people and minorities, by putting them in prison.
When I was in office as governor of Georgia, one out of every 1,000 Americans were in prison.
Nowadays, 7.3 people per 1,000 are in prison.
That's a sevenfold increase.
And since I left the White House, there's been an 800 percent increase in the number of women who are black who are in prison.
We also have [one of the only countries] on Earth that still has the death penalty that is a developed country.
And we rank right alongside the countries that are most abusive in all elements of human rights in encouraging the death penalty.
We're in California now, and I figured out the other day that California has spent four billion dollars in convicting 13 people for the death penalty.
If you add that up, that's 307 million dollars it costs California to send a person to be executed.
Nebraska this week just passed a law abolishing the death penalty, because it costs so much. (Applause) So the resort to violence and abuse of poor people and helpless people is another cause of the increase in abuse of women.
Let me just go down a very few abuses of women that concern me most, and I'll be fairly brief, because I have a limited amount of time, as you know.
One is genital mutilation.
Genital mutilation is horrible and not known by American women, but in some countries, many countries, when a child is born that's a girl, very soon in her life, her genitals are completely cut away by a so-called cutter who has a razor blade and, in a non-sterilized way, they remove the exterior parts of a woman's genitalia.
And sometimes, in more extreme cases but not very rare cases, they sew the orifice up so the girl can just urinate or menstruate.
And then later, when she gets married, the same cutter goes in and opens the orifice up so she can have sex.
This is not a rare thing, although it's against the law in most countries.
In Egypt, for instance, 91 percent of all the females that live in Egypt today have been sexually mutilated in that way.
In some countries, it's more than 98 percent of the women are cut that way before they reach maturity.
This is a horrible affliction on all women that live in those countries.
Another very serious thing is honor killings, where a family with misinterpretation, again, of a holy scripture -- there's nothing in the Quran that mandates this -- will execute a girl in their family if she is raped or if she marries a man that her father does not approve, or sometimes even if she wears inappropriate clothing.
And this is done by members of her own family, so the family becomes murderers when the girl brings so-called disgrace to the family.
An analysis was done in Egypt not so long ago by the United Nations and it showed that 75 percent of these murders of a girl are perpetrated by the father, the uncle or the brother, but 25 percent of the murders are conducted by women.
Another problem that we have in the world that relates to women particularly is slavery, or human trafficking it's called nowadays.
There were about 12.5 million people sold from Africa into slavery in the New World back in the 19th century and the 18th century.
There are 30 million people now living in slavery.
The United States Department of State now has a mandate from Congress to give a report every year, and the State Department reports that 800,000 people are sold across international borders every year into slavery, and that 80 percent of those sold are women, into sexual slavery.
In the United States right this moment, 60,000 people are living in human bondage, or slavery.
Atlanta, Georgia, where the Carter Center is located and where I teach at Emory University, they have between 200 and 300 women, people sold into slavery every month.
It's the number one place in the nation because of that.
Atlanta has the busiest airport in the world, and they also have a lot of passengers that come from the Southern Hemisphere.
If a brothel owner wants to buy a girl that has brown or black skin, they can do it for 1,000 dollars.
A white-skinned girl brings several times more than that, and the average brothel owner in Atlanta and in the United States now can earn about $35,000 per slave.
The sex trade in Atlanta, Georgia, exceeds the total drug trade in Atlanta, Georgia.
So this is another very serious problem, and the basic problem is prostitution, because there's not a whorehouse in America that's not known by the local officials, the local policemen, or the chief of police or the mayor and so forth.
And this leads to one of the worst problems, and that is that women are bought increasingly and put into sexual slavery in all countries in the world.
Sweden has got a good approach to it.
About 15 to 20 years ago, Sweden decided to change the law, and women are no longer prosecuted if they are in sexual slavery, but the brothel owners and the pimps and the male customers are prosecuted, and -- (Applause) -- prostitution has gone down.
In the United States, we take just the opposite position.
For every male arrested for illegal sex trade, 25 women are arrested in the United States of America.
Canada, Ireland, I've already said Sweden, France, and other countries are moving now towards this so-called Swedish model.
That's another thing that can be done.
We have two great institutions in this country that all of us admire: our military and our great university system.
In the military, they are now analyzing how many sexual assaults take place.
The last report I got, there were 26,000 sexual assaults that took place in the military -- 26,000.
Only 3,000, not much more than 1 percent, are actually prosecuted, and the reason is that the commanding officer of any organization -- a ship like my submarine, or a battalion in the Army or a company in the Marines -- the commanding officer has the right under law to decide whether to prosecute a rapist or not, and of course, the last thing they want is for anybody to know that under their command, sexual assaults are taking place, so they do not do it.
That law needs to be changed.
About one out of four girls who enter American universities will be sexually assaulted before she graduates, and this is now getting a lot of publicity, partially because of my book, but other things, and so 89 universities in America are now condemned by the Department of Education under Title IX because the officials of the universities are not taking care of the women to protect them from sexual assault.
The Department of Justice says that more than half of the rapes on a college campus take place by serial rapists, because outside of the university system, if they rape somebody, they'll be prosecuted, but when they get on a university campus, they can rape with impunity.
They're not prosecuted.
Those are the kinds of things that go on in our society.
Another thing that's very serious about the abuse of women and girls is the lack of equal pay for equal work, as you know. (Applause) And this is sometimes misinterpreted, but for full-time employment, a woman in the United States now gets 23 percent less than a man.
When I became president, the difference was 39 percent.
So we've made some progress, partially because I was president and so forth -- (Applause) (Laughter) -- but in the last 15 years, there's been no progress made, so it's been just about 23 or 24 percent difference for the last 15 years.
These are the kind of things that go on.
If you take the Fortune 500 companies, 23 of them have women CEOs, out of 500, and those CEOs, I need not tell you, make less on an average than the other CEOs.
Well, that's what goes on in our country.
Another problem with the United States is we are the most warlike nation on Earth.
We have been to war with about 25 different countries since the Second World War.
Sometimes, we've had soldiers on the ground fighting.
The other times, we've been flying overhead dropping bombs on people.
Other times, of course, now, we have drones that attack people and so forth.
We've been at war with 25 different countries or more since the Second World War.
There was four years, I won't say which ones, where we didn't -- (Applause) -- we didn't drop a bomb, we didn't launch a missile, we didn't fire a bullet.
But anyway, those kinds of things, the resort to violence and the misinterpretation of the holy scriptures are what causes, are the basic causes, of abuse of women and girls.
There's one more basic cause that I need not mention, and that is that in general, men don't give a damn.
(Applause) That's true.
The average man that might say, I'm against the abuse of women and girls quietly accepts the privileged position that we occupy, and this is very similar to what I knew when I was a child, when separate but equal had existed.
Racial discrimination, legally, had existed for 100 years, from 1865 at the end of the War Between the States, the Civil War, all the way up to the 1960s, when Lyndon Johnson got the bills passed for equal rights.
But during that time, there were many white people that didn't think that racial discrimination was okay, but they stayed quiet, because they enjoyed the privileges of better jobs, unique access to jury duty, better schools, and everything else, and that's the same thing that exists today, because the average man really doesn't care.
Even though they say, "I'm against discrimination against girls and women," they enjoy a privileged position.
And it's very difficult to get the majority of men who control the university system, the majority of men that control the military system, the majority of men that control the governments of the world, and the majority of men that control the great religions.
So what is the basic thing that we need to do today?
I would say the best thing that we could do today is for the women in the powerful nations like this one, and where you come from, Europe and so forth, who have influence and who have freedom to speak and to act, need to take the responsibility on yourselves to be more forceful in demanding an end to racial discrimination against girls and women all over the world.
The average woman in Egypt doesn't have much to say about her daughters getting genitally mutilated and so forth.
I didn't even go down to detail about that.
But I hope that out of this conference, that every woman here will get your husbands to realize that these abuses on the college campuses and the military and so forth and in the future job market, need to protect your daughters and your granddaughters.
I have 12 grandchildren, four children, and 10 great-grandchildren, and I think often about them and about the plight that they will face in America, not only if they lived in Egypt or a foreign country, in having equal rights, and I hope that all of you will join me in being a champion for women and girls around the world and protect their human rights.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
My colleagues and I are fascinated by the science of moving dots.
So what are these dots?
Well, it's all of us.
And we're moving in our homes, in our offices, as we shop and travel throughout our cities and around the world.
And wouldn't it be great if we could understand all this movement?
If we could find patterns and meaning and insight in it.
And luckily for us, we live in a time where we're incredibly good at capturing information about ourselves.
So whether it's through sensors or videos, or apps, we can track our movement with incredibly fine detail.
So it turns out one of the places where we have the best data about movement is sports.
So whether it's basketball or baseball, or football or the other football, we're instrumenting our stadiums and our players to track their movements every fraction of a second.
So what we're doing is turning our athletes into -- you probably guessed it -- moving dots.
So we've got mountains of moving dots and like most raw data, it's hard to deal with and not that interesting.
But there are things that, for example, basketball coaches want to know.
And the problem is they can't know them because they'd have to watch every second of every game, remember it and process it.
And a person can't do that, but a machine can.
The problem is a machine can't see the game with the eye of a coach.
At least they couldn't until now.
So what have we taught the machine to see?
So, we started simply.
We taught it things like passes, shots and rebounds.
Things that most casual fans would know.
And then we moved on to things slightly more complicated.
Events like post-ups, and pick-and-rolls, and isolations.
And if you don't know them, that's okay. Most casual players probably do.
Now, we've gotten to a point where today, the machine understands complex events like down screens and wide pins.
Basically things only professionals know.
So we have taught a machine to see with the eyes of a coach.
So how have we been able to do this?
If I asked a coach to describe something like a pick-and-roll, they would give me a description, and if I encoded that as an algorithm, it would be terrible.
The pick-and-roll happens to be this dance in basketball between four players, two on offense and two on defense.
And here's kind of how it goes.
So there's the guy on offense without the ball the ball and he goes next to the guy guarding the guy with the ball, and he kind of stays there and they both move and stuff happens, and ta-da, it's a pick-and-roll.
(Laughter) So that is also an example of a terrible algorithm.
So, if the player who's the interferer -- he's called the screener -- goes close by, but he doesn't stop, it's probably not a pick-and-roll.
Or if he does stop, but he doesn't stop close enough, it's probably not a pick-and-roll.
Or, if he does go close by and he does stop but they do it under the basket, it's probably not a pick-and-roll.
Or I could be wrong, they could all be pick-and-rolls.
It really depends on the exact timing, the distances, the locations, and that's what makes it hard.
So, luckily, with machine learning, we can go beyond our own ability to describe the things we know.
So how does this work? Well, it's by example.
So we go to the machine and say, "Good morning, machine.
Here are some pick-and-rolls, and here are some things that are not.
Please find a way to tell the difference."
And the key to all of this is to find features that enable it to separate.
So if I was going to teach it the difference between an apple and orange, I might say, "Why don't you use color or shape?"
And the problem that we're solving is, what are those things?
What are the key features that let a computer navigate the world of moving dots?
So figuring out all these relationships with relative and absolute location, distance, timing, velocities -- that's really the key to the science of moving dots, or as we like to call it, spatiotemporal pattern recognition, in academic vernacular.
Because the first thing is, you have to make it sound hard -- because it is.
The key thing is, for NBA coaches, it's not that they want to know whether a pick-and-roll happened or not.
It's that they want to know how it happened.
And why is it so important to them? So here's a little insight.
It turns out in modern basketball, this pick-and-roll is perhaps the most important play.
And knowing how to run it, and knowing how to defend it, is basically a key to winning and losing most games.
So it turns out that this dance has a great many variations and identifying the variations is really the thing that matters, and that's why we need this to be really, really good.
So, here's an example.
There are two offensive and two defensive players, getting ready to do the pick-and-roll dance.
So the guy with ball can either take, or he can reject.
His teammate can either roll or pop.
The guy guarding the ball can either go over or under.
His teammate can either show or play up to touch, or play soft and together they can either switch or blitz and I didn't know most of these things when I started and it would be lovely if everybody moved according to those arrows.
It would make our lives a lot easier, but it turns out movement is very messy.
People wiggle a lot and getting these variations identified with very high accuracy, both in precision and recall, is tough because that's what it takes to get a professional coach to believe in you.
And despite all the difficulties with the right spatiotemporal features we have been able to do that.
Coaches trust our ability of our machine to identify these variations.
We're at the point where almost every single contender for an NBA championship this year is using our software, which is built on a machine that understands the moving dots of basketball.
So not only that, we have given advice that has changed strategies that have helped teams win very important games, and it's very exciting because you have coaches who've been in the league for 30 years that are willing to take advice from a machine.
And it's very exciting, it's much more than the pick-and-roll.
Our computer started out with simple things and learned more and more complex things and now it knows so many things.
Frankly, I don't understand much of what it does, and while it's not that special to be smarter than me, we were wondering, can a machine know more than a coach?
Can it know more than person could know?
And it turns out the answer is yes.
The coaches want players to take good shots.
So if I'm standing near the basket and there's nobody near me, it's a good shot.
If I'm standing far away surrounded by defenders, that's generally a bad shot.
But we never knew how good "good" was, or how bad "bad" was quantitatively.
Until now.
So what we can do, again, using spatiotemporal features, we looked at every shot.
We can see: Where is the shot? What's the angle to the basket?
Where are the defenders standing? What are their distances?
What are their angles?
For multiple defenders, we can look at how the player's moving and predict the shot type.
We can look at all their velocities and we can build a model that predicts what is the likelihood that this shot would go in under these circumstances?
So why is this important?
We can take something that was shooting, which was one thing before, and turn it into two things: the quality of the shot and the quality of the shooter.
So here's a bubble chart, because what's TED without a bubble chart?
(Laughter) Those are NBA players.
The size is the size of the player and the color is the position.
On the x-axis, we have the shot probability.
People on the left take difficult shots, on the right, they take easy shots.
On the [y-axis] is their shooting ability.
People who are good are at the top, bad at the bottom.
So for example, if there was a player who generally made 47 percent of their shots, that's all you knew before.
But today, I can tell you that player takes shots that an average NBA player would make 49 percent of the time, and they are two percent worse.
And the reason that's important is that there are lots of 47s out there.
And so it's really important to know if the 47 that you're considering giving 100 million dollars to is a good shooter who takes bad shots or a bad shooter who takes good shots.
Machine understanding doesn't just change how we look at players, it changes how we look at the game.
So there was this very exciting game a couple of years ago, in the NBA finals.
Miami was down by three, there was 20 seconds left.
They were about to lose the championship.
A gentleman named LeBron James came up and he took a three to tie.
He missed.
His teammate Chris Bosh got a rebound, passed it to another teammate named Ray Allen.
He sank a three. It went into overtime.
They won the game. They won the championship.
It was one of the most exciting games in basketball.
And our ability to know the shot probability for every player at every second, and the likelihood of them getting a rebound at every second can illuminate this moment in a way that we never could before.
Now unfortunately, I can't show you that video.
But for you, we recreated that moment at our weekly basketball game about 3 weeks ago.
(Laughter) And we recreated the tracking that led to the insights.
So, here is us. This is Chinatown in Los Angeles, a park we play at every week, and that's us recreating the Ray Allen moment and all the tracking that's associated with it.
So, here's the shot.
I'm going to show you that moment and all the insights of that moment.
The only difference is, instead of the professional players, it's us, and instead of a professional announcer, it's me.
So, bear with me.
Miami.
Down three.
Twenty seconds left.
Jeff brings up the ball.
Josh catches, puts up a three!
[Calculating shot probability] [Shot quality] [Rebound probability] Won't go!
[Rebound probability] Rebound, Noel.
Back to Daria.
[Shot quality] Her three-pointer -- bang!
Tie game with five seconds left.
The crowd goes wild.
(Laughter) That's roughly how it happened.
(Applause) Roughly.
(Applause) That moment had about a nine percent chance of happening in the NBA and we know that and a great many other things.
I'm not going to tell you how many times it took us to make that happen.
(Laughter) Okay, I will! It was four.
(Laughter) Way to go, Daria.
But the important thing about that video and the insights we have for every second of every NBA game -- it's not that.
It's the fact you don't have to be a professional team to track movement.
You do not have to be a professional player to get insights about movement.
In fact, it doesn't even have to be about sports because we're moving everywhere.
We're moving in our homes, in our offices, as we shop and we travel throughout our cities and around our world.
What will we know? What will we learn?
Perhaps, instead of identifying pick-and-rolls, a machine can identify the moment and let me know when my daughter takes her first steps.
Which could literally be happening any second now.
Perhaps we can learn to better use our buildings, better plan our cities.
I believe that with the development of the science of moving dots, we will move better, we will move smarter, we will move forward.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Five years ago, I stood on the TED stage, and I spoke about my work.
But one year later, I had a terrible accident as I left a pub one dark night with friends, in Scotland.
As we followed the path through a forest, I suddenly felt a massive thud, then a second thud, and I fell to the ground.
I had no idea what had hit me.
I later found out that when the gate was opened on a garden, a wild stag stampeded along the path and ran straight into me.
Its antler penetrated my trachea and my esophagus and stopped at my spinal cord and fractured my neck.
My best friend found me lying on the floor, gurgling for help through a hole in my neck.
And we locked eyes, and although I couldn't speak, she could understand what I was thinking.
And she told me, "Just breathe."
And so, whilst focusing on my breath, I had a strong sense of calmness, but I was certain that I was going to die.
Somehow, I was content with this, because I've always tried to do my best in life whenever I can.
So I just continued to enjoy each breath as one more moment -- one breath in and one breath out.
An ambulance came, I was still fully conscious, and I analyzed everything on the journey, because I'm a scientist: the sound of the tires on the road, the frequency of the street lights and eventually, the city street lights.
And I thought, "Maybe I will survive."
And then I passed out.
I was stabilized at a local hospital and then airlifted to Glasgow, where they reconstructed my throat and put me in a coma.
And while I was in the coma, I had many alternate realities.
It was like a crazy mix of "Westworld" and "Black Mirror."
But that's a whole other story.
My local TV station reported live from outside the hospital of a Cambridge scientist who was in a coma, and they didn't know if she would live or die or walk or talk.
And a week later, I woke up from that coma.
And that was the first gift.
Then I had the gift to think, the gift to move, the gift to breathe and the gift to eat and to drink.
That took three and a half months.
But there was one thing that I never got back, though, and that was my privacy.
The tabloid press made the story about gender.
Look -- I'm transgender, it's not that big a deal.
Like, my hair color or my shoe size is way more interesting.
When I last spoke here -- (Applause) When I last spoke here -- (Applause) at TED, I didn't talk about it, because it's boring.
And one Scottish newspaper ran with the headline: "Sex Swap Scientist Gored by Stag."
And five others did similar things.
And for a minute, I was angry.
But then I found my calm place.
And what ran through my head was, "They've crossed the wrong woman, and they're not going to know what's hit them."
(Laughter) I'm a kindness ninja.
I don't really know what a ninja does, but to me, they slip through the shadows, crawl through the sewers, skip across the rooftops, and before you know it, they're behind you.
They don't turn up with an army or complain, and they're laser-focused on a plan.
So when I lay in my hospital bed, I thought of my plan to help reduce the chances of them doing this to somebody else, by using the system as is, and paying the price of sacrificing my privacy.
What they told one million people, I will tell 10 million people.
Because when you're angry, people defend themselves.
So I didn't attack them, and they were defenseless.
I wrote kind and calm letters to these newspapers.
And The Sun newspaper, the kind of "Fox News" of the UK, thanked me for my "reasoned approach."
I asked for no apology, no retraction, no money, just an acknowledgment that they broke their own rules, and what they did was just wrong.
And on this journey, I started to learn who they are, and they began to learn who I am.
And we actually became friends.
I've even had a few glasses of wine with Philippa from The Sun since then.
And after three months, they all agreed, and the statements were published on a Friday, and that was the end of that.
Or so they thought.
On the Saturday, I went on the evening news, with the headline "Six National Newspapers Admit They Were Wrong."
And the anchor said to me, "But don't you think it's our job as journalists to sensationalize a story?"
And I said, "I was laying on a forest floor, gored by a stag.
Is that not sensational enough?"
(Laughter) And I was now writing the headlines.
My favorite one was, "The stag trampled on my throat, and the press trampled on my privacy."
It was the most read piece of BBC News online that day.
And I was kind of having fun.
And by the end of my week of media, I started to use my newfound voice and platform to spread a message of love and kindness.
And when I had the minute of anger and hatred towards those press and journalists, I had to identify my inner bigotry towards them.
And I had to meet and speak with these people without judgment.
I had to let myself understand them, and in return, they began to understand me.
Well, six months later, they asked me to join the committee that regulates the press.
And a few times a year, I sip tea and dip biscuits with the likes of Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre, who says to me, "So, Kate, how have your last few months been?"
And I respect them.
And I'm now one of three members of the public who has a seat at the table -- not because I'm different, but because my voice counts, just like anybody else.
And the irony is, every now and again, I'm asked to visit those printing presses of this declining industry, because some people think that the technology I spoke about here, last time at TED, my interactive print, might actually help save them.
So beware of your inner bigot, and make friends from your enemies.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'll begin today by sharing a poem written by my friend from Malawi, Eileen Piri.
Eileen is only 13 years old, but when we were going through the collection of poetry that we wrote, I found her poem so interesting, so motivating.
So I'll read it to you.
She entitled her poem "I'll Marry When I Want."
(Laughter) "I'll marry when I want.
My mother can't force me to marry.
My father cannot force me to marry.
My uncle, my aunt, my brother or sister, cannot force me to marry.
No one in the world can force me to marry.
I'll marry when I want.
Even if you beat me, even if you chase me away, even if you do anything bad to me, I'll marry when I want.
I'll marry when I want, but not before I am well educated, and not before I am all grown up.
I'll marry when I want."
This poem might seem odd, written by a 13-year-old girl, but where I and Eileen come from, this poem, which I have just read to you, is a warrior's cry.
I am from Malawi.
Malawi is one of the poorest countries, very poor, where gender equality is questionable.
Growing up in that country, I couldn't make my own choices in life.
I couldn't even explore personal opportunities in life.
I will tell you a story of two different girls, two beautiful girls.
These girls grew up under the same roof.
They were eating the same food.
Sometimes, they would share clothes, and even shoes.
But their lives ended up differently, in two different paths.
The other girl is my little sister.
My little sister was only 11 years old when she got pregnant.
It's a hurtful thing.
Not only did it hurt her, even me.
I was going through a hard time as well.
As it is in my culture, once you reach puberty stage, you are supposed to go to initiation camps.
In these initiation camps, you are taught how to sexually please a man.
There is this special day, which they call "Very Special Day" where a man who is hired by the community comes to the camp and sleeps with the little girls.
Imagine the trauma that these young girls go through every day.
Most girls end up pregnant.
They even contract HIV and AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
For my little sister, she ended up being pregnant.
Today, she's only 16 years old and she has three children.
Her first marriage did not survive, nor did her second marriage.
On the other side, there is this girl.
She's amazing.
(Laughter) (Applause) I call her amazing because she is.
She's very fabulous.
That girl is me. (Laughter) When I was 13 years old, I was told, you are grown up, you have now reached of age, you're supposed to go to the initiation camp.
I was like, "What?
I'm not going to go to the initiation camps."
You know what the women said to me?
"You are a stupid girl. Stubborn.
You do not respect the traditions of our society, of our community."
I said no because I knew where I was going.
I knew what I wanted in life.
I had a lot of dreams as a young girl.
I wanted to get well educated, to find a decent job in the future.
I was imagining myself as a lawyer, seated on that big chair.
Those were the imaginations that were going through my mind every day.
And I knew that one day, I would contribute something, a little something to my community.
But every day after refusing, women would tell me, "Look at you, you're all grown up. Your little sister has a baby.
What about you?"
That was the music that I was hearing every day, and that is the music that girls hear every day when they don't do something that the community needs them to do.
When I compared the two stories between me and my sister, I said, "Why can't I do something?
Why can't I change something that has happened for a long time in our community?"
That was when I called other girls just like my sister, who have children, who have been in class but they have forgotten how to read and write.
I said, "Come on, we can remind each other how to read and write again, how to hold the pen, how to read, to hold the book."
It was a great time I had with them.
Nor did I just learn a little about them, but they were able to tell me their personal stories, what they were facing every day as young mothers.
That was when I was like, 'Why can't we take all these things that are happening to us and present them and tell our mothers, our traditional leaders, that these are the wrong things?"
It was a scary thing to do, because these traditional leaders, they are already accustomed to the things that have been there for ages.
A hard thing to change, but a good thing to try.
So we tried.
It was very hard, but we pushed.
And I'm here to say that in my community, it was the first community after girls pushed so hard to our traditional leader, and our leader stood up for us and said no girl has to be married before the age of 18.
(Applause) In my community, that was the first time a community, they had to call the bylaws, the first bylaw that protected girls in our community.
We did not stop there.
We forged ahead.
We were determined to fight for girls not just in my community, but even in other communities.
When the child marriage bill was being presented in February, we were there at the Parliament house.
Every day, when the members of Parliament were entering, we were telling them, "Would you please support the bill?"
And we don't have much technology like here, but we have our small phones.
So we said, "Why can't we get their numbers and text them?"
So we did that. It was a good thing.
(Applause) So when the bill passed, we texted them back, "Thank you for supporting the bill."
(Laughter) And when the bill was signed by the president, making it into law, it was a plus.
Now, in Malawi, 18 is the legal marriage age, from 15 to 18.
(Applause) It's a good thing to know that the bill passed, but let me tell you this: There are countries where 18 is the legal marriage age, but don't we hear cries of women and girls every day?
Every day, girls' lives are being wasted away.
This is high time for leaders to honor their commitment.
In honoring this commitment, it means keeping girls' issues at heart every time.
We don't have to be subjected as second, but they have to know that women, as we are in this room, we are not just women, we are not just girls, we are extraordinary.
We can do more.
And another thing for Malawi, and not just Malawi but other countries: The laws which are there, you know how a law is not a law until it is enforced?
The law which has just recently passed and the laws that in other countries have been there, they need to be publicized at the local level, at the community level, where girls' issues are very striking.
Girls face issues, difficult issues, at the community level every day.
So if these young girls know that there are laws that protect them, they will be able to stand up and defend themselves because they will know that there is a law that protects them.
And another thing I would say is that girls' voices and women's voices are beautiful, they are there, but we cannot do this alone.
Male advocates, they have to jump in, to step in and work together.
It's a collective work.
What we need is what girls elsewhere need: good education, and above all, not to marry whilst 11.
And furthermore, I know that together, we can transform the legal, the cultural and political framework that denies girls of their rights.
I am standing here today and declaring that we can end child marriage in a generation.
This is the moment where a girl and a girl, and millions of girls worldwide, will be able to say, "I will marry when I want."
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
Over the past 10 years, I've been researching the way people organize and visualize information.
And I've noticed an interesting shift.
For a long period of time, we believed in a natural ranking order in the world around us, also known as the great chain of being, or "Scala naturae" in Latin, a top-down structure that normally starts with God at the very top, followed by angels, noblemen, common people, animals, and so on.
This idea was actually based on Aristotle's ontology, which classified all things known to man in a set of opposing categories, like the ones you see behind me.
But over time, interestingly enough, this concept adopted the branching schema of a tree in what became known as the Porphyrian tree, also considered to be the oldest tree of knowledge.
The branching scheme of the tree was, in fact, such a powerful metaphor for conveying information that it became, over time, an important communication tool to map a variety of systems of knowledge.
We can see trees being used to map morality, with the popular tree of virtues and tree of vices, as you can see here, with these beautiful illustrations from medieval Europe.
We can see trees being used to map consanguinity, the various blood ties between people.
We can also see trees being used to map genealogy, perhaps the most famous archetype of the tree diagram.
I think many of you in the audience have probably seen family trees.
Many of you probably even have your own family trees drawn in such a way.
We can see trees even mapping systems of law, the various decrees and rulings of kings and rulers.
And finally, of course, also a very popular scientific metaphor, we can see trees being used to map all species known to man.
And trees ultimately became such a powerful visual metaphor because in many ways, they really embody this human desire for order, for balance, for unity, for symmetry.
However, nowadays we are really facing new complex, intricate challenges that cannot be understood by simply employing a simple tree diagram.
And a new metaphor is currently emerging, and it's currently replacing the tree in visualizing various systems of knowledge.
It's really providing us with a new lens to understand the world around us.
And this new metaphor is the metaphor of the network.
And we can see this shift from trees into networks in many domains of knowledge.
We can see this shift in the way we try to understand the brain.
While before, we used to think of the brain as a modular, centralized organ, where a given area was responsible for a set of actions and behaviors, the more we know about the brain, the more we think of it as a large music symphony, played by hundreds and thousands of instruments.
This is a beautiful snapshot created by the Blue Brain Project, where you can see 10,000 neurons and 30 million connections.
And this is only mapping 10 percent of a mammalian neocortex.
We can also see this shift in the way we try to conceive of human knowledge.
These are some remarkable trees of knowledge, or trees of science, by Spanish scholar Ramon Llull.
And Llull was actually the precursor, the very first one who created the metaphor of science as a tree, a metaphor we use every single day, when we say, "Biology is a branch of science," when we say, "Genetics is a branch of science."
But perhaps the most beautiful of all trees of knowledge, at least for me, was created for the French encyclopedia by Diderot and d'Alembert in 1751.
This was really the bastion of the French Enlightenment, and this gorgeous illustration was featured as a table of contents for the encyclopedia.
And it actually maps out all domains of knowledge as separate branches of a tree.
But knowledge is much more intricate than this.
These are two maps of Wikipedia showing the inter-linkage of articles -- related to history on the left, and mathematics on the right.
And I think by looking at these maps and other ones that have been created of Wikipedia -- arguably one of the largest rhizomatic structures ever created by man -- we can really understand how human knowledge is much more intricate and interdependent, just like a network.
We can also see this interesting shift in the way we map social ties between people.
This is the typical organization chart.
I'm assuming many of you have seen a similar chart as well, in your own corporations, or others.
It's a top-down structure that normally starts with the CEO at the very top, and where you can drill down all the way to the individual workmen on the bottom.
But humans sometimes are, well, actually, all humans are unique in their own way, and sometimes you really don't play well under this really rigid structure.
I think the Internet is really changing this paradigm quite a lot.
This is a fantastic map of online social collaboration between Perl developers.
Perl is a famous programming language, and here, you can see how different programmers are actually exchanging files, and working together on a given project.
And here, you can notice that this is a completely decentralized process -- there's no leader in this organization, it's a network.
We can also see this interesting shift when we look at terrorism.
One of the main challenges of understanding terrorism nowadays is that we are dealing with decentralized, independent cells, where there's no leader leading the whole process.
And here, you can actually see how visualization is being used.
The diagram that you see behind me shows all the terrorists involved in the Madrid attack in 2004.
And what they did here is, they actually segmented the network into three different years, represented by the vertical layers that you see behind me.
And the blue lines tie together the people that were present in that network year after year.
So even though there's no leader per se, these people are probably the most influential ones in that organization, the ones that know more about the past, and the future plans and goals of this particular cell.
We can also see this shift from trees into networks in the way we classify and organize species.
The image on the right is the only illustration that Darwin included in "The Origin of Species," which Darwin called the "Tree of Life."
There's actually a letter from Darwin to the publisher, expanding on the importance of this particular diagram.
It was critical for Darwin's theory of evolution.
But recently, scientists discovered that overlaying this tree of life is a dense network of bacteria, and these bacteria are actually tying together species that were completely separated before, to what scientists are now calling not the tree of life, but the web of life, the network of life.
And finally, we can really see this shift, again, when we look at ecosystems around our planet.
No more do we have these simplified predator-versus-prey diagrams we have all learned at school.
This is a much more accurate depiction of an ecosystem.
This is a diagram created by Professor David Lavigne, mapping close to 100 species that interact with the codfish off the coast of Newfoundland in Canada.
And I think here, we can really understand the intricate and interdependent nature of most ecosystems that abound on our planet.
But even though recent, this metaphor of the network, is really already adopting various shapes and forms, and it's almost becoming a growing visual taxonomy.
It's almost becoming the syntax of a new language.
And this is one aspect that truly fascinates me.
And these are actually 15 different typologies I've been collecting over time, and it really shows the immense visual diversity of this new metaphor.
And here is an example.
On the very top band, you have radial convergence, a visualization model that has become really popular over the last five years.
At the top left, the very first project is a gene network, followed by a network of IP addresses -- machines, servers -- followed by a network of Facebook friends.
You probably couldn't find more disparate topics, yet they are using the same metaphor, the same visual model, to map the never-ending complexities of its own subject.
And here are a few more examples of the many I've been collecting, of this growing visual taxonomy of networks.
But networks are not just a scientific metaphor.
As designers, researchers, and scientists try to map a variety of complex systems, they are in many ways influencing traditional art fields, like painting and sculpture, and influencing many different artists.
And perhaps because networks have this huge aesthetical force to them -- they're immensely gorgeous -- they are really becoming a cultural meme, and driving a new art movement, which I've called "networkism."
And we can see this influence in this movement in a variety of ways.
This is just one of many examples, where you can see this influence from science into art.
The example on your left side is IP-mapping, a computer-generated map of IP addresses; again -- servers, machines.
And on your right side, you have "Transient Structures and Unstable Networks" by Sharon Molloy, using oil and enamel on canvas.
And here are a few more paintings by Sharon Molloy, some gorgeous, intricate paintings.
And here's another example of that interesting cross-pollination between science and art.
On your left side, you have "Operation Smile."
It is a computer-generated map of a social network.
And on your right side, you have "Field 4," by Emma McNally, using only graphite on paper.
Emma McNally is one of the main leaders of this movement, and she creates these striking, imaginary landscapes, where you can really notice the influence from traditional network visualization.
But networkism doesn't happen only in two dimensions.
This is perhaps one of my favorite projects of this new movement.
And I think the title really says it all -- it's called: "Galaxies Forming Along Filaments, Like Droplets Along the Strands of a Spider's Web."
And I just find this particular project to be immensely powerful.
It was created by Toms Saraceno, and he occupies these large spaces, creates these massive installations using only elastic ropes.
As you actually navigate that space and bounce along those elastic ropes, the entire network kind of shifts, almost like a real organic network would.
And here's yet another example of networkism taken to a whole different level.
This was created by Japanese artist Chiharu Shiota in a piece called "In Silence."
And Chiharu, like Toms Saraceno, fills these rooms with this dense network, this dense web of elastic ropes and black wool and thread, sometimes including objects, as you can see here, sometimes even including people, in many of her installations.
But networks are also not just a new trend, and it's too easy for us to dismiss it as such.
Networks really embody notions of decentralization, of interconnectedness, of interdependence.
And this new way of thinking is critical for us to solve many of the complex problems we are facing nowadays, from decoding the human brain, to understanding the vast universe out there.
On your left side, you have a snapshot of a neural network of a mouse -- very similar to our own at this particular scale.
And on your right side, you have the Millennium Simulation.
It was the largest and most realistic simulation of the growth of cosmic structure.
It was able to recreate the history of 20 million galaxies in approximately 25 terabytes of output.
And coincidentally or not, I just find this particular comparison between the smallest scale of knowledge -- the brain -- and the largest scale of knowledge -- the universe itself -- to be really quite striking and fascinating.
Because as Bruce Mau once said, "When everything is connected to everything else, for better or for worse, everything matters."
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
It was the middle of summer and well past closing time in the downtown Berkeley bar where my friend Polly and I worked together as bartenders.
Usually at the end of our shift we had a drink -- but not that night.
"I'm pregnant.
Not sure what I'm going to do yet," I told Polly.
Without hesitation, she replied, "I've had an abortion."
Before Polly, no one had ever told me that she'd had an abortion.
I'd graduated from college just a few months earlier and I was in a new relationship when I found out that I was pregnant.
When I thought about my choices, I honestly did not know how to decide, what criteria I should use.
How would I know what the right decision was?
I worried that I would regret an abortion later.
Coming of age on the beaches of Southern California, I grew up in the middle of our nation's abortion wars.
I was born in a trailer on the third anniversary of Roe vs. Wade.
Our community was surfing Christians.
We cared about God, the less fortunate, and the ocean.
Everyone was pro-life.
As a kid, the idea of abortion made me so sad that I knew if I ever got pregnant I could never have one.
And then I did.
It was a step towards the unknown.
But Polly had given me a very special gift: the knowledge that I wasn't alone and the realization that abortion was something that we can talk about.
Abortion is common.
According to the Guttmacher Institute, one in three women in America will have an abortion in their lifetime.
But for the last few decades, the dialogue around abortion in the United States has left little room for anything beyond pro-life and pro-choice.
It's political and polarizing.
But as much as abortion is hotly debated, it's still rare for us, whether as fellow women or even just as fellow people, to talk with one another about the abortions that we have.
There is a gap.
Between what happens in politics and what happens in real life, and in that gap, a battlefield mentality.
An "are you with us or against us?" stance takes root.
This isn't just about abortion.
There are so many important issues that we can't talk about.
And so finding ways to shift the conflict to a place of conversation is the work of my life.
There are two main ways to get started.
One way is to listen closely.
And the other way is to share stories.
So, 15 years ago, I cofounded an organization called Exhale to start listening to people who have had abortions.
The first thing we did was create a talk-line, where women and men could call to get emotional support.
Free of judgment and politics, believe it or not, nothing like our sevice had ever existed.
We needed a new framework that could hold all the experiences that we were hearing on our talk-line.
The feminist who regrets her abortion.
The Catholic who is grateful for hers.
The personal experiences that weren't fitting neatly into one box or the other.
We didn't think it was right to ask women to pick a side.
We wanted to show them that the whole world was on their side, as they were going through this deeply personal experience.
So we invented "pro-voice."
Beyond abortion, pro-voice works on hard issues that we've struggled with globally for years, issues like immigration, religious tolerance, violence against women.
It also works on deeply personal topics that might only matter to you and your immediate family and friends.
They have a terminal illness, their mother just died, they have a child with special needs and they can't talk about it.
Listening and storytelling are the hallmarks of pro-voice practice.
Listening and storytelling.
That sounds pretty nice.
Sounds maybe, easy? We could all do that.
It's not easy. It's very hard.
Pro-voice is hard because we are talking about things everyone's fighting about or the things that no one wants to talk about.
I wish I could tell you that when you decide to be pro-voice, that you'll find beautiful moments of breakthrough and gardens full of flowers, where listening and storytelling creates wonderful "a-ha" moments.
I wish I could tell you that there would be a feminist welcoming party for you, or that there's a long-lost sisterhood of people who are just ready to have your back when you get slammed.
But it can be vulnerable and exhausting to tell our own stories when it feels like nobody cares.
And if we truly listen to one another, we will hear things that demand that we shift our own perceptions.
There is no perfect time and there is no perfect place to start a difficult conversation.
There's never a time when everyone will be on the same page, share the same lens, or know the same history.
So, let's talk about listening and how to be a good listener.
There's lots of ways to be a good listener and I'm going to give you just a couple.
One is to ask open-ended questions.
You can ask yourself or someone that you know, "How are you feeling?"
"What was that like?"
"What do you hope for, now?"
Another way to be a good listener is to use reflective language.
If someone is talking about their own personal experience, use the words that they use.
If someone is talking about an abortion and they say the word "baby," you can say "baby."
If they say "fetus," you can say "fetus."
If someone describes themselves as gender queer to you, you can say "gender queer."
If someone kind of looks like a he, but they say they're a she -- it's cool.
Call that person a she.
When we reflect the language of the person who is sharing their own story, we are conveying that we are interested in understanding who they are and what they're going through.
The same way that we hope people are interested in knowing us.
So, I'll never forget being in one of the Exhale counselor meetings, listening to a volunteer talk about how she was getting a lot of calls from Christian women who were talking about God.
Now, some of our volunteers are religious, but this particular one was not.
At first, it felt a little weird for her to talk to callers about God.
So, she decided to get comfortable.
And she stood in front of her mirror at home, and she said the word "God."
"God."
"God."
"God."
"God."
"God."
"God."
Over and over and over again until the word no longer felt strange coming out her mouth.
Saying the word God did not turn this volunteer into a Christian, but it did make her a much better listener of Christian women.
So, another way to be pro-voice is to share stories, and one risk that you take on, when you share your story with someone else, is that given the same set of circumstances as you they might actually make a different decision.
For example, if you're telling a story about your abortion, realize that she might have had the baby.
She might have placed for adoption.
She might have told her parents and her partner -- or not.
She might have felt relief and confidence, even though you felt sad and lost.
This is okay.
Empathy gets created the moment we imagine ourselves in someone else's shoes.
It doesn't mean we all have to end up in the same place.
It's not agreement, it's not sameness that pro-voice is after.
It creates a culture and a society that values what make us special and unique.
It values what makes us human, our flaws and our imperfections.
And this way of thinking allows us to see our differences with respect, instead of fear.
And it generates the empathy that we need to overcome all the ways that we try to hurt one another.
Stigma, shame, prejudice, discrimination, oppression.
Pro-voice is contagious, and the more it's practiced the more it spreads.
So, last year I was pregnant again.
This time I was looking forward to the birth of my son.
And while pregnant, I had never been asked how I was feeling so much in all my life.
(Laughter) And however I replied, whether I was feeling wonderful and excited or scared and totally freaked out, there was always someone there giving me a "been there" response.
It was awesome.
It was a welcome, yet dramatic departure from what I experience when I talk about my mixed feelings of my abortion.
Pro-voice is about the real stories of real people making an impact on the way abortion and so many other politicized and stigmatized issues are understood and discussed.
From sexuality and mental health to poverty and incarceration.
Far beyond definition as single right or wrong decisions, our experiences can exist on a spectrum.
Pro-voice focuses that conversation on human experience and it makes support and respect possible for all.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What if you could take a pill or a vaccine and, just like getting over a cold, you could heal your wounds faster?
Today, if we have an operation or an accident, we're in the hospital for weeks, and often left with scars and painful side effects of our inability to regenerate or regrow healthy, uninjured organs.
I work to create materials that instruct our immune system to give us the signals to grow new tissues.
Just like vaccines instruct our body to fight disease, we could instead instruct our immune system to build tissues and more quickly heal wounds.
Now, regrowing body parts out of nowhere might seem like magic, but there are several organisms that can achieve this feat.
Some lizards can regrow their tails, the humble salamander can completely regenerate their arm, and even us mere humans can regrow our liver after losing more than half of its original mass.
To make this magic a bit closer to reality, I'm investigating how our body can heal wounds and build tissue through instructions from the immune system.
From a scrape on your knee to that annoying sinus infection, our immune system defends our body from danger.
I'm an immunologist, and by using what I know about our body's defense system, I was able to identify key players in our fight to build back our cuts and bruises.
When looking at materials that are currently being tested for their abilities to help regrow muscle, our team noticed that after treating an injured muscle with these materials, there was a large number of immune cells in that material and the surrounding muscle.
So in this case, instead of the immune cells rushing off towards infection to fight bacteria, they're rushing toward an injury.
I discovered a specific type of immune cell, the helper T cell, was present inside that material that I implanted and absolutely critical for wound healing.
Now, just like when you were a kid and you'd break your pencil and try and tape it back together again, we can heal, but it might not be in the most functional way, and we'll get a scar.
So if we don't have these helper T cells, instead of healthy muscle, our muscle develops fat cells inside of it, and if there's fat in our muscle, it isn't as strong.
Now, using our immune system, our body could grow back without these scars and look like what it was before we were even injured.
I'm working to create materials that give us the signals to build new tissue by changing the immune response.
We know that any time a material is implanted in our body, the immune system will respond to it.
This ranges from pacemakers to insulin pumps to the materials that engineers are using to try and build new tissue.
So when I place that material, or scaffold, in the body, the immune system creates a small environment of cells and proteins that can change the way that our stem cells behave.
Now, just like the weather affects our daily activities, like going for a run or staying inside and binge-watching an entire TV show on Netflix, the immune environment of a scaffold affects the way that our stem cells grow and develop.
If we have the wrong signals, say the Netflix signals, we get fat cells instead of muscle.
These scaffolds are made of a variety of different things, from plastics to naturally derived materials, nanofibers of varying thicknesses, sponges that are more or less porous, gels of different stiffnesses.
And researchers can even make the materials release different signals over time.
So in other words, we can orchestrate this Broadway show of cells by giving them the correct stage, cues and props that can be changed for different tissues, just like a producer would change the set for "Les Mis" versus "Little Shop of Horrors."
I'm combining specific types of signals that mimic how our body responds to injury to help us regenerate.
In the future, we could see a scar-proof band-aid, a moldable muscle filler or even a wound-healing vaccine.
Now, we aren't going to wake up tomorrow and be able to heal like Wolverine.
Probably not next Tuesday, either.
But with these advances, and working with our immune system to help build tissue and heal wounds, we could begin seeing products on the market that work with our body's defense system to help us regenerate, and maybe one day be able to keep pace with a salamander.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So on my way here, the passenger next to me and I had a very interesting conversation during my flight.
He told me, "It seems like the United States has run out of jobs, because they're just making some up: cat psychologist, dog whisperer, tornado chaser."
A couple of seconds later, he asked me, "So what do you do?"
And I was like, "Peacebuilder?"
(Laughter) Every day, I work to amplify the voices of women and to highlight their experiences and their participation in peace processes and conflict resolution, and because of my work, I recognize that the only way to ensure the full participation of women globally is by reclaiming religion.
Now, this matter is vitally important to me.
As a young Muslim woman, I am very proud of my faith.
It gives me the strength and conviction to do my work every day.
It's the reason I can be here in front of you.
But I can't overlook the damage that has been done in the name of religion, not just my own, but all of the world's major faiths.
The misrepresentation and misuse and manipulation of religious scripture has influenced our social and cultural norms, our laws, our daily lives, to a point where we sometimes don't recognize it.
My parents moved from Libya, North Africa, to Canada in the early 1980s, and I am the middle child of 11 children.
Yes, 11.
But growing up, I saw my parents, both religiously devout and spiritual people, pray and praise God for their blessings, namely me of course, but among others. (Laughter) They were kind and funny and patient, limitlessly patient, the kind of patience that having 11 kids forces you to have.
And they were fair.
I was never subjected to religion through a cultural lens.
I was treated the same, the same was expected of me.
I was never taught that God judged differently based on gender.
And my parents' understanding of God as a merciful and beneficial friend and provider shaped the way I looked at the world.
Now, of course, my upbringing had additional benefits.
Being one of 11 children is Diplomacy 101. (Laughter) To this day, I am asked where I went to school, like, "Did you go to Kennedy School of Government?"
and I look at them and I'm like, "No, I went to the Murabit School of International Affairs."
It's extremely exclusive. You would have to talk to my mom to get in.
Lucky for you, she's here.
But being one of 11 children and having 10 siblings teaches you a lot about power structures and alliances.
It teaches you focus; you have to talk fast or say less, because you will always get cut off.
It teaches you the importance of messaging.
You have to ask questions in the right way to get the answers you know you want, and you have to say no in the right way to keep the peace.
But the most important lesson I learned growing up was the importance of being at the table.
When my mom's favorite lamp broke, I had to be there when she was trying to find out how and by who, because I had to defend myself, because if you're not, then the finger is pointed at you, and before you know it, you will be grounded.
I am not speaking from experience, of course.
When I was 15 in 2005, I completed high school and I moved from Canada -- Saskatoon -- to Zawiya, my parents' hometown in Libya, a very traditional city.
Mind you, I had only ever been to Libya before on vacation, and as a seven-year-old girl, it was magic.
It was ice cream and trips to the beach and really excited relatives.
Turns out it's not the same as a 15-year-old young lady.
I very quickly became introduced to the cultural aspect of religion.
The words "haram" -- meaning religiously prohibited -- and "aib" -- meaning culturally inappropriate -- were exchanged carelessly, as if they meant the same thing and had the same consequences.
And I found myself in conversation after conversation with classmates and colleagues, professors, friends, even relatives, beginning to question my own role and my own aspirations.
And even with the foundation my parents had provided for me, I found myself questioning the role of women in my faith.
So at the Murabit School of International Affairs, we go very heavy on the debate, and rule number one is do your research, so that's what I did, and it surprised me how easy it was to find women in my faith who were leaders, who were innovative, who were strong -- politically, economically, even militarily.
Khadija financed the Islamic movement in its infancy.
We wouldn't be here if it weren't for her.
So why weren't we learning about her?
Why weren't we learning about these women?
Why were women being relegated to positions which predated the teachings of our faith?
And why, if we are equal in the eyes of God, are we not equal in the eyes of men?
To me, it all came back to the lessons I had learned as a child.
The decision maker, the person who gets to control the message, is sitting at the table, and unfortunately, in every single world faith, they are not women.
Religious institutions are dominated by men and driven by male leadership, and they create policies in their likeness, and until we can change the system entirely, then we can't realistically expect to have full economic and political participation of women.
Our foundation is broken.
My mom actually says, you can't build a straight house on a crooked foundation.
In 2011, the Libyan revolution broke out, and my family was on the front lines.
And there's this amazing thing that happens in war, a cultural shift almost, very temporary.
And it was the first time that I felt it was not only acceptable for me to be involved, but it was encouraged.
It was demanded.
Myself and other women had a seat at the table.
We weren't holding hands or a medium.
We were part of decision making.
We were information sharing. We were crucial.
And I wanted and needed for that change to be permanent.
Turns out, that's not that easy.
It only took a few weeks before the women that I had previously worked with were returning back to their previous roles, and most of them were driven by words of encouragement from religious and political leaders, most of whom cited religious scripture as their defense.
It's how they gained popular support for their opinions.
So initially, I focused on the economic and political empowerment of women.
I thought that would lead to cultural and social change.
It turns out, it does a little, but not a lot.
I decided to use their defense as my offense, and I began to cite and highlight Islamic scripture as well.
In 2012 and 2013, my organization led the single largest and most widespread campaign in Libya.
We entered homes and schools and universities, even mosques.
We spoke to 50,000 people directly, and hundreds of thousands more through billboards and television commercials, radio commercials and posters.
And you're probably wondering how a women's rights organization was able to do this in communities which had previously opposed our sheer existence.
I used scripture.
I used verses from the Quran and sayings of the Prophet, Hadiths, his sayings which are, for example, "The best of you is the best to their family."
"Do not let your brother oppress another."
For the first time, Friday sermons led by local community imams promoted the rights of women.
They discussed taboo issues, like domestic violence.
Policies were changed.
In certain communities, we actually had to go as far as saying the International Human Rights Declaration, which you opposed because it wasn't written by religious scholars, well, those same principles are in our book.
So really, the United Nations just copied us.
By changing the message, we were able to provide an alternative narrative which promoted the rights of women in Libya.
It's something that has now been replicated internationally, and while I am not saying it's easy -- believe me, it's not.
Liberals will say you're using religion and call you a bad conservative.
Conservatives will call you a lot of colorful things.
I've heard everything from, "Your parents must be extremely ashamed of you" -- false; they're my biggest fans -- to "You will not make it to your next birthday" -- again wrong, because I did.
And I remain a very strong believer that women's rights and religion are not mutually exclusive.
But we have to be at the table.
We have to stop giving up our position, because by remaining silent, we allow for the continued persecution and abuse of women worldwide.
By saying that we're going to fight for women's rights and fight extremism with bombs and warfare, we completely cripple local societies which need to address these issues so that they're sustainable.
It is not easy, challenging distorted religious messaging.
You will have your fair share of insults and ridicule and threats.
But we have to do it.
We have no other option than to reclaim the message of human rights, the principles of our faith, not for us, not for the women in your families, not for the women in this room, not even for the women out there, but for societies that would be transformed with the participation of women.
And the only way we can do that, our only option, is to be, and remain, at the table.
Thank you.
(Applause)
One of my earliest memories is of trying to wake up one of my relatives and not being able to.
And I was just a little kid, so I didn't really understand why, but as I got older, I realized we had drug addiction in my family, including later cocaine addiction.
I'd been thinking about it a lot lately, partly because it's now exactly 100 years since drugs were first banned in the United States and Britain, and we then imposed that on the rest of the world.
It's a century since we made this really fateful decision to take addicts and punish them and make them suffer, because we believed that would deter them; it would give them an incentive to stop.
And a few years ago, I was looking at some of the addicts in my life who I love, and trying to figure out if there was some way to help them.
And I realized there were loads of incredibly basic questions I just didn't know the answer to, like, what really causes addiction?
Why do we carry on with this approach that doesn't seem to be working, and is there a better way out there that we could try instead?
So I read loads of stuff about it, and I couldn't really find the answers I was looking for, so I thought, okay, I'll go and sit with different people around the world who lived this and studied this and talk to them and see if I could learn from them.
And I didn't realize I would end up going over 30,000 miles at the start, but I ended up going and meeting loads of different people, from a transgender crack dealer in Brownsville, Brooklyn, to a scientist who spends a lot of time feeding hallucinogens to mongooses to see if they like them -- it turns out they do, but only in very specific circumstances -- to the only country that's ever decriminalized all drugs, from cannabis to crack, Portugal.
And the thing I realized that really blew my mind is, almost everything we think we know about addiction is wrong, and if we start to absorb the new evidence about addiction, I think we're going to have to change a lot more than our drug policies.
But let's start with what we think we know, what I thought I knew.
Let's think about this middle row here.
Imagine all of you, for 20 days now, went off and used heroin three times a day.
Some of you look a little more enthusiastic than others at this prospect.
(Laughter) Don't worry, it's just a thought experiment.
Imagine you did that, right?
What would happen?
Now, we have a story about what would happen that we've been told for a century.
We think, because there are chemical hooks in heroin, as you took it for a while, your body would become dependent on those hooks, you'd start to physically need them, and at the end of those 20 days, you'd all be heroin addicts. Right?
That's what I thought.
First thing that alerted me to the fact that something's not right with this story is when it was explained to me.
If I step out of this TED Talk today and I get hit by a car and I break my hip, I'll be taken to hospital and I'll be given loads of diamorphine.
Diamorphine is heroin.
It's actually much better heroin than you're going to buy on the streets, because the stuff you buy from a drug dealer is contaminated.
Actually, very little of it is heroin, whereas the stuff you get from the doctor is medically pure.
And you'll be given it for quite a long period of time.
There are loads of people in this room, you may not realize it, you've taken quite a lot of heroin.
And anyone who is watching this anywhere in the world, this is happening.
And if what we believe about addiction is right -- those people are exposed to all those chemical hooks -- What should happen? They should become addicts.
This has been studied really carefully.
It doesn't happen; you will have noticed if your grandmother had a hip replacement, she didn't come out as a junkie. (Laughter) And when I learned this, it seemed so weird to me, so contrary to everything I'd been told, everything I thought I knew, I just thought it couldn't be right, until I met a man called Bruce Alexander.
He's a professor of psychology in Vancouver who carried out an incredible experiment I think really helps us to understand this issue.
Professor Alexander explained to me, the idea of addiction we've all got in our heads, that story, comes partly from a series of experiments that were done earlier in the 20th century.
You can do them tonight at home if you feel a little sadistic.
You get a rat and you put it in a cage, and you give it two water bottles: One is just water, and the other is water laced with either heroin or cocaine.
If you do that, the rat will almost always prefer the drug water and almost always kill itself quite quickly.
In the '70s, Professor Alexander comes along and he looks at this experiment and he noticed something.
It's got nothing to do except use these drugs.
Let's try something different.
So Professor Alexander built a cage that he called "Rat Park," which is basically heaven for rats.
They've got loads of cheese, they've got loads of colored balls, they've got loads of tunnels.
Crucially, they've got loads of friends. They can have loads of sex.
And they've got both the water bottles, the normal water and the drugged water.
But here's the fascinating thing: In Rat Park, they don't like the drug water.
They almost never use it.
None of them ever use it compulsively.
None of them ever overdose.
You go from almost 100 percent overdose when they're isolated to zero percent overdose when they have happy and connected lives.
Now, when he first saw this, Professor Alexander thought, maybe this is just a thing about rats, they're quite different to us.
Maybe not as different as we'd like, but, you know -- But fortunately, there was a human experiment into the exact same principle happening at the exact same time.
It was called the Vietnam War.
In Vietnam, 20 percent of all American troops were using loads of heroin, and if you look at the news reports from the time, they were really worried, because they thought, my God, we're going to have hundreds of thousands of junkies on the streets of the United States when the war ends; it made total sense.
Now, those soldiers who were using loads of heroin were followed home.
The Archives of General Psychiatry did a really detailed study, and what happened to them?
Ninety-five percent of them just stopped.
Now, if you believe the story about chemical hooks, that makes absolutely no sense, but Professor Alexander began to think there might be a different story about addiction.
He said, what if addiction isn't about your chemical hooks?
What if addiction is about your cage?
What if addiction is an adaptation to your environment?
Looking at this, there was another professor called Peter Cohen in the Netherlands who said, maybe we shouldn't even call it addiction.
Maybe we should call it bonding.
Human beings have a natural and innate need to bond, and when we're happy and healthy, we'll bond and connect with each other, but if you can't do that, because you're traumatized or isolated or beaten down by life, you will bond with something that will give you some sense of relief.
Now, that might be gambling, that might be pornography, that might be cocaine, that might be cannabis, but you will bond and connect with something because that's our nature.
That's what we want as human beings.
And at first, I found this quite a difficult thing to get my head around, but one way that helped me to think about it is, I can see, I've got over by my seat a bottle of water, right?
I'm looking at lots of you, and lots of you have bottles of water with you.
Forget the drugs. Forget the drug war.
Totally legally, all of those bottles of water could be bottles of vodka, right?
We could all be getting drunk -- I might after this -- (Laughter) -- but we're not.
Now, because you've been able to afford the approximately gazillion pounds that it costs to get into a TED Talk, I'm guessing you guys could afford to be drinking vodka for the next six months.
You wouldn't end up homeless.
You're not going to do that, and the reason you're not going to do that is not because anyone's stopping you.
It's because you've got bonds and connections that you want to be present for.
You've got work you love. You've got people you love.
You've got healthy relationships.
And a core part of addiction, I came to think, and I believe the evidence suggests, is about not being able to bear to be present in your life.
Now, this has really significant implications.
The most obvious implications are for the War on Drugs.
In Arizona, I went out with a group of women who were made to wear t-shirts saying, "I was a drug addict," and go out on chain gangs and dig graves while members of the public jeer at them, and when those women get out of prison, they're going to have criminal records that mean they'll never work in the legal economy again.
Now, that's a very extreme example, obviously, in the case of the chain gang, but actually almost everywhere in the world we treat addicts to some degree like that.
We punish them. We shame them. We give them criminal records.
We put barriers between them reconnecting.
There was a doctor in Canada, Dr. Gabor Mat, an amazing man, who said to me, if you wanted to design a system that would make addiction worse, you would design that system.
Now, there's a place that decided to do the exact opposite, and I went there to see how it worked.
In the year 2000, Portugal had one of the worst drug problems in Europe.
One percent of the population was addicted to heroin, which is kind of mind-blowing, and every year, they tried the American way more and more.
They punished people and stigmatized them and shamed them more, and every year, the problem got worse.
And one day, the Prime Minister and the leader of the opposition got together, and basically said, look, we can't go on with a country where we're having ever more people becoming heroin addicts.
Let's set up a panel of scientists and doctors to figure out what would genuinely solve the problem.
And they set up a panel led by an amazing man called Dr. Joo Goulo, to look at all this new evidence, and they came back and they said, "Decriminalize all drugs from cannabis to crack, but" -- and this is the crucial next step -- "take all the money we used to spend on cutting addicts off, on disconnecting them, and spend it instead on reconnecting them with society."
And that's not really what we think of as drug treatment in the United States and Britain.
So they do do residential rehab, they do psychological therapy, that does have some value.
But the biggest thing they did was the complete opposite of what we do: a massive program of job creation for addicts, and microloans for addicts to set up small businesses.
So say you used to be a mechanic.
When you're ready, they'll go to a garage, and they'll say, if you employ this guy for a year, we'll pay half his wages.
The goal was to make sure that every addict in Portugal had something to get out of bed for in the morning.
And when I went and met the addicts in Portugal, what they said is, as they rediscovered purpose, they rediscovered bonds and relationships with the wider society.
It'll be 15 years this year since that experiment began, and the results are in: injecting drug use is down in Portugal, according to the British Journal of Criminology, by 50 percent, five-zero percent.
Overdose is massively down, HIV is massively down among addicts.
Addiction in every study is significantly down.
One of the ways you know it's worked so well is that almost nobody in Portugal wants to go back to the old system.
Now, that's the political implications.
I actually think there's a layer of implications to all this research below that.
We live in a culture where people feel really increasingly vulnerable to all sorts of addictions, whether it's to their smartphones or to shopping or to eating.
Before these talks began -- you guys know this -- we were told we weren't allowed to have our smartphones on, and I have to say, a lot of you looked an awful lot like addicts who were told their dealer was going to be unavailable for the next couple of hours. (Laughter) A lot of us feel like that, and it might sound weird to say, I've been talking about how disconnection is a major driver of addiction and weird to say it's growing, because you think we're the most connected society that's ever been, surely.
But I increasingly began to think that the connections we have or think we have, are like a kind of parody of human connection.
If you have a crisis in your life, you'll notice something.
It won't be your Twitter followers who come to sit with you.
It won't be your Facebook friends who help you turn it round.
It'll be your flesh and blood friends who you have deep and nuanced and textured, face-to-face relationships with, and there's a study I learned about from Bill McKibben, the environmental writer, that I think tells us a lot about this.
It looked at the number of close friends the average American believes they can call on in a crisis.
That number has been declining steadily since the 1950s.
The amount of floor space an individual has in their home has been steadily increasing, and I think that's like a metaphor for the choice we've made as a culture.
We've traded floorspace for friends, we've traded stuff for connections, and the result is we are one of the loneliest societies there has ever been.
And Bruce Alexander, the guy who did the Rat Park experiment, says, we talk all the time in addiction about individual recovery, and it's right to talk about that, but we need to talk much more about social recovery.
Something's gone wrong with us, not just with individuals but as a group, and we've created a society where, for a lot of us, life looks a whole lot more like that isolated cage and a whole lot less like Rat Park.
If I'm honest, this isn't why I went into it.
I didn't go in to the discover the political stuff, the social stuff.
I wanted to know how to help the people I love.
And when I came back from this long journey and I'd learned all this, I looked at the addicts in my life, and if you're really candid, it's hard loving an addict, and there's going to be lots of people who know in this room.
You are angry a lot of the time, and I think one of the reasons why this debate is so charged is because it runs through the heart of each of us, right?
Everyone has a bit of them that looks at an addict and thinks, I wish someone would just stop you.
And the kind of scripts we're told for how to deal with the addicts in our lives is typified by, I think, the reality show "Intervention," if you guys have ever seen it.
I think everything in our lives is defined by reality TV, but that's another TED Talk.
If you've ever seen the show "Intervention," it's a pretty simple premise.
Get an addict, all the people in their life, gather them together, confront them with what they're doing, and they say, if you don't shape up, we're going to cut you off.
So what they do is they take the connection to the addict, and they threaten it, they make it contingent on the addict behaving the way they want.
And I began to think, I began to see why that approach doesn't work, and I began to think that's almost like the importing of the logic of the Drug War into our private lives.
So I was thinking, how could I be Portuguese?
And what I've tried to do now, and I can't tell you I do it consistently and I can't tell you it's easy, is to say to the addicts in my life that I want to deepen the connection with them, to say to them, I love you whether you're using or you're not.
I love you, whatever state you're in, and if you need me, I'll come and sit with you because I love you and I don't want you to be alone or to feel alone.
And I think the core of that message -- you're not alone, we love you -- has to be at every level of how we respond to addicts, socially, politically and individually.
For 100 years now, we've been singing war songs about addicts.
I think all along we should have been singing love songs to them, because the opposite of addiction is not sobriety.
The opposite of addiction is connection.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Jeanie, Will and Adina are three senior citizens connected by a special relationship.
They view their bond as a shield from the loneliness of aging.
I first met them at a retirement home in Los Angeles, where I had been photographing for three years.
I saw as they approached the gate one night, and felt an immediate connection to them.
Although I didn't know the details of their love triangle, I intuitively felt that I had to find out who they were.
Questioning a nurse a day later, she said to me, "Oh, you're talking about the threesome."
(Laughter) I was intrigued.
(Laughter) The trio set out on a daily adventure to coffee and doughnut shops, bus stops and street corners.
I soon learned that the purpose of these outings was solace and a search for meaning.
The trio sought to combat their alienation by literally integrating themselves in public streets.
Yet, even when arm in arm, no one saw them.
We often think that as we age, we lose the desires held in our youth.
Actually, as a teenage photojournalist when I met the trio, I saw their behavior as a mirror to the fears of exclusion and desires for intimacy that I also carried.
I related to their invisibility, which pained me during my childhood but has become my greatest asset as an immersive documentarian, because I can just fade into my empathy.
As we walked down the streets of Hollywood, in a neighborhood of screenwriters, actors and filmmakers, the trio assumed the invisibility that each senior does.
I would ask myself, "How is it that no one else sees these three human beings?
Why is it that I am the only one who sees them?"
Years later, as I began to share this work with the public, I noticed that people are largely uncomfortable with this story.
Perhaps it is because the trio doesn't assume conventional notions associated with love, romance or partnership.
They were unseen in public and shunned by their peers.
They wanted to belong somewhere but only seemed to belong with each other.
I wanted to belong somewhere, too.
And my camera has been a catalyst for me to belong everywhere.
But beyond challenging sociocultural norms about the elderly, the trio sheds light on fear of remoteness.
At the end of each day, they return to their respective retirement homes.
Under the surface of their aloneness, there is a desire for community, for their people.
There was a sense that they were each yearning for their tribe, but that comfort comes with compromise, because Will cannot commit to one woman.
Sitting with Jeanie one day in her apartment, she said to me, "Sharing Will is a thorn in your side.
A relationship between a man and a woman is private.
It is a couple, not a trio."
My process is to essentially become the people I document by spending years with them as an observer-occupant, to create a safe space, to then become hidden in plain sight.
I was about 17 when I met the trio, and I shadowed them for four years.
We actually see, in the breakdown of social development, that adolescence and old age look strikingly alike, because both are periods of identity confusion.
I identified with the women.
But also with Will, who made me aware of the divide in me.
The schism that we each often have about what we crave and the actuality of our situation.
Before shooting this series, I was also in love with two different people who knew about each other, being the object over which they fought.
But I also knew what it was like to be at the base of the triangle, like Jeanie or Adina, asking myself, "Why aren't I enough?"
I would look through my viewfinder and see three elderly figures, and it became impossible to deny that regardless of age, we were each in pursuit of filling the proverbial hole through other people.
Perhaps the discomfort of looking at Jeanie, Will and Adina's story is truly a reminder that even at the end of life, we may never reach the fantasy we have envisioned for ourselves.
Thank you for listening.
(Applause)
I love trees, and I'm very lucky, because we live near a wonderful arboretum, and Sundays, usually, I'd go there with my wife and now, with my four-year-old, and we'd climb in the trees, we'd play hide and seek.
The second school I was at had big trees too, had a fantastic tulip tree, I think it was the biggest in the country, and it also had a lot of wonderful bushes and vegetation around it, around the playing fields.
One day I was grabbed by some of my classmates, and taken in the bushes -- I was stripped; I was attacked; I was abused; and this came out of the blue.
Now, the reason I say that, because, afterwards, I was thinking -- well, I went back into the school -- I felt dirty; I felt betrayed; I felt ashamed, but mainly -- mainly, I felt powerless.
And 30 years later I was sitting in an airplane, next to a lady called Veronica, who came from Chile, and we were on a human rights tour, and she was starting to tell me what it was like to be tortured, and, from my very privileged position, this was the only reference point that I had.
And it was an amazing learning experience because, for me, human rights have been something in which I had, you know, a part-time interest, but, mainly, it was something that happened to other people over there.
But I got a phone call from Bono in 1985 and, as you know, he's a great singer, but he's a magnificent hustler, and -- (Laughter) -- a very hard guy to say no to, and he was saying, you know, just after I'd done the Biko song, we're going to do a tour for Amnesty, you have to be on it, and really that was the first time that I'd been out and started meeting people who'd watched their family being shot in front of them, who'd had a partner thrown out of an airplane into an ocean, and suddenly this world of human rights arrived in my world, and I couldn't really walk away in quite the same way as before.
So I got involved with this tour, which was for Amnesty, and then in '88 I took over Bono's job trying to learn how to hustle.
I didn't do it as well, but we managed to get Youssou N'Dour, Sting, Tracy Chapman, and Bruce Springsteen to go 'round the world for Amnesty, and it was an amazing experience.
And, once again, I got an extraordinary education, and it was the first time, really, that I'd met a lot of these people in the different countries, and these human rights stories became very physical, and, again, I couldn't really walk away quite so comfortably.
But the thing that really amazed me, that I had no idea, was that you could suffer in this way and then have your whole experience, your story, denied, buried and forgotten.
And it seemed that whenever there was a camera around, or a video or film camera, it was a great deal harder to do -- for those in power to bury the story.
And Reebok set up a foundation after these Human Rights Now tours and there was a decision then -- well, we made a proposal, for a couple of years, about trying to set up a division that was going to give cameras to human rights activists.
It didn't really get anywhere, and then the Rodney King incident happened, and people thought, OK, if you have a camera in the right place at the right time, or, perhaps, the wrong time, depending who you are, then you can actually start doing something, and campaigning, and being heard, and telling people about what's going on.
So, WITNESS was started in '92 and it's since given cameras out in over 60 countries.
And we campaign with activist groups and help them tell their story and, in fact, I will show you in a moment one of the most recent campaigns, and I'm afraid it's a story from Uganda, and, although we had a wonderful story from Uganda yesterday, this one isn't quite so good.
In the north of Uganda, there are something like 1.5 million internally displaced people, people who are not refugees in another country, but because of the civil war, which has been going on for about 20 years, they have nowhere to live.
And 20,000 kids have been taken away to become child soldiers, and the International Criminal Court is going after five of the leaders of the -- now, what's it called?
I forget the name of the of the army -- it's Lord's Resistance Army, I believe -- but the government, also, doesn't have a clean sheet, so if we could run the first video.
(Music) Woman: Life in the camp is never simple. Even today life is difficult.
We stay because of the fear that what pushed us into the camp ...
still exists back home.
Text: "Between Two Fires: Torture and Displacement in Northern Uganda" Man: When we were at home, it was Kony's [rebel] soldiers disturbing us.
At first, we were safe in the camp.
But later the government soldiers began mistreating us a lot.
(Chanting) Jennifer: A soldier walked onto the road, asking where we'd been.
Evelyn and I hid behind my mother.
Evelyn: He ordered us to sit down, so we sat down.
The other soldier also came.
Jennifer: The man came and started undressing me.
The other one carried Evelyn aside.
The one who was defiling me then left me and went to rape Evelyn.
And the one who was raping Evelyn came and defiled me also.
Man: The soldiers with clubs this long beat us to get a confession.
They kept telling us, "Tell the truth!" as they beat us.
Woman: They insisted that I was lying.
At that moment, they fired and shot off my fingers.
I fell. They ran to join the others ... leaving me for dead.
(Music) Text: Uganda ratified the Convention Against Torture in 1986.
Torture is defined as any act by which severe pain of suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted by a person acting in an official capacity to obtain information or a confession, to punish, coerce or intimidate.
Peter Gabriel: So torture is not something that always happens on other soil.
In my country, it was -- we had been looking at pictures of British soldiers beating up young Iraqis; we've got Abu Ghraib; we've got Guantanamo Bay.
I had a driver on my way to Newark Airport, and he told me a story that, in the middle of the night, 4 a.m., he'd been taken out of his home in Queens -- taken to a place in the Midwest, that he was interrogated and tortured and returned to the street four weeks later, because he had the same -- he was Middle Eastern, and he had the same name as one of the 9/11 pilots, and that may or may not be true -- I didn't think he was a liar, though.
And, I think, if we look around the world, as well as the polar ice caps melting, human rights, which have been fought for, for many hundreds of years in some cases, are, also, eroding very fast, and that is something that we need to take a look at and, maybe, start campaigning for.
I mean, here, too, one of our partners was at Van Jones and the Books Not Bars project -- they have managed, with their footage in California to change the youth correction systems employed, and it's much -- much -- I think, more humane methods are being looked at, how you should lock up young kids, and that's questionable to start off.
And as the story of Mr. Morales, just down the road, excuse me, Mr. Gabriel, would you mind if we delayed your execution a little bit?
No, not at all, no problem, take your time.
But this, surely, whoever that man is, whatever he's done, this is cruel and unusual punishment.
Anyway, WITNESS has been trying to arm the brave people who often put their lives at risk around the world, with cameras, and I'd like to show you just a little more of that. Thank you.
(Thunder) Text: You can say a story is fabricated.
(Music) Text: You can say a jury is corrupt.
You can say a person is lying.
You can say you don't trust newspapers.
But you can't say what you just saw never happened.
Help WITNESS give cameras to the world.
Shoot a video; expose injustice; reveal the truth; show us what's wrong with the world; and maybe we can help make it right.
WITNESS.
All the video you have just seen was recorded by human rights groups working with WITNESS.
(Applause) PG: WITNESS was born of technological innovation -- in a sense the small, portable, DV cam was really what allowed it to come into being.
And we've also been trying to get computers out to the world, so that groups can communicate much more effectively, campaign much more effectively, but now we have the wonderful possibility, which is given to us from the mobile phone with the camera in it, because that is cheap; it's ubiquitous; and it's moving fast all around the world -- and it's very exciting for us.
And so, the dream is that we could have a world in which anyone who has anything bad happen to them of this sort has a chance of getting their story uploaded, being seen, being watched, that they really know that they can be heard, that there would be a giant website, maybe, a little like Google Earth, and you could fly over and find out the realities of what's going, for the world's inhabitants. In a way what this technology is allowing is, really, that a lot of the problems of the world can have a human face, that we can actually see who's dying of AIDS or who's being beaten up, for the first time, and we can hear their stories in a way that the blogger culture -- if we can move that into these sort of fields, I think we can really transform the world in all sorts of ways.
There could be a new movement growing up, rising from the ground, reaching for the light, and growing strong, just like a tree. Thank you.
In this rather long sort of marathon presentation, I've tried to break it up into three parts: the first being a whole lot of examples on how it can be a little bit more pleasurable to deal with a computer and really address the qualities of the human interface.
And these will be some simple design qualities and they will also be some qualities of, if you will, the intelligence of interaction.
Then the second part will really just be examples of new technologies -- new media falling very much into that mold.
Again, I will go through them as fast as possible.
And then the last one will be some examples I've been able to collect, which I think illustrate this at least as best I can, in the world of entertainment.
People have this belief -- and I share most of it -- that we will be using the TV screens or their equivalents for electronic books of the future. But then you think, "My God! What a terrible image you get when you look at still pictures on TV."
Well, it doesn't have to be terrible.
And that is a slide taken from a TV set and it was pre-processed to be very sympathetic to the TV medium, and it absolutely looks beautiful.
Well, what's happened? How did people get into this mess?
Where you are now, all of a sudden, sitting in front of personal computers and video text -- teletext systems, and somewhat horrified by what you see on the screen?
Well, you have to remember that TV was designed to be looked at eight times the distance of the diagonal.
So you get a 13-inch, 19-inch, whatever, TV, and then you should multiply that by eight and that's the distance you should sit away from the TV set.
Now we've put people 18 inches in front of a TV, and all the artifacts that none of the original designers expected to be seen, all of a sudden, are staring you in the face: the shadow mask, the scan lines, all of that.
And they can be treated very easily; there are actually ways of getting rid of them, there are actually ways of just making absolutely beautiful pictures.
I'm talking here a little bit about display technologies.
Let me talk about how you might input information.
And my favorite example is always fingers.
I'm very interested in touch-sensitive displays.
High-tech, high-touch. Isn't that what some of you said?
It's certainly a very important medium for input, and a lot of people think that fingers are a very low-resolution sort of stylus for inputting to a display.
In fact, they're not: it's really a very, very high-resolution input medium -- you have to just do it twice, you have to touch the screen and then rotate your finger slightly -- and you can move a cursor with great accuracy.
And so when you see on the market these systems that have just a few light emitting diodes on the side and are very low resolution, it's nice that they exist because it still is better than nothing.
But it, in some sense, misses the point: namely, that fingers are a very, very high-resolution input medium.
Now, what are some of the other advantages?
Well, the one advantage is that you don't have to pick them up, and people don't realize how important that is -- not having to pick up your fingers to use them. (Laughter) When you think for a second of the mouse on Macintosh -- and I will not criticize the mouse too much -- when you're typing -- what you have -- you want to now put something -- first of all, you've got to find the mouse.
You have to probably stop. Maybe not come to a grinding halt, but you've got to sort of find that mouse. Then you find the mouse, and you're going to have to wiggle it a little bit to see where the cursor is on the screen.
And then when you finally see where it is, then you've got to move it to get the cursor over there, and then -- "Bang" -- you've got to hit a button or do whatever.
That's four separate steps versus typing and then touching and typing and just doing it all in one motion -- or one-and-a-half, depending on how you want to count.
Again, what I'm trying to do is just illustrate the kinds of problems that I think face the designers of new computer systems and entertainment systems and educational systems from the perspective of the quality of that interface.
And another advantage, of course, of using fingers is you have 10 of them.
And we have never known how to do this technically, so this slide is a fake slide.
We never succeeded in using ten fingers, but there are certain things you can do, obviously, with more than one-finger input, which is rather fascinating.
What we did stumble across was something ...
Again, which is typical of the computer field, is when you have a bug that you can't get rid of you turn it into a feature.
And maybe ... (Laughter) maybe a mouse is a new kind of bug.
But the bug in our case was in touch-sensitive displays: we wanted to be able to draw -- you know, rub your finger across the screen to input continuous points -- and there was just too much friction created between your finger and the glass -- if glass was the substrate, which it usually is.
So we found that that actually was a feature in the sense you could build a pressure-sensitive display.
And when you touch it with your finger, you can actually, then, introduce all the forces on the face of that screen, and that actually has a certain amount of value.
Let me see if I can load another disc and show you, quickly, an example.
Now, imagine a screen, which is not only touch-sensitive now, it's pressure-sensitive.
And it's pressure-sensitive to the forces both in the plane of the screen -- X, Y, and Z at least in one direction; we couldn't figure out how to come in the other direction.
But let me get rid of the slide, and let's see if this comes on.
OK. So there is the pressure-sensitive display in operation.
The person's just, if you will, pushing on the screen to make a curve.
But this is the interesting part.
I want to stop it for a second because the movie is very badly made.
And the particular display was built about six years ago, and when we moved from one room to another room, a rather large person sat on it and it got destroyed.
So all we have is this record. (Laughter) But imagine that screen having lots of objects on it and the person has touched an object -- one of N -- like he did there, and then pushed on it.
Now, imagine a program where some of those objects are physically heavy and some are light: one is an anvil on a fuzzy rug and the other one is a ping-pong ball on a sheet of glass.
And when you touch it, you have to really push very hard to move that anvil across the screen, and yet you touch the ping-pong ball very lightly and it just scoots across the screen.
And what you can do -- oops, I didn't mean to do that -- what you can do is actually feed back to the user the feeling of the physical properties.
So again, they don't have to be weight; they could be a general trying to move troops, and he's got to move an aircraft carrier versus a little boat.
In fact, they funded it for that very reason.
(Laughter) The whole notion, then, is one that at the interface there are physical properties in that transducer -- in this case it's pressure and touches -- that allow you to present things to the user that you could never present before.
So it's not simply looking at the quality or, if you will, the luxury of that interface, but it's actually looking at the idea of presenting things that previously couldn't be presented before.
I want to move on to another example, which is one of a different sort, where we're trying to use computer and video disc technology now to come up with a new kind of book.
Here, the idea is that you're going to take this book, if you will, and it's going to come alive.
You're going to sort of breathe life into it.
We are so used to doing monologues.
Filmmakers, for example, are the experts in monologue making: you make a film and it has a well-formed beginning, middle and end, and in some sense the art of it is that.
And you then say, "There's an opportunity for making conversational movies." Well, what does that mean?
And it sort of nibbles at the core of the whole profession and all the assumptions of that medium.
So, book writing is the same thing.
What I'll show you very quickly is a new kind of book where it is mixed now with ... all sorts of things live in there, but you have to keep a few things in mind.
One is that this book knows about itself.
Each frame of the movie has information about itself.
So it knows, or at least there is computer-readable information in the medium itself. It's just not a static movie frame.
That's one thing. The other is that you have to realize that it is a random access medium, and you can, in fact, branch and expand and elaborate and shrink.
And here -- again, my favorite example -- is the cookbook, the "Larousse Gastronomique."
And I think I use the example all too often, but it's a great one because there is a classic ending in that little encyclopedia-style cookbook that tells you how to do something like penguin, and you get to the end of the recipe and it says, "Cook until done."
Now, that would be, if you will, the top green track, which doesn't mean too much. But you might have to elaborate for me or for somebody who isn't an expert, and say, "Cook at 380 degrees for 45 minutes."
And then for a real beginner, you would go down even further and elaborate more -- say, "Open the oven, preheat, wait for the light to go out, open the door, don't leave it open too long, put the penguin in and shut the door ..." (Laughter) whatever.
And that's a much more elaborate one than you dribble back.
That's one kind of use of random access.
And the other is where you want to explain the same thing in different ways.
If you're in a classroom situation and somebody asks a question, the last thing you do is repeat what you just said.
You try and think of a different way of saying the same thing, or if you know the particular student and that student's cognitive style, then you might say it in a way that you think would have a good impedance match with that student.
There are all sorts of techniques you will use -- and again, this is a different kind of branching.
So, what I will show you is ... it's a rather boring book, but I'm afraid sometimes you have to do boring books because your sponsors aren't necessarily interested in fiction and entertainment. And this is a book on how to repair a transmission.
Now, I don't even know what vintage the transmission is, but let me just show you very quickly some of it, and we'll move on.
(Video) Narrator: And continue to get descriptions for each of these chapters.
Nicholas Negroponte: Now, this is his table of contents.
Just a picture of the transmission, and as you rub your finger across the transmission it highlights the various parts.
Narrator: When I find a chapter that I want to see, I just touch the text and the system will format pages for me to read.
The words or phrases that are lit up in red are glossary words, so I can get a different definition by just touching the word, and the definition appears, superimposed over the illustration.
NN: This is about the oil pan, or the oil filter and all that.
This is relatively important because it sets the page ...
Narrator: This is another example of a page with glossary words highlighted in red.
I can get a definition of these words just by touching them, and the definition will appear in the illustration corner.
I can get back to the illustration, but in this case it's not a single frame, but it's actually a movie of someone coming into the frame and doing the repair that's described in the text.
The two-headed slider is a speed control that allows me to watch the movie at various speeds, in forward or reverse.
And the movie is displayed as a full frame movie.
I can go back to the beginning ... and play the movie at full speed.
Here's another step-by-step procedure, only in this case -- NN: Okay, this movie is ... Everybody's heard of sound-sync movies -- this is text-sync movies, so as the movie plays, the text gets highlighted.
We highlight the text as we go through the movie.
Repairman: ... Not too far out. Front poles, preferably.
Don't loosen them too far. If you loosen them too far, you'll have a big mess.
NN: I suspect that some of you might not even understand that language.
(Laughter) OK. I'm at the third and last part of this, which I said I would make an attempt to at least give you some examples that may be more directly related to the world of entertainment.
And of course, good education has got to be good entertainment, so my first example will be drawn from a very recent experiment that we've been doing -- in this case, in Senegal -- where we have tried to use personal computers as a pedagogical medium. But not as teaching machines at all; the whole notion is to use this as an instrument where there is a complete reversal of roles -- the child is, if you will, the teacher and the machine is the student -- and the art of computer programming is a vehicle that sort of approximates thinking about thinking.
But teaching kids programming per se is utterly irrelevant.
And there are just a few slides I want to go through, but there's a story I'd like to tell. And that was when, before we did this in any developing countries -- we're doing it, in fact, in three developing countries right now: Pakistan, Colombia and Senegal -- we did it in some pretty rough areas of New York City.
And one child, whose name I've forgotten, was about seven or eight years old, absolutely considered mentally handicapped -- couldn't read, didn't even make it in the lowest section of the school's classes -- and was pretty much not in school, though physically there.
But did hang around the, quote, "computer room," where there were quite a few computers, and learned this particular language called Logo -- and learned it with great ease and found it a lot of fun, it was very interesting. And one day, by chance, some visitors from the NIE came by in their double-breasted suits looking at this setup, and none of the children who were normally there, except for this one child, were there.
He was, and he said, "Let me show you how this works," and they got an absolutely ingenuous, wonderful description of Logo.
And the child was just zipping right through it, showing them all sorts of things until they asked him how to do something which he couldn't explain and so he flipped through the manual, found the explanation and typed the command and got it to do what they asked.
They were delighted, and by the time it was time to go see the principal, whom they'd actually come to see -- not the computer room -- they went upstairs and they said, "This is absolutely remarkable!
That child was very articulate and showed us and even dealt with the things he couldn't do automatically with that manual. It was just absolutely fantastic."
The principal said, "There's a dreadful mistake, because that child can't read.
And you obviously have been hoodwinked or you've talked about somebody else."
And they all got up and they all went downstairs and the child was still there. And they did something very intelligent: they asked the child, "Can you read?"
And the child said, "No, I can't."
And then they said, "But wait a minute. You just looked through that manual and you found ... " and he said, "Oh, but that's not reading."
And so they said, "Well, what's reading then?"
He says, "Well, reading is this junk they give me in little books to read.
It's absolutely irrelevant, (Laughter) and I get nothing for it.
But here, with a little bit of effort I get a lot of return."
And it really meant something to the child.
The child read beautifully, it turned out, and was really very competent. So it actually meant something.
And that story has many other anecdotes that are similar, but wow. The key to the future of computers in education is right there, and it is: when does it mean something to a child?
There is a myth, and it truly is a myth: we believe -- and I'm sure a lot of you believe in this room -- that it is harder to read and write than it is to learn how to speak.
And it's not, but we think speech -- "My God, little children pick it up somehow, and by the age of two they're doing a mediocre job, and by three and four they're speaking reasonably well.
And yet you've got to go to school to learn how to read, and you have to sit in a classroom and somebody has to teach you.
Hence, it must be harder." Well, it's not harder.
What the truth is is that speaking has great value to a child; the child can get a great deal by talking to you.
Reading and writing is utterly useless.
There is no reason for a child to read and write except blind faith, and that it's going to help you. (Laughter) So what happens is you go to school and people say, "Just believe me, you're going to like it.
You're going to like reading," and just read and read.
On the other hand, you give a kid -- a three-year-old kid -- a computer and they type a little command and -- Poof! -- something happens.
And all of a sudden ... You may not call that reading and writing, but a certain bit of typing and reading stuff on the screen has a huge payoff, and it's a lot of fun.
And in fact, it's a powerful educational instrument.
Well, in Senegal we found that this was the traditional classroom: 120 kids -- three per desk -- one teacher, a little bit of chalk.
This student was one of our first students, and it's the girl on the left leaning with her chalkboard, and she came ... within two days -- I want to show you the program she wrote, and remember her hairstyle. And that is the program she made.
That's what meant something to her, is doing the hair pattern, and actually did it within two days -- an hour each day -- and found it was, to her, absolutely the most meaningful piece ...
But rooted in that, little did she know how much knowledge she was acquiring about geometry and just math and logic and all the rest.
And again, I could talk for three hours about this subject.
I will come to my last example and then quit.
And my last example -- as some of my former colleagues, whom I see in the room, can imagine what it will be.
Yes, it is. It's our work -- that was a while ago, and it still is my favorite project -- of teleconferencing.
And the reason it remains a favorite project is that we were asked to do a teleconferencing system where you had the following situation: you had five people at five different sites -- they were known people -- and you had to have these people in teleconference, such that each one was utterly convinced that the other four were physically present.
Now, that is sufficiently zany that we would, obviously, jump to the bait, and we did.
And the fact that we knew the people -- we had to take a page out of the history of Walt Disney -- we actually went so far as to build CRTs in the shapes of the people's faces.
So if I wanted to call my friend Peter Sprague on the phone, my secretary would get his head out and bring it and set it on the desk, (Laughter) and that would be the TV used for the occasion.
And it's uncanny: there's no way I can explain to you the amount of eye contact you get with that physical face projected on a 3D CRT of that sort.
The next thing that we had to do is to persuade them that there needed to be spatial correspondence, which is straightforward, but again, it's something that didn't fall naturally out of a telecommunications or computing style of thinking; it was a very, if you will, architectural or spatial concept.
And that was to recognize that when you sit around the table, the actual location of the people becomes rather important.
And when somebody gets up, in fact, to go answer a phone or use a bathroom or something, the empty seat becomes, if you will, that person. And you point frequently to the empty seat and you say, "He or she wouldn't agree," and the empty chair is that person and the spatiality is crucial.
So we said, "Well, these will be on round tables and the order around the table had to be the same, so that at my site, I would be, if you will, real and then at each other's site you'd have these plastic heads.
And the plastic heads, sometimes you want to project them.
And there are a number of schemes, which I don't want to dwell on, but this is the one that we finally used where we projected onto rear screen material that was molded in the face -- literally in the face of the person.
And I'll show you one more slide, where this is actually made from something called a solid photograph and is the screen.
Now, we track, on the person's head, the head motions -- so we transmit with a video the head positions -- and so this head moves in about two axes.
So if I, all of a sudden, turn to the person to my left and start talking to that person, then at the person to my right's site, he'll see these two plastic heads talking to each other.
And then if that person interrupts, then those two heads may turn.
And it really is reconstructing, quite accurately, teleconferencing.
Alec Soth: So about 10 years ago, I got a call from a woman in Texas, Stacey Baker, and she'd seen some of my photographs in an art exhibition and was wondering if she could commission me to take a portrait of her parents.
Now, at the time I hadn't met Stacey, and I thought this was some sort of wealthy oil tycoon and I'd struck it rich, but it was only later that I found out she'd actually taken out a loan to make this happen.
I took the picture of her parents, but I was actually more excited about photographing Stacey.
The picture I made that day ended up becoming one of my best-known portraits.
At the time I made this picture, Stacey was working as an attorney for the State of Texas.
Not long after, she left her job to study photography in Maine, and while she was there, she ended up meeting the director of photography at the New York Times Magazine and was actually offered a job.
Stacey Baker: In the years since, Alec and I have done a number of magazine projects together, and we've become friends.
A few months ago, I started talking to Alec about a fascination of mine.
I've always been obsessed with how couples meet.
I asked Alec how he and his wife Rachel met, and he told me the story of a high school football game where she was 16 and he was 15, and he asked her out.
He liked her purple hair.
She said yes, and that was it.
I then asked Alec if he'd be interested in doing a photography project exploring this question.
AS: And I was interested in the question, but I was actually much more interested in Stacey's motivation for asking it, particularly since I'd never known Stacey to have a boyfriend.
So as part of this project, I thought it'd be interesting if she tried to meet someone.
So my idea was to have Stacey here go speed dating in Las Vegas on Valentine's Day.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Music) SB: We ended up at what was advertised as the world's largest speed dating event.
I had 19 dates and each date lasted three minutes.
Participants were given a list of ice- breaker questions to get the ball rolling, things like, "If you could be any kind of animal, what would you be?"
That sort of thing.
My first date was Colin.
He's from England, and he once married a woman he met after placing an ad for a Capricorn.
Alec and I saw him at the end of the evening, and he said he'd kissed a woman in line at one of the concession stands.
Zack and Chris came to the date-a-thon together.
This is Carl.
I asked Carl, "What's the first thing you notice about a woman?"
He said, "Tits."
(Laughter) Matthew is attracted to women with muscular calves.
We talked about running. He does triathlons, I run half-marathons.
Alec actually liked his eyes and asked if I was attracted to him, but I wasn't, and I don't think he was attracted to me either.
Austin and Mike came together.
Mike asked me a hypothetical question.
He said, "You're in an elevator running late for a meeting.
Someone makes a dash for the elevator.
Do you hold it open for them?"
And I said I would not.
(Laughter) Cliff said the first thing he notices about a woman is her teeth, and we complimented each other's teeth.
Because he's an open mouth sleeper, he says he has to floss more to help prevent gum disease, and so I asked him how often he flosses, and he said, "Every other day."
(Laughter) Now, as someone who flosses twice a day, I wasn't really sure that that was flossing more but I don't think I said that out loud.
Bill is an auditor, and we talked the entire three minutes about auditing. (Laughter) The first thing Spencer notices about a woman is her complexion.
He feels a lot of women wear too much makeup, and that they should only wear enough to accentuate the features that they have.
I told him I didn't wear any makeup at all and he seemed to think that that was a good thing.
Craig told me he didn't think I was willing to be vulnerable.
He was also frustrated when I couldn't remember my most embarrassing moment.
He thought I was lying, but I wasn't.
I didn't think he liked me at all, but at the end of the night, he came back to me and he gave me a box of chocolates.
William was really difficult to talk to.
I think he was drunk.
(Laughter) Actor Chris McKenna was the MC of the event.
He used to be on "The Young and the Restless."
I didn't actually go on a date with him.
Alec said he saw several women give their phone numbers to him.
Needless to say, I didn't fall in love.
I didn't feel a particular connection with any of the men that I went on dates with, and I didn't feel like they felt a particular connection with me either.
AS: Now, the most beautiful thing to me -- (Laughter) -- as a photographer is the quality of vulnerability.
The physical exterior reveals a crack in which you can get a glimpse at a more fragile interior.
At this date-a-thon event, I saw so many examples of that, but as I watched Stacey's dates and talked to her about them, I realized how different photographic love is from real love.
What is real love? How does it work?
In order to work on this question and to figure out how someone goes from meeting on a date to having a life together, Stacey and I went to Sun City Summerlin, which is the largest retirement community in Las Vegas.
Our contact there was George, who runs the community's photography club.
He arranged for us to meet other couples in their makeshift photo studio.
SB: After 45 years of marriage, Anastasia's husband died two years ago, so we asked if she had an old wedding picture.
She met her husband when she was a 15-year-old waitress at a small barbecue place in Michigan.
He was 30.
She'd lied about her age.
He was the first person she'd dated.
Dean had been named photographer of the year in Las Vegas two years in a row, and this caught Alec's attention, as did the fact that he met his wife, Judy, at the same age when Alec met Rachel.
Dean admitted that he likes to look at beautiful women, but he's never questioned his decision to marry Judy.
AS: George met Josephine at a parish dance.
He was 18, she was 15.
Like a lot of the couples we met, they weren't especially philosophical about their early choices.
George said something that really stuck with me.
He said, "When you get that feeling, you just go with it."
Bob and Trudy met on a blind date when she was still in high school.
They said they weren't particularly attracted to each other when the first met.
Nevertheless, they were married soon after.
SB: The story that stayed with me the most was that of George, the photography club president, and his wife, Mary.
This was George and Mary's second marriage.
They met at a country-western club in Louisville, Kentucky called the Sahara.
He was there alone drinking and she was with friends.
When they started dating, he owed the IRS 9,000 dollars in taxes, and she offered to help him get out of debt, so for the next year, he turned his paychecks over to Mary, and she got him out of debt.
George was actually an alcoholic when they married, and Mary knew it.
At some point in their marriage, he says he consumed 54 beers in one day.
Another time, when he was drunk, he threatened to kill Mary and her two kids, but they escaped and a SWAT team was called to the house.
Amazingly, Mary took him back, and eventually things got better.
George has been involved in Alcoholics Anonymous and hasn't had a drink in 36 years.
(Music) At the end of the day, after we left Sun City, I told Alec that I didn't actually think that the stories of how these couples met were all that interesting.
What was more interesting was how they managed to stay together.
AS: They all had this beautiful quality of endurance, but that was true of the singles, too.
The world is hard, and the singles were out there trying to connect with other people, and the couples were holding onto each other after all these decades.
My favorite pictures on this trip were of Joe and Roseanne.
Now, by the time we met Joe and Roseanne, we'd gotten in the habit of asking couples if they had an old wedding photograph.
In their case, they simultaneously pulled out of their wallets the exact same photograph.
What's more beautiful, I thought to myself, this image of a young couple who has just fallen in love or the idea of these two people holding onto this image for decades?
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, people are more afraid of insects than they are of dying.
(Laughter) At least, according to a 1973 "Book of Lists" survey which preceded all those online best, worst, funniest lists that you see today.
Only heights and public speaking exceeded the six-legged as sources of fear.
And I suspect if you had put spiders in there, the combinations of insects and spiders would have just topped the chart.
Now, I am not one of those people.
I really love insects.
I think they're interesting and beautiful, and sometimes even cute.
(Laughter) And I'm not alone.
For centuries, some of the greatest minds in science, from Charles Darwin to E.O. Wilson, have drawn inspiration from studying some of the smallest minds on Earth.
Well, why is that?
What is that keeps us coming back to insects?
Some of it, of course, is just the sheer magnitude of almost everything about them.
They're more numerous than any other kind of animal.
We don't even know how many species of insects there are, because new ones are being discovered all the time.
There are at least a million, maybe as many as 10 million.
This means that you could have an insect-of-the-month calendar and not have to reuse a species for over 80,000 years.
(Laughter) Take that, pandas and kittens!
(Laughter) More seriously, insects are essential.
We need them.
It's been estimated that 1 out of every 3 bites of food is made possible by a pollinator.
Scientist use insects to make fundamental discoveries about everything from the structure of our nervous systems to how our genes and DNA work.
But what I love most about insects is what they can tell us about our own behavior.
Insects seem like they do everything that people do.
They meet, they mate, they fight, they break up.
And they do so with what looks like love or animosity.
But what drives their behaviors is really different than what drives our own, and that difference can be really illuminating.
There's nowhere where that's more true than when it comes to one of our most consuming interests -- sex.
Now, I will maintain. and I think I can defend, what may seem like a surprising statement.
I think sex in insects is more interesting than sex in people.
(Laughter) And the wild variety that we see makes us challenge some of our own assumptions about what it means to be male and female.
Of course, to start with, a lot of insects don't need to have sex at all to reproduce.
Female aphids can make little, tiny clones of themselves without ever mating.
Virgin birth, right there.
On your rose bushes.
(Laughter) When they do have sex, even their sperm is more interesting than human sperm.
There are some kinds of fruit flies whose sperm is longer than the male's own body.
And that's important because the males use their sperm to compete.
Now, male insects do compete with weapons, like the horns on these beetles.
But they also compete after mating with their sperm.
Dragonflies and damselflies have penises that look kind of like Swiss Army knives with all of the attachments pulled out.
(Laughter) They use these formidable devices like scoops, to remove the sperm from previous males that the female has mated with.
(Laughter) So, what can we learn from this?
(Laughter) All right, it is not a lesson in the sense of us imitating them or of them setting an example for us to follow.
Which, given this, is probably just as well.
And also, did I mention sexual cannibalism is rampant among insects?
So, no, that's not the point.
But what I think insects do, is break a lot of the rules that we humans have about the sex roles.
So, people have this idea that nature dictates kind of a 1950s sitcom version of what males and females are like.
So that males are always supposed to be dominant and aggressive, and females are passive and coy.
But that's just not the case.
So for example, take katydids, which are relatives of crickets and grasshoppers.
The males are very picky about who they mate with, because they not only transfer sperm during mating, they also give the female something called a nuptial gift.
You can see two katydids mating in these photos.
In both panels, the male's the one on the right, and that sword-like appendage is the female's egg-laying organ.
The white blob is the sperm, the green blob is the nuptial gift, and the male manufactures this from his own body and it's extremely costly to produce.
It can weigh up to a third of his body mass.
I will now pause for a moment and let you think about what it would be like if human men, every time they had sex, had to produce something that weighed 50, 60, 70 pounds.
(Laughter) Okay, they would not be able to do that very often.
(Laughter) And indeed, neither can the katydids.
And so what that means is the katydid males are very choosy about who they offer these nuptial gifts to.
Now, the gift is very nutritious, and the female eats it during and after mating.
So, the bigger it is, the better off the male is, because that means more time for his sperm to drain into her body and fertilize her eggs.
But it also means that the males are very passive about mating, whereas the females are extremely aggressive and competitive, in an attempt to get as many of these nutritious nuptial gifts as they can.
So, it's not exactly a stereotypical set of rules.
Even more generally though, males are actually not all that important in the lives of a lot of insects.
In the social insects -- the bees and wasps and ants -- the individuals that you see every day -- the ants going back and forth to your sugar bowl, the honey bees that are flitting from flower to flower -- all of those are always female.
People have had a hard time getting their head around that idea for millennia.
The ancient Greeks knew that there was a class of bees, the drones, that are larger than the workers, although they disapproved of the drones' laziness because they could see that the drones just hang around the hive until the mating flight -- they're the males.
They hang around until the mating flight, but they don't participate in gathering nectar or pollen.
The Greeks couldn't figure out the drones' sex, and part of the confusion was that they were aware of the stinging ability of bees but they found it difficult to believe that any animals that bore such a weapon could possibly be a female.
Aristotle tried to get involved as well.
He suggested, "OK, if the stinging individuals are going to be the males ..."
Then he got confused, because that would have meant the males were also taking care of the young in a colony, and he seemed to think that would be completely impossible.
He then concluded that maybe bees had the organs of both sexes in the same individual, which is not that far-fetched, some animals do that, but he never really did get it figured out.
And you know, even today, my students, for instance, call every animal they see, including insects, a male.
And when I tell them that the ferocious army-ant soldiers with their giant jaws, used to defend the colony, are all always female, they seem to not quite believe me.
(Laughter) And certainly all of the movies -- Antz, Bee Movie -- portray the main character in the social insects as being male.
Well, what difference does this make?
These are movies. They're fiction.
They have talking animals in them.
What difference does it make if they talk like Jerry Seinfeld?
I think it does matter, and it's a problem that actually is part of a much deeper one that has implications for medicine and health and a lot of other aspects of our lives.
You all know that scientists use what we call model systems, which are creatures -- white rats or fruit flies -- that are kind of stand-ins for all other animals, including people.
And the idea is that what's true for a person will also be true for the white rat.
And by and large, that turns out to be the case.
But you can take the idea of a model system too far.
And what I think we've done, is use males, in any species, as though they are the model system.
The norm.
The way things are supposed to be.
And females as a kind of variant -- something special that you only study after you get the basics down.
And so, back to the insects.
I think what that means is that people just couldn't see what was in front of them.
Because they assumed that the world's stage was largely occupied by male players and females would only have minor, walk-on roles.
But when we do that, we really miss out on a lot of what nature is like.
And we can also miss out on the way natural, living things, including people, can vary.
And I think that's why we've used males as models in a lot of medical research, something that we know now to be a problem if we want the results to apply to both men and women.
Well, the last thing I really love about insects is something that a lot of people find unnerving about them.
They have little, tiny brains with very little cognitive ability, the way we normally think of it.
They have complicated behavior, but they lack complicated brains.
And so, we can't just think of them as though they're little people because they don't do things the way that we do.
I really love that it's difficult to anthropomorphize insects, to look at them and just think of them like they're little people in exoskeletons, with six legs.
(Laughter) Instead, you really have to accept them on their own terms, because insects make us question what's normal and what's natural.
Now, you know, people write fiction and talk about parallel universes.
They speculate about the supernatural, maybe the spirits of the departed walking among us.
The allure of another world is something that people say is part of why they want to dabble in the paranormal.
But as far as I'm concerned, who needs to be able to see dead people, when you can see live insects?
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the early days of Twitter, it was like a place of radical de-shaming.
People would admit shameful secrets about themselves, and other people would say, "Oh my God, I'm exactly the same."
Voiceless people realized that they had a voice, and it was powerful and eloquent.
If a newspaper ran some racist or homophobic column, we realized we could do something about it.
We could get them.
We could hit them with a weapon that we understood but they didn't -- a social media shaming.
Advertisers would withdraw their advertising.
When powerful people misused their privilege, we were going to get them.
This was like the democratization of justice.
Hierarchies were being leveled out.
We were going to do things better.
Soon after that, a disgraced pop science writer called Jonah Lehrer -- he'd been caught plagiarizing and faking quotes, and he was drenched in shame and regret, he told me.
And he had the opportunity to publicly apologize at a foundation lunch.
This was going to be the most important speech of his life.
Maybe it would win him some salvation.
He knew before he arrived that the foundation was going to be live-streaming his event, but what he didn't know until he turned up, was that they'd erected a giant screen Twitter feed right next to his head.
(Laughter) Another one in a monitor screen in his eye line.
I don't think the foundation did this because they were monstrous.
I think they were clueless: I think this was a unique moment when the beautiful naivety of Twitter was hitting the increasingly horrific reality.
And here were some of the Tweets that were cascading into his eye line, as he was trying to apologize: "Jonah Lehrer, boring us into forgiving him."
(Laughter) And, "Jonah Lehrer has not proven that he is capable of feeling shame."
That one must have been written by the best psychiatrist ever, to know that about such a tiny figure behind a lectern.
And, "Jonah Lehrer is just a frigging sociopath."
That last word is a very human thing to do, to dehumanize the people we hurt.
It's because we want to destroy people but not feel bad about it.
Imagine if this was an actual court, and the accused was in the dark, begging for another chance, and the jury was yelling out, "Bored! Sociopath!"
(Laughter) You know, when we watch courtroom dramas, we tend to identify with the kindhearted defense attorney, but give us the power, and we become like hanging judges.
Power shifts fast.
We were getting Jonah because he was perceived to have misused his privilege, but Jonah was on the floor then, and we were still kicking, and congratulating ourselves for punching up.
And it began to feel weird and empty when there wasn't a powerful person who had misused their privilege that we could get.
A day without a shaming began to feel like a day picking fingernails and treading water.
Let me tell you a story.
It's about a woman called Justine Sacco.
She was a PR woman from New York with 170 Twitter followers, and she'd Tweet little acerbic jokes to them, like this one on a plane from New York to London: [Weird German Dude: You're in first class. It's 2014. Get some deodorant."
-Inner monologue as inhale BO. Thank god for pharmaceuticals.] So Justine chuckled to herself, and pressed send, and got no replies, and felt that sad feeling that we all feel when the Internet doesn't congratulate us for being funny.
(Laughter) Black silence when the Internet doesn't talk back.
And then she got to Heathrow, and she had a little time to spare before her final leg, so she thought up another funny little acerbic joke: [Going to Africa. Hope I don't get AIDS. Just kidding. I'm white!] And she chuckled to herself, pressed send, got on the plane, got no replies, turned off her phone, fell asleep, woke up 11 hours later, turned on her phone while the plane was taxiing on the runway, and straightaway there was a message from somebody that she hadn't spoken to since high school, that said, "I am so sorry to see what's happening to you."
And then another message from a best friend, "You need to call me right now.
You are the worldwide number one trending topic on Twitter."
(Laughter) What had happened is that one of her 170 followers had sent the Tweet to a Gawker journalist, and he retweeted it to his 15,000 followers: [And now, a funny holiday joke from IAC's PR boss] And then it was like a bolt of lightning.
A few weeks later, I talked to the Gawker journalist.
I emailed him and asked him how it felt, and he said, "It felt delicious."
And then he said, "But I'm sure she's fine."
But she wasn't fine, because while she slept, Twitter took control of her life and dismantled it piece by piece.
First there were the philanthropists: [If @JustineSacco's unfortunate words ... bother you, join me in supporting @CARE's work in Africa.] [In light of ... disgusting, racist tweet, I'm donating to @care today] Then came the beyond horrified: [... no words for that horribly disgusting racist as fuck tweet from Justine Sacco.
I am beyond horrified.] Was anybody on Twitter that night? A few of you.
Did Justine's joke overwhelm your Twitter feed the way it did mine?
It did mine, and I thought what everybody thought that night, which was, "Wow, somebody's screwed!
Somebody's life is about to get terrible!"
And I sat up in my bed, and I put the pillow behind my head, and then I thought, I'm not entirely sure that joke was intended to be racist.
Maybe instead of gleefully flaunting her privilege, she was mocking the gleeful flaunting of privilege.
There's a comedy tradition of this, like South Park or Colbert or Randy Newman.
Maybe Justine Sacco's crime was not being as good at it as Randy Newman.
In fact, when I met Justine a couple of weeks later in a bar, she was just crushed, and I asked her to explain the joke, and she said, "Living in America puts us in a bit of a bubble when it comes to what is going on in the Third World.
I was making of fun of that bubble."
You know, another woman on Twitter that night, a New Statesman writer Helen Lewis, she reviewed my book on public shaming and wrote that she Tweeted that night, "I'm not sure that her joke was intended to be racist," and she said straightaway she got a fury of Tweets saying, "Well, you're just a privileged bitch, too."
And so to her shame, she wrote, she shut up and watched as Justine's life got torn apart.
It started to get darker: [Everyone go report this cunt @JustineSacco] Then came the calls for her to be fired.
[Good luck with the job hunt in the new year. #GettingFired] Thousands of people around the world decided it was their duty to get her fired.
[@JustineSacco last tweet of your career. #SorryNotSorry Corporations got involved, hoping to sell their products on the back of Justine's annihilation: [Next time you plan to tweet something stupid before you take off, make sure you are getting on a @Gogo flight!] (Laughter) A lot of companies were making good money that night.
You know, Justine's name was normally Googled 40 times a month.
That month, between December the 20th and the end of December, her name was Googled 1,220,000 times.
And one Internet economist told me that that meant that Google made somewhere between 120,000 dollars and 468,000 dollars from Justine's annihilation, whereas those of us doing the actual shaming -- we got nothing.
(Laughter) We were like unpaid shaming interns for Google.
(Laughter) And then came the trolls: [I'm actually kind of hoping Justine Sacco gets aids? lol] Somebody else on that wrote, "Somebody HIV-positive should rape this bitch and then we'll find out if her skin color protects her from AIDS."
And that person got a free pass.
Nobody went after that person.
We were all so excited about destroying Justine, and our shaming brains are so simple-minded, that we couldn't also handle destroying somebody who was inappropriately destroying Justine.
Justine was really uniting a lot of disparate groups that night, from philanthropists to "rape the bitch."
[@JustineSacco I hope you get fired! You demented bitch...
Just let the world know you're planning to ride bare back while in Africa.] Women always have it worse than men.
When a man gets shamed, it's, "I'm going to get you fired."
When a woman gets shamed, it's, "I'm going to get you fired and raped and cut out your uterus."
And then Justine's employers got involved: [IAC on @JustineSacco tweet: This is an outrageous, offensive comment.
Employee in question currently unreachable on an intl flight.] And that's when the anger turned to excitement: [All I want for Christmas is to see @JustineSacco's face when her plane lands and she checks her inbox/voicemail. #fired] [Oh man, @justinesacco is going to have the most painful phone-turning-on moment ever when her plane lands.] [We are about to watch this @JustineSacco bitch get fired. In REAL time.
Before she even KNOWS she's getting fired.] What we had was a delightful narrative arc.
We knew something that Justine didn't.
Can you think of anything less judicial than this?
Justine was asleep on a plane and unable to explain herself, and her inability was a huge part of the hilarity.
On Twitter that night, we were like toddlers crawling towards a gun.
Somebody worked out exactly which plane she was on, so they linked to a flight tracker website.
[British Airways Flight 43 On-time - arrives in 1 hour 34 minutes] A hashtag began trending worldwide: # hasJustineLandedYet?
[It is kinda wild to see someone self-destruct without them even being aware of it. #hasJustineLandedYet] [Seriously. I just want to go home to go to bed, but everyone at the bar is SO into #HasJustineLandedYet. Can't look away. Can't leave.] [#HasJustineLandedYet may be the best thing to happen to my Friday night.] [Is no one in Cape Town going to the airport to tweet her arrival?
Come on, twitter! I'd like pictures] And guess what? Yes there was.
[@JustineSacco HAS in fact landed at Cape Town international.
And if you want to know what it looks like to discover that you've just been torn to shreds because of a misconstrued liberal joke, not by trolls, but by nice people like us, this is what it looks like: [... She's decided to wear sunnies as a disguise.] So why did we do it?
I think some people were genuinely upset, but I think for other people, it's because Twitter is basically a mutual approval machine.
We surround ourselves with people who feel the same way we do, and we approve each other, and that's a really good feeling.
And if somebody gets in the way, we screen them out.
And do you know what that's the opposite of?
It's the opposite of democracy.
We wanted to show that we cared about people dying of AIDS in Africa.
Our desire to be seen to be compassionate is what led us to commit this profoundly un-compassionate act.
As Meghan O'Gieblyn wrote in the Boston Review, "This isn't social justice. It's a cathartic alternative."
For the past three years, I've been going around the world meeting people like Justine Sacco -- and believe me, there's a lot of people like Justine Sacco.
There's more every day.
And we want to think they're fine, but they're not fine.
The people I met were mangled.
They talked to me about depression, and anxiety and insomnia and suicidal thoughts.
One woman I talked to, who also told a joke that landed badly, she stayed home for a year and a half.
Before that, she worked with adults with learning difficulties, and was apparently really good at her job.
Justine was fired, of course, because social media demanded it.
But it was worse than that.
She was losing herself.
She was waking up in the middle of the night, forgetting who she was.
She was got because she was perceived to have misused her privilege.
And of course, that's a much better thing to get people for than the things we used to get people for, like having children out of wedlock.
But the phrase "misuse of privilege" is becoming a free pass to tear apart pretty much anybody we choose to.
It's becoming a devalued term, and it's making us lose our capacity for empathy and for distinguishing between serious and unserious transgressions.
Justine had 170 Twitter followers, and so to make it work, she had to be fictionalized.
Word got around that she was the daughter the mining billionaire Desmond Sacco.
[Let us not be fooled by #JustineSacco her father is a SA mining billionaire.
She's not sorry. And neither is her father.] I thought that was true about Justine, until I met her at a bar, and I asked her about her billionaire father, and she said, "My father sells carpets."
And I think back on the early days of Twitter, when people would admit shameful secrets about themselves, and other people would say, "Oh my God, I'm exactly the same."
These days, the hunt is on for people's shameful secrets.
You can lead a good, ethical life, but some bad phraseology in a Tweet can overwhelm it all, become a clue to your secret inner evil.
Maybe there's two types of people in the world: those people who favor humans over ideology, and those people who favor ideology over humans.
I favor humans over ideology, but right now, the ideologues are winning, and they're creating a stage for constant artificial high dramas where everybody's either a magnificent hero or a sickening villain, even though we know that's not true about our fellow humans.
What's true is that we are clever and stupid; what's true is that we're grey areas.
The great thing about social media was how it gave a voice to voiceless people, but we're now creating a surveillance society, where the smartest way to survive is to go back to being voiceless.
Let's not do that.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Jon.
Jon Ronson: Thanks, Bruno.
BG: Don't go away.
What strikes me about Justine's story is also the fact that if you Google her name today, this story covers the first 100 pages of Google results -- there is nothing else about her.
In your book, you mention another story of another victim who actually got taken on by a reputation management firm, and by creating blogs and posting nice, innocuous stories about her love for cats and holidays and stuff, managed to get the story off the first couple pages of Google results, but it didn't last long.
A couple of weeks later, they started creeping back up to the top result.
Is this a totally lost battle?
Jon Ronson: You know, I think the very best thing we can do, if you see a kind of unfair or an ambiguous shaming, is to speak up, because I think the worst thing that happened to Justine was that nobody supported her -- like, everyone was against her, and that is profoundly traumatizing, to be told by tens of thousands of people that you need to get out.
But if a shaming happens and there's a babble of voices, like in a democracy, where people are discussing it, I think that's much less damaging.
So I think that's the way forward, but it's hard, because if you do stand up for somebody, it's incredibly unpleasant.
BG: So let's talk about your experience, because you stood up by writing this book.
By the way, it's mandatory reading for everybody, okay?
You stood up because the book actually puts the spotlight on shamers.
And I assume you didn't only have friendly reactions on Twitter.
JR: It didn't go down that well with some people.
(Laughter) I mean, you don't want to just concentrate -- because lots of people understood, and were really nice about the book.
But yeah, for 30 years I've been writing stories about abuses of power, and when I say the powerful people over there in the military, or in the pharmaceutical industry, everybody applauds me.
As soon as I say, "We are the powerful people abusing our power now," I get people saying, "Well you must be a racist too."
BG: So the other night -- yesterday -- we were at dinner, and there were two discussions going on.
On one side you were talking with people around the table -- and that was a nice, constructive discussion.
On the other, every time you turned to your phone, there is this deluge of insults.
JR: Yeah. This happened last night. We had like a TED dinner last night.
We were chatting and it was lovely and nice, and I decided to check Twitter.
Somebody said, "You are a white supremacist."
And then I went back and had a nice conversation with somebody, and then I went back to Twitter, somebody said my very existence made the world a worse place.
My friend Adam Curtis says that maybe the Internet is like a John Carpenter movie from the 1980s, when eventually everyone will start screaming at each other and shooting each other, and then eventually everybody would flee to somewhere safer, and I'm starting to think of that as a really nice option.
BG: Jon, thank you. JR: Thank you, Bruno.
(Applause)
This back here was my brain cancer.
Isn't it nice?
(Laughter) The key phrase is "was," phew.
(Applause) Having brain cancer was really, as you can imagine, shocking news for me.
I knew nothing about cancer.
In Western cultures, when you have cancer, it's as if you disappear in a way.
Your life as a complex human being is replaced by medical data: Your images, your exams, your lab values, a list of medicines.
And everyone changes as well.
You suddenly become a disease on legs.
Doctors start speaking a language which you don't understand.
They start pointing their fingers at your body and your images.
People start changing as well because they start dealing with the disease, instead of with the human being.
They say, "What did the doctor say?"
before even saying, "Hello."
And in the meanwhile, you're left with questions to which nobody gives an answer.
These are the "Can I?" questions: Can I work while I have cancer?
Can I study? Can I make love? Can I be creative?
And you wonder, "What have I done to deserve this?"
You wonder, "Can I change something about my lifestyle?"
You wonder, "Can I do something?
Are there any other options?"
And, obviously, doctors are the good guys in all these scenarios, because they are very professional and dedicated to curing you.
But they also are very used to having to deal with patients, so I'd say that they sometimes lose the idea that this is torture for you and that you become, literally, a patient -- "patient" means "the one who waits."
(Laughter) Things are changing, but classically, they tend to not engage you in any way to learn about your condition, to get your friends and family engaged, or showing you ways in which you can change your lifestyle to minimize the risks of what you're going through.
But instead, you're forced there to wait in the hands of a series of very professional strangers.
While I was in the hospital, I asked for a printed-out picture of my cancer and I spoke with it.
It was really hard to obtain, because it's not common practice to ask for a picture of your own cancer.
I talked to it and I said, "Okay, cancer, you're not all there is to me.
There's more to me.
A cure, whichever it is, will have to deal with the whole of me."
And so, the next day, I left the hospital against medical advice.
I was determined to change my relationship with the cancer and I was determined to learn more about my cancer before doing anything as drastic as a surgery.
I'm an artist, I use several forms of open-source technologies and open information in my practice.
So my best bet was to get it all out there, get the information out there, and use it so that it could be accessed by anyone.
So I created a website, which is called La Cura, on which I put my medical data, online.
I actually had to hack it and that's a thing which we can talk about in another speech.
(Laughter) I chose this word, La Cura -- La Cura in Italian means "the cure" -- because in many different cultures, the word "cure" can mean many different things.
In our Western cultures, it means eradicating or reversing a disease, but in different cultures, for example, a culture from Asia, from the Mediterranean, from Latin countries, from Africa, it can mean many more things.
Of course, I was interested in the opinions of doctors and healthcare providers, but I was also interested in the cure of the artist, of the poet, of the designer, of, who knows, the musicians.
I was interested in the social cure, I was interested in the psychological cure, I was interested in the spiritual cure, I was interested in the emotional cure, I was interested in any form of cure.
And, it worked.
The La Cura website went viral.
I received lots of media attention from Italy and from abroad and I quickly received more than 500,000 contacts -- emails, social networking -- most of them were a suggestion on how to cure my cancer, but more of them were about how to cure myself as a full individual.
For example, many thousands of videos, images, pictures, art performances were produced for La Cura.
For example, here we see Francesca Fini in her performance.
Or, as artist Patrick Lichty has done: He produced a 3D sculpture of my tumor and put it on sale on Thingiverse.
Now you can have my cancer, too!
(Laughter) Which is a nice thing, if you think about it, we can share our cancer.
And this was going on -- scientists, the traditional medicine experts, several researchers, doctors -- all connected with me to give advice.
With all this information and support, I was able to form a team of several neurosurgeons, traditional doctors, oncologists, and several hundred volunteers with whom I was able to discuss the information I was receiving, which is very important.
And together, we were able to form a strategy for my own cure in many languages, according to many cultures.
And the current strategy spans the whole world and thousands of years of human history, which is quite remarkable for me.
[Surgery] The follow-up MRIs showed, luckily, little to no growth of the cancer.
So I was able to take my time and choose.
I chose the doctor I wanted to work with, I chose the hospital I wanted to stay in, and in the meanwhile, I was supported by thousands of people, none of whom felt pity for me.
Everyone felt like they could take an active role in helping me to get well, and this was the most important part of La Cura.
What are the outcomes?
I'm fine, as you can see, pretty fine.
(Applause) I had excellent news after the surgery -- I have -- I had a very low-grade glioma, which is a "good" kind of cancer which doesn't grow a lot.
I have completely changed my life and my lifestyle.
Everything I did was thoughtfully designed to get me engaged.
Up until the very last few minutes of the surgery, which was very intense, a matrix of electrodes was implanted in my brain from this side, to be able to build a functional map of what the brain controls.
And right before the operation, we were able to discuss the functional map of my brain with the doctor, to understand which risks I was running into and if there were any I wanted to avoid.
Obviously, there were.
[Open] And this openness was really the fundamental part of La Cura.
Thousands of people shared their stories, their experiences.
Doctors got to talk with people they don't usually consult when they think about cancer.
I'm a self-founding, continuous state of translation among many different languages, in which science meets emotion and conventional research meets traditional research.
[Society] The most important thing of La Cura was to feel like a part of a really engaged and connected society whose wellness really depends on the wellness of all of its components.
This global performance is my open-source cure for cancer.
And from what I feel, it's a cure for me, but for us all.
Thank you.
(Applause).
In 2012, when I painted the minaret of Jara Mosque in my hometown of Gabs, in the south of Tunisia, I never thought that graffiti would bring so much attention to a city.
At the beginning, I was just looking for a wall in my hometown, and it happened that the minaret was built in '94.
And for 18 years, those 57 meters of concrete stayed grey.
When I met the imam for the first time, and I told him what I wanted to do, he was like, "Thank God you finally came," and he told me that for years he was waiting for somebody to do something on it.
The most amazing thing about this imam is that he didn't ask me anything -- neither a sketch, or what I was going to write.
In every work that I create, I write messages with my style of calligraffiti -- a mix of calligraphy and graffiti.
I use quotes or poetry.
For the minaret, I thought that the most relevant message to be put on a mosque should come from the Quran, so I picked this verse: "Oh humankind, we have created you from a male and a female, and made you people and tribe, so you may know each other."
It was a universal call for peace, tolerance, and acceptance coming from the side that we don't usually portray in a good way in the media.
I was amazed to see how the local community reacted to the painting, and how it made them proud to see the minaret getting so much attention from international press all around the world.
For the imam, it was not just the painting; it was really deeper than that.
He hoped that this minaret would become a monument for the city, and attract people to this forgotten place of Tunisia.
The universality of the message, the political context of Tunisia at this time, and the fact that I was writing Quran in a graffiti way were not insignificant.
It reunited the community.
Bringing people, future generations, together through Arabic calligraphy is what I do.
Writing messages is the essence of my artwork.
What is funny, actually, is that even Arabic-speaking people really need to focus a lot to decipher what I'm writing.
You don't need to know the meaning to feel the piece.
I think that Arabic script touches your soul before it reaches your eyes.
There is a beauty in it that you don't need to translate.
Arabic script speaks to anyone, I believe; to you, to you, to you, to anybody, and then when you get the meaning, you feel connected to it.
I always make sure to write messages that are relevant to the place where I'm painting, but messages that have a universal dimension, so anybody around the world can connect to it.
I was born and raised in France, in Paris, and I started learning how to write and read Arabic when I was 18.
Today I only write messages in Arabic.
One of the reasons this is so important to me, is because of all the reaction that I've experienced all around the world.
In Rio de Janeiro, I translated this Portuguese poem from Gabriela Trres Barbosa, who was giving an homage to the poor people of the favela, and then I painted it on the rooftop.
The local community were really intrigued by what I was doing, but as soon as I gave them the meaning of the calligraphy, they thanked me, as they felt connected to the piece.
In South Africa, in Cape Town, the local community of Philippi offered me the only concrete wall of the slum.
It was a school, and I wrote on it a quote from Nelson Mandela, saying, "[in Arabic]," which means, "It seems impossible until it's done."
Then this guy came to me and said, "Man, why you don't write in English?"
and I replied to him, "I would consider your concern legit if you asked me why I didn't write in Zulu."
In Paris, once, there was this event, and someone gave his wall to be painted.
And when he saw I was painting in Arabic, he got so mad -- actually, hysterical -- and he asked for the wall to be erased.
I was mad and disappointed.
But a week later, the organizer of the event asked me to come back, and he told me that there was a wall right in front of this guy's house.
So, this guy -- (Laughter) like, was forced to see it every day.
At the beginning, I was going to write, "[In Arabic]," which means, "In your face," but -- (Laughter) I decided to be smarter and I wrote, "[In Arabic]," which means, "Open your heart."
I'm really proud of my culture, and I'm trying to be an ambassador of it through my artwork.
And I hope that I can break the stereotypes we all know, with the beauty of Arabic script.
Today, I don't write the translation of the message anymore on the wall.
I don't want the poetry of the calligraphy to be broken, as it's art and you can appreciate it without knowing the meaning, as you can enjoy any music from other countries.
Some people see that as a rejection or a closed door, but for me, it's more an invitation -- to my language, to my culture, and to my art.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a map of New York State that was made in 1937 by the General Drafting Company.
It's an extremely famous map among cartography nerds, because down here at the bottom of the Catskill Mountains, there is a little town called Roscoe -- actually, this will go easier if I just put it up here -- There's Roscoe, and then right above Roscoe is Rockland, New York, and then right above that is the tiny town of Agloe, New York.
Agloe, New York, is very famous to cartographers, because it's a paper town.
It's also known as a copyright trap.
Mapmakers -- because my map of New York and your map of New York are going to look very similar, on account of the shape of New York -- often, mapmakers will insert fake places onto their maps, in order to protect their copyright.
Because then, if my fake place shows up on your map, I can be well and truly sure that you have robbed me.
Agloe is a scrabblization of the initials of the two guys who made this map, Ernest Alpers and Otto [G.] Lindberg, and they released this map in 1937.
Decades later, Rand McNally releases a map with Agloe, New York, on it, at the same exact intersection of two dirt roads in the middle of nowhere.
Well, you can imagine the delight over at General Drafting.
They immediately call Rand McNally, and they say, "We've caught you! We made Agloe, New York, up.
We're going to sue your pants off!"
And Rand McNally says, "No, no, no, no, Agloe is real."
Because people kept going to that intersection of two dirt roads -- (Laughter) in the middle of nowhere, expecting there to be a place called Agloe -- someone built a place called Agloe, New York.
(Laughter) It had a gas station, a general store, two houses at its peak.
(Laughter) And this is of course a completely irresistible metaphor to a novelist, because we would all like to believe that the stuff that we write down on paper can change the actual world in which we're actually living, which is why my third book is called "Paper Towns".
But what interests me ultimately more than the medium in which this happened, is the phenomenon itself.
It's easy enough to say that the world shapes our maps of the world, right?
Like the overall shape of the world is obviously going to affect our maps.
But what I find a lot more interesting is the way that the manner in which we map the world changes the world.
Because the world would truly be a different place if North were down.
And the world would be a truly different place if Alaska and Russia weren't on opposite sides of the map.
And the world would be a different place if we projected Europe to show it in its actual size.
The world is changed by our maps of the world.
The way that we choose -- sort of, our personal cartographic enterprise, also shapes the map of our lives, and that in turn shapes our lives.
I believe that what we map changes the life we lead.
And I don't mean that in some, like, secret-y Oprah's Angels network, like, you-can-think-your-way- out-of-cancer sense.
But I do believe that while maps don't show you where you will go in your life, they show you where you might go.
You very rarely go to a place that isn't on your personal map.
So I was a really terrible student when I was a kid.
My GPA was consistently in the low 2s.
And I think the reason that I was such a terrible student is that I felt like education was just a series of hurdles that had been erected before me, and I had to jump over in order to achieve adulthood.
And I didn't really want to jump over these hurdles, because they seemed completely arbitrary, so I often wouldn't, and then people would threaten me, you know, they'd threaten me with this "going on [my] permanent record," or "You'll never get a good job."
I didn't want a good job!
As far as I could tell at eleven or twelve years old, like, people with good jobs woke up very early in the morning, (Laughter) and the men who had good jobs, one of the first things they did was tie a strangulation item of clothing around their necks.
They literally put nooses on themselves, and then they went off to their jobs, whatever they were.
That's not a recipe for a happy life.
These people -- in my, symbol-obsessed, twelve year-old imagination -- these people who are strangling themselves as one of the first things they do each morning, they can't possibly be happy.
Why would I want to jump over all of these hurdles and have that be the end?
That's a terrible end!
And then, when I was in tenth grade, I went to this school, Indian Springs School, a small boarding school, outside of Birmingham, Alabama.
And all at once I became a learner.
And I became a learner, because I found myself in a community of learners.
I found myself surrounded by people who celebrated intellectualism and engagement, and who thought that my ironic oh-so-cool disengagement wasn't clever, or funny, but, like, it was a simple and unspectacular response to very complicated and compelling problems.
And so I started to learn, because learning was cool.
I learned that some infinite sets are bigger than other infinite sets, and I learned that iambic pentameter is and why it sounds so good to human ears.
I learned that the Civil War was a nationalizing conflict, I learned some physics, I learned that correlation shouldn't be confused with causation -- all of these things, by the way, enriched my life on a literally daily basis.
And it's true that I don't use most of them for my "job," but that's not what it's about for me.
It's about cartography.
What is the process of cartography?
It's, you know, sailing upon some land, and thinking, "I think I'll draw that bit of land," and then wondering, "Maybe there's some more land to draw."
And that's when learning really began for me.
It's true that I had teachers that didn't give up on me, and I was very fortunate to have those teachers, because I often gave them cause to think there was no reason to invest in me.
But a lot of the learning that I did in high school wasn't about what happened inside the classroom, it was about what happened outside of the classroom.
For instance, I can tell you that "There's a certain Slant of light, Winter Afternoons -- That oppresses, like the Heft Of Cathedral Tunes --" not because I memorized Emily Dickinson in school when I was in high school, but because there was a girl when I was in high school, and her name was Amanda, and I had a crush on her, and she liked Emily Dickinson poetry.
The reason I can tell you what opportunity cost is, is because one day when I was playing Super Mario Kart on my couch, my friend Emmet walked in, and he said, "How long have you been playing Super Mario Kart?"
And I said, "I don't know, like, six hours?" and he said, "Do you realize that if you'd worked at Baskin-Robbins those six hours, you could have made 30 dollars, so in some ways, you just paid thirty dollars to play Super Mario Kart."
And I was, like, "I'll take that deal."
(Laughter) But I learned what opportunity cost is.
And along the way, the map of my life got better.
It got bigger; it contained more places.
There were more things that might happen, more futures I might have.
It wasn't a formal, organized learning process, and I'm happy to admit that.
It was spotty, it was inconsistent, there was a lot I didn't know.
I might know, you know, Cantor's idea that some infinite sets are larger than other infinite sets, but I didn't really understand the calculus behind that idea.
I might know the idea of opportunity cost, but I didn't know the law of diminishing returns.
But the great thing about imagining learning as cartography, instead of imagining it as arbitrary hurdles that you have to jump over, is that you see a bit of coastline, and that makes you want to see more.
And so now I do know at least some of the calculus that underlies all of that stuff.
So, I had one learning community in high school, then I went to another for college, and then I went to another, when I started working at a magazine called "Booklist," where I was an assistant, surrounded by astonishingly well-read people.
And then I wrote a book.
And like all authors dream of doing, I promptly quit my job.
(Laughter) And for the first time since high school, I found myself without a learning community, and it was miserable.
I hated it.
I read many, many books during this two-year period.
I read books about Stalin, and books about how the Uzbek people came to identify as Muslims, and I read books about how to make atomic bombs, but it just felt like I was creating my own hurdles, and then jumping over them myself, instead of feeling the excitement of being part of a community of learners, a community of people who are engaged together in the cartographic enterprise of trying to better understand and map the world around us.
And then, in 2006, I met that guy.
I didn't actually meet him, just on the Internet.
Ze Frank was running, at the time, a show called "The Show with Ze Frank," and I discovered the show, and that was my way back into being a community learner again.
Here's Ze talking about Las Vegas: (Video) Ze Frank: Las Vegas was built in the middle of a huge, hot desert.
Almost everything here was brought from somewhere else -- the sort of rocks, the trees, the waterfalls.
These fish are almost as out of place as my pig that flew.
Contrasted to the scorching desert that surrounds this place, so are these people.
Things from all over the world have been rebuilt here, away from their histories, and away from the people that experience them differently.
Sometimes improvements were made -- even the Sphinx got a nose job.
This New York means the same to me as it does to everyone else.
Everything is out of context, and that means context allows for everything: Self Parking, Events Center, Shark Reef.
This fabrication of place could be one of the world's greatest achievements, because no one belongs here; everyone does.
As I walked around this morning, I noticed most of the buildings were huge mirrors reflecting the sun back into the desert.
But unlike most mirrors, which present you with an outside view of yourself embedded in a place, these mirrors come back empty.
John Green: Makes me nostalgic for the days when you could see the pixels in online video.
(Laughter) Ze isn't just a great public intellectual, he's also a brilliant community builder, and the community of people that built up around these videos was in many ways a community of learners.
So we played Ze Frank at chess collaboratively, and we beat him.
We organized ourselves to take a young man on a road trip across the United States.
We turned the Earth into a sandwich, by having one person hold a piece of bread at one point on the Earth, and on the exact opposite point of the Earth, have another person holding a piece of bread.
I realize that these are silly ideas, but they are also "learny" ideas, and that was what was so exciting to me, and if you go online, you can find communities like this all over the place.
Follow the calculus tag on Tumblr, and yes, you will see people complaining about calculus, but you'll also see people re-blogging those complaints, making the argument that calculus is interesting and beautiful, and here's a way in to thinking about the problem that you find unsolvable.
You can go to places like Reddit, and find sub-Reddits, like "Ask a Historian" or "Ask Science," where you can ask people who are in these fields a wide range of questions, from very serious ones to very silly ones.
But to me, the most interesting communities of learners that are growing up on the Internet right now are on YouTube, and admittedly, I am biased.
But I think in a lot of ways, the YouTube page resembles a classroom.
Look for instance at "Minute Physics," a guy who's teaching the world about physics: (Video) Let's cut to the chase.
As of July 4, 2012, the Higgs boson is the last fundamental piece of the standard model of particle physics to be discovered experimentally.
But, you might ask, why was the Higgs boson included in the standard model, alongside well-known particles like electrons and photons and quarks, if it hadn't been discovered back then in the 1970s?
Good question. There are two main reasons.
First, just like the electron is an excitation in the electron field, the Higgs boson is simply a particle which is an excitation of the everywhere-permeating Higgs field.
The Higgs field in turn plays an integral role in our model for the weak nuclear force.
In particular, the Higgs field helps explain why it's so weak.
We'll talk more about this in a later video, but even though weak nuclear theory was confirmed in the 1980s, in the equations, the Higgs field is so inextricably jumbled with the weak force, that until now we've been unable to confirm its actual and independent existence.
JG: Or here's a video that I made as part of my show "Crash Course," talking about World War I: (Video) The immediate cause was of course the assassination in Sarajevo of the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand, on June 28, 1914, by a Bosnian-Serb nationalist named Gavrilo Princip.
Quick aside: It's worth noting that the first big war of the twentieth century began with an act of terrorism.
So Franz Ferdinand wasn't particularly well-liked by his uncle, the emperor Franz Joseph -- now that is a mustache!
But even so, the assassination led Austria to issue an ultimatum to Serbia, whereupon Serbia accepted some, but not all, of Austria's demands, leading Austria to declare war against Serbia.
And then Russia, due to its alliance with the Serbs, mobilized its army.
Germany, because it had an alliance with Austria, told Russia to stop mobilizing, which Russia failed to do, so then Germany mobilized its own army, declared war on Russia, cemented an alliance with the Ottomans, and then declared war on France, because, you know, France.
(Laughter) And it's not just physics and world history that people are choosing to learn through YouTube.
Here's a video about abstract mathematics.
(Video) So you're me, and you're in math class yet again, because they make you go every single day.
And you're learning about, I don't know, the sums of infinite series.
That's a high school topic, right?
So I guess that's why they allow infinite series in the curriculum.
So, in a quite understandable need for distraction, you're doodling and thinking more about what the plural of "series" should be than about the topic at hand: "serieses," "seriese," "seriesen," and "serii?"
Or is it that the singular should be changed: one "serie," or "serum," just like the singular of "sheep" should be "shoop."
But the whole concept of things like 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + 1/16 and so on approaches one, is useful if, say, you want to draw a line of elephants, each holding the tail of the next one: normal elephant, young elephant, baby elephant, dog-sized elephant, puppy-sized elephant, all the way down to Mr. Tusks and beyond.
Which is at least a tiny bit awesome, because you can get an infinite number of elephants in a line, and still have it fit across a single notebook page.
JG: And lastly, here's Destin, from "Smarter Every Day," talking about the conservation of angular momentum, and, since it's YouTube, cats: (Video) Hey, it's me, Destin. Welcome back to "Smarter Every Day."
So you've probably observed that cats almost always land on their feet.
Today's question is: why?
Like most simple questions, there's a very complex answer.
For instance, let me reword this question: How does a cat go from feet-up to feet-down in a falling reference frame, without violating the conservation of angular momentum?
(Laughter) JG: So, here's something all four of these videos have in common: They all have more than half a million views on YouTube.
And those are people watching not in classrooms, but because they are part of the communities of learning that are being set up by these channels.
And I said earlier that YouTube is like a classroom to me, and in many ways it is, because here is the instructor -- it's like the old-fashioned classroom: here's the instructor, and then beneath the instructor are the students, and they're all having a conversation.
And I know that YouTube comments have a very bad reputation in the world of the Internet, but in fact, if you go on comments for these channels, what you'll find is people engaging the subject matter, asking difficult, complicated questions that are about the subject matter, and then other people answering those questions.
And because the YouTube page is set up so that the page in which I'm talking to you is on the exact -- the place where I'm talking to you is on the exact same page as your comments, you are participating in a live and real and active way in the conversation.
And because I'm in comments usually, I get to participate with you.
And you find this whether it's world history, or mathematics, or science, or whatever it is.
You also see young people using the tools and the sort of genres of the Internet in order to create places for intellectual engagement, instead of the ironic detachment that maybe most of us associate with memes and other Internet conventions -- you know, "Got bored. Invented calculus."
Or, here's Honey Boo Boo criticizing industrial capitalism: ["Liberal capitalism is not at all the Good of humanity.
Quite the contrary; it is the vehicle of savage, destructive nihilism."] In case you can't see what she says ... yeah.
I really believe that these spaces, these communities, have become for a new generation of learners, the kind of communities, the kind of cartographic communities that I had when I was in high school, and then again when I was in college.
And as an adult, re-finding these communities has re-introduced me to a community of learners, and has encouraged me to continue to be a learner even in my adulthood, so that I no longer feel like learning is something reserved for the young.
Vi Hart and "Minute Physics" introduced me to all kinds of things that I didn't know before.
And I know that we all hearken back to the days of the Parisian salon in the Enlightenment, or to the Algonquin Round Table, and wish, "Oh, I wish I could have been a part of that, I wish I could have laughed at Dorothy Parker's jokes."
But I'm here to tell you that these places exist, they still exist.
They exist in corners of the Internet, where old men fear to tread.
(Laughter) And I truly, truly believe that when we invented Agloe, New York, in the 1960s, when we made Agloe real, we were just getting started.
Thank you.
(Applause)
All life, every living thing ever, has been built according to the information in DNA.
What does that mean?
Well, it means that just as the English language is made up of alphabetic letters that, when combined into words, allow me to tell you the story I'm going to tell you today, DNA is made up of genetic letters that, when combined into genes, allow cells to produce proteins, strings of amino acids that fold up into complex structures that perform the functions that allow a cell to do what it does, to tell its stories.
The English alphabet has 26 letters, and the genetic alphabet has four.
They're pretty famous. Maybe you've heard of them.
They are often just referred to as G, C, A and T.
But it's remarkable that all the diversity of life is the result of four genetic letters.
Imagine what it would be like if the English alphabet had four letters.
What sort of stories would you be able to tell?
What if the genetic alphabet had more letters?
Would life with more letters be able to tell different stories, maybe even more interesting ones?
In 1999, my lab at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, California started working on this question with the goal of creating living organisms with DNA made up of a six-letter genetic alphabet, the four natural letters plus two additional new man-made letters.
Such an organism would be the first radically altered form of life ever created.
It would be a semisynthetic form of life that stores more information than life ever has before.
It would be able to make new proteins, proteins built from more than the 20 normal amino acids that are usually used to build proteins.
What sort of stories could that life tell?
With the power of synthetic chemistry and molecular biology and just under 20 years of work, we created bacteria with six-letter DNA.
Let me tell you how we did it.
All you have to remember from your high school biology is that the four natural letters pair together to form two base pairs.
G pairs with C and A pairs with T, so to create our new letters, we synthesized hundreds of new candidates, new candidate letters, and examined their abilities to selectively pair with each other.
And after about 15 years of work, we found two that paired together really well, at least in a test tube.
They have complicated names, but let's just call them X and Y.
The next thing we needed to do was find a way to get X and Y into cells, and eventually we found that a protein that does something similar in algae worked in our bacteria.
So the final thing that we needed to do was to show that with X and Y provided, cells could grow and divide and hold on to X and Y in their DNA.
Everything we had done up to then took longer than I had hoped -- I am actually a really impatient person -- but this, the most important step, worked faster than I dreamed, basically immediately.
On a weekend in 2014, a graduate student in my lab grew bacteria with six-letter DNA.
Let me take the opportunity to introduce you to them right now.
This is an actual picture of them.
These are the first semisynthetic organisms.
So bacteria with six-letter DNA, that's really cool, right?
Well, maybe some of you are still wondering why.
So let me tell you a little bit more about some of our motivations, both conceptual and practical.
Conceptually, people have thought about life, what it is, what makes it different from things that are not alive, since people have had thoughts.
Many have interpreted life as being perfect, and this was taken as evidence of a creator.
Living things are different because a god breathed life into them.
Others have sought a more scientific explanation, but I think it's fair to say that they still consider the molecules of life to be special.
I mean, evolution has been optimizing them for billions of years, right?
Whatever perspective you take, it would seem pretty impossible for chemists to come in and build new parts that function within and alongside the natural molecules of life without somehow really screwing everything up.
But just how perfectly created or evolved are we?
Just how special are the molecules of life?
These questions have been impossible to even ask, because we've had nothing to compare life to.
Now for the first time, our work suggests that maybe the molecules of life aren't that special.
Maybe life as we know it isn't the only way it could be.
Maybe we're not the only solution, maybe not even the best solution, just a solution.
These questions address fundamental issues about life, but maybe they seem a little esoteric.
So what about practical motivations?
Well, we want to explore what sort of new stories life with an expanded vocabulary could tell, and remember, stories here are the proteins that a cell produces and the functions they have.
So what sort of new proteins with new types of functions could our semisynthetic organisms make and maybe even use?
Well, we have a couple of things in mind.
The first is to get the cells to make proteins for us, for our use.
Proteins are being used today for an increasingly broad range of different applications, from materials that protect soldiers from injury to devices that detect dangerous compounds, but at least to me, the most exciting application is protein drugs.
Despite being relatively new, protein drugs have already revolutionized medicine, and, for example, insulin is a protein.
You've probably heard of it, and it's manufactured as a drug that has completely changed how we treat diabetes.
But the problem is that proteins are really hard to make and the only practical way to get them is to get cells to make them for you.
So of course, with natural cells, you can only get them to make proteins with the natural amino acids, and so the properties those proteins can have, the applications they could be developed for, must be limited by the nature of those amino acids that the protein's built from.
So here they are, the 20 normal amino acids that are strung together to make a protein, and I think you can see, they're not that different-looking.
They don't bring that many different functions.
They don't make that many different functions available.
Now, they're much simpler than proteins, but they're routinely built from a much broader range of diverse things.
Don't worry about the molecular details, but I think you can see how different they are.
And in fact, it's their differences that make them great drugs to treat different diseases.
So it's really provocative to wonder what sort of new protein drugs you could develop if you could build proteins from more diverse things.
So can we get our semisynthetic organism to make proteins that include new and different amino acids, maybe amino acids selected to confer the protein with some desired property or function?
For example, many proteins just aren't stable when you inject them into people.
They are rapidly degraded or eliminated, and this stops them from being drugs.
What if we could make proteins with new amino acids with things attached to them that protect them from their environment, that protect them from being degraded or eliminated, so that they could be better drugs?
Could we make proteins with little fingers attached that specifically grab on to other molecules?
Many small molecules failed during development as drugs because they just weren't specific enough to find their target in the complex environment of the human body.
So could we take those molecules and make them parts of new amino acids that, when incorporated into a protein, are guided by that protein to their target?
I started a biotech company called Synthorx.
Synthorx stands for synthetic organism with an X added at the end because that's what you do with biotech companies.
(Laughter) Synthorx is working closely with my lab, and they're interested in a protein that recognizes a certain receptor on the surface of human cells.
But the problem is that it also recognizes another receptor on the surface of those same cells, and that makes it toxic.
So could we produce a variant of that protein where the part that interacts with that second bad receptor is shielded, blocked by something like a big umbrella so that the protein only interacts with that first good receptor?
Doing that would be really difficult or impossible to do with the normal amino acids, but not with amino acids that are specifically designed for that purpose.
So getting our semisynthetic cells to act as little factories to produce better protein drugs isn't the only potentially really interesting application, because remember, it's the proteins that allow cells to do what they do.
So if we have cells that make new proteins with new functions, could we get them to do things that natural cells can't do?
For example, could we develop semisynthetic organisms that when injected into a person, seek out cancer cells and only when they find them, secrete a toxic protein that kills them?
Could we create bacteria that eat different kinds of oil, maybe to clean up an oil spill?
These are just a couple of the types of stories that we're going to see if life with an expanded vocabulary can tell.
So, sounds great, right?
Injecting semisynthetic organisms into people, dumping millions and millions of gallons of our bacteria into the ocean or out on your favorite beach?
Oh, wait a minute, actually it sounds really scary.
This dinosaur is really scary.
But here's the catch: our semisynthetic organisms in order to survive, need to be fed the chemical precursors of X and Y.
X and Y are completely different than anything that exists in nature.
Cells just don't have them or the ability to make them.
So when we prepare them, when we grow them up in the controlled environment of the lab, we can feed them lots of the unnatural food.
Then, when we deploy them in a person or out on a beach where they no longer have access that special food, they can grow for a little bit, they can survive for a little, maybe just long enough to perform some intended function, but then they start to run out of the food.
They start to starve.
They starve to death and they just disappear.
So not only could we get life to tell new stories, we get to tell life when and where to tell those stories.
At the beginning of this talk I told you that we reported in 2014 the creation of semisynthetic organisms that store more information, X and Y, in their DNA.
But all the motivations that we just talked about require cells to use X and Y to make proteins, so we started working on that.
Within a couple years, we showed that the cells could take DNA with X and Y and copy it into RNA, the working copy of DNA.
And late last year, we showed that they could then use X and Y to make proteins.
Here they are, the stars of the show, the first fully-functional semisynthetic organisms.
(Applause) These cells are green because they're making a protein that glows green.
It's a pretty famous protein, actually, from jellyfish that a lot of people use in its natural form because it's easy to see that you made it.
But within every one of these proteins, there's a new amino acid that natural life can't build proteins with.
Every living cell, every living cell ever, has made every one of its proteins using a four-letter genetic alphabet.
These cells are living and growing and making protein with a six-letter alphabet.
These are a new form of life.
This is a semisynthetic form of life.
So what about the future?
My lab is already working on expanding the genetic alphabet of other cells, including human cells, and we're getting ready to start working on more complex organisms.
Think semisynthetic worms.
The last thing I want to say to you, the most important thing that I want to say to you, is that the time of semisynthetic life is here.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: I mean, Floyd, this is so remarkable.
I just wanted to ask you, what are the implications of your work for how we should think about the possibilities for life, like, in the universe, elsewhere?
It just seems like so much of life, or so much of our assumptions are based on the fact that of course, it's got to be DNA, but is the possibility space of self-replicating molecules much bigger than DNA, even just DNA with six letters?
Floyd Romesberg: Absolutely, I think that's right, and I think what our work has shown, as I mentioned, is that there's been always this prejudice that sort of we're perfect, we're optimal, God created us this way, evolution perfected us this way.
We've made molecules that work right alongside the natural ones, and I think that suggests that any molecules that obey the fundamental laws of chemistry and physics and you can optimize them could do the things that the natural molecules of life do.
There's nothing magic there.
And I think that it suggests that life could evolve many different ways, maybe similar to us with other types of DNA, maybe things without DNA at all.
CA: I mean, in your mind, how big might that possibility space be?
Do we even know? Are most things going to look something like a DNA molecule, or something radically different that can still self-reproduce and potentially create living organisms?
FR: My personal opinion is that if we found new life, we might not even recognize it.
CA: So this obsession with the search for Goldilocks planets in exactly the right place with water and whatever, that's a very parochial assumption, perhaps.
FR: Well, if you want to find someone you can talk to, then maybe not, but I think that if you're just looking for any form of life, I think that's right, I think that you're looking for life under the light post.
CA: Thank you for boggling all our minds. Thank so much, Floyd.
(Applause)
There's this quote by activist and punk rock musician Jello Biafra that I love.
He says, "Don't hate the media. Be the media."
I'm an artist.
I like working with media and technology because A, I'm familiar with them and I like the power they hold.
And B, I hate them and I'm terrified of the power they hold.
(Laughter) I remember watching, in 2003, an interview between Fox News host Tony Snow and then-US Defense Secretary, Donald Rumsfeld.
They were talking about the recent invasion of Iraq, and Rumsfeld is asked the question, "Well, we're hear about our body counts, but we never hear about theirs, why?"
And Rumsfeld's answer is, "Well, we don't do body counts on other people."
Right?
It's estimated that between 150,000 to one million Iraqis, civilians, have died as a result of the US-led invasion in 2003.
That number is in stark contrast with the 4,486 US service members who died during that same window of time.
I wanted to do more than just bring awareness to this terrifying number.
I wanted to create a monument for the individual civilians who died as a result of the invasion.
Monuments to war, such as Maya Lin's Vietnam Memorial, are often enormous in scale.
Very powerful and very one-sided.
I wanted my monument to live in the world, and to circulate.
I remember when I was a boy in school, my teacher assigned us this classic civics assignment where you take a sheet of paper and you write a member of your government.
And we were told, if we wrote a really good letter, if we really thought about it, we would get back more than just a simple formed letter as a reply.
This is my "Notepad."
What looks like an everyday, yellow legal tablet of paper is actually a monument to the individual Iraqi civilians that died as a result of the US invasion.
"Notepad" is an act of protest and an act of commemoration disguised as an everyday tablet of paper.
The lines of the paper, when magnified, are revealed to be micro-printed text that contains the details, the names, the dates and locations of individual Iraqi civilians that died.
So, for the last 5 years, I've been taking pads of this paper, tons of this stuff, and smuggling it into the stationery supplies of the United States and the Coalition governments.
(Laughter) (Applause) I don't have to tell you guys this is not the place to discuss how I did that.
(Laughter) But also, I've been meeting one-on-one with members and former members of the so-called Coalition of the Willing, who assisted in the invasion.
And so, whenever I can, I meet with one of them, and I share the project with them.
And last summer, I had the chance to meet with former United States Attorney General and Torture Memo author, Alberto Gonzales.
(Video) Matt Kenyon: May I give this to you?
This is a special legal tablet.
It's actually part of an ongoing art project.
Alberto Gonzalez: This is a special legal pad?
MK: Yes. You won't believe me, but it's in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art; I'm an artist.
MK: And all of the lines of the paper are actually -- AG: Are they going to disappear?
MK: No, they're micro-printed text that contains the names of individual Iraqi civilians who have died since the invasion of Iraq.
AG: Yeah. OK.
AG: Thank you. MK: Thank you.
(Laughter) The way he says "thank you" really creeps me out.
(Laughter) OK, so I'd like each of you to look under your chairs.
There's an envelope.
And please open it.
The paper you're holding in your hand contains the details of Iraqi civilians that died as result of the invasion.
I'd like you to use this paper and write a member of government.
You can help to smuggle this civilian body count into government archives.
Because every letter that's sent in to the government, and this is all across the world, of course -- every letter that is sent in is archived, filed and recorded.
Together, we can put this in the mailboxes and under the noses of people in power.
Everything that's sent in eventually becomes part of the permanent archive of our government, our shared historical record.
Thank you.
(Applause) Tom Rielly: So, tell me Matt, how did this idea come into your head, of "Notepad"?
Matt Kenyon: I'd just finished a project that dealt with the US Coalition side of the war and it was a black armband that was called the "Improvised Empathetic Device" which accumulated, in real time, the names, ranks, cause of death and location of US service members who had died overseas, and each time the Department of Defense or CENTCOM released their data, it would stab me in the arm.
And so, I became aware that there was a spectacle associated with our own people who were dying overseas, but a disproportionate amount of casualties were the civilian casualties.
TR: Thank you so much.
MK: Thank you.
(Applause)
Seventy-thousand years ago, our ancestors were insignificant animals.
The most important thing to know about prehistoric humans is that they were unimportant.
Their impact on the world was not much greater than that of jellyfish or fireflies or woodpeckers.
Today, in contrast, we control this planet.
And the question is: How did we come from there to here?
How did we turn ourselves from insignificant apes, minding their own business in a corner of Africa, into the rulers of planet Earth?
Usually, we look for the difference between us and all the other animals on the individual level.
We want to believe -- I want to believe -- that there is something special about me, about my body, about my brain, that makes me so superior to a dog or a pig, or a chimpanzee.
But the truth is that, on the individual level, I'm embarrassingly similar to a chimpanzee.
And if you take me and a chimpanzee and put us together on some lonely island, and we had to struggle for survival to see who survives better, I would definitely place my bet on the chimpanzee, not on myself.
And this is not something wrong with me personally.
I guess if they took almost any one of you, and placed you alone with a chimpanzee on some island, the chimpanzee would do much better.
The real difference between humans and all other animals is not on the individual level; it's on the collective level.
Humans control the planet because they are the only animals that can cooperate both flexibly and in very large numbers.
Now, there are other animals -- like the social insects, the bees, the ants -- that can cooperate in large numbers, but they don't do so flexibly.
Their cooperation is very rigid.
There is basically just one way in which a beehive can function.
And if there's a new opportunity or a new danger, the bees cannot reinvent the social system overnight.
They cannot, for example, execute the queen and establish a republic of bees, or a communist dictatorship of worker bees.
Other animals, like the social mammals -- the wolves, the elephants, the dolphins, the chimpanzees -- they can cooperate much more flexibly, but they do so only in small numbers, because cooperation among chimpanzees is based on intimate knowledge, one of the other.
I'm a chimpanzee and you're a chimpanzee, and I want to cooperate with you.
I need to know you personally.
What kind of chimpanzee are you?
Are you a nice chimpanzee?
Are you an evil chimpanzee?
Are you trustworthy?
If I don't know you, how can I cooperate with you?
The only animal that can combine the two abilities together and cooperate both flexibly and still do so in very large numbers is us, Homo sapiens.
One versus one, or even 10 versus 10, chimpanzees might be better than us.
But, if you pit 1,000 humans against 1,000 chimpanzees, the humans will win easily, for the simple reason that a thousand chimpanzees cannot cooperate at all.
And if you now try to cram 100,000 chimpanzees into Oxford Street, or into Wembley Stadium, or Tienanmen Square or the Vatican, you will get chaos, complete chaos.
Just imagine Wembley Stadium with 100,000 chimpanzees.
Complete madness.
In contrast, humans normally gather there in tens of thousands, and what we get is not chaos, usually.
What we get is extremely sophisticated and effective networks of cooperation.
All the huge achievements of humankind throughout history, whether it's building the pyramids or flying to the moon, have been based not on individual abilities, but on this ability to cooperate flexibly in large numbers.
Think even about this very talk that I'm giving now: I'm standing here in front of an audience of about 300 or 400 people, most of you are complete strangers to me.
Similarly, I don't really know all the people who have organized and worked on this event.
I don't know the pilot and the crew members of the plane that brought me over here, yesterday, to London.
I don't know the people who invented and manufactured this microphone and these cameras, which are recording what I'm saying.
I don't know the people who wrote all the books and articles that I read in preparation for this talk.
And I certainly don't know all the people who might be watching this talk over the Internet, somewhere in Buenos Aires or in New Delhi.
Nevertheless, even though we don't know each other, we can work together to create this global exchange of ideas.
This is something chimpanzees cannot do.
They communicate, of course, but you will never catch a chimpanzee traveling to some distant chimpanzee band to give them a talk about bananas or about elephants, or anything else that might interest chimpanzees.
Now cooperation is, of course, not always nice; all the horrible things humans have been doing throughout history -- and we have been doing some very horrible things -- all those things are also based on large-scale cooperation.
Prisons are a system of cooperation; slaughterhouses are a system of cooperation; concentration camps are a system of cooperation.
Chimpanzees don't have slaughterhouses and prisons and concentration camps.
Now suppose I've managed to convince you perhaps that yes, we control the world because we can cooperate flexibly in large numbers.
The next question that immediately arises in the mind of an inquisitive listener is: How, exactly, do we do it?
What enables us alone, of all the animals, to cooperate in such a way?
The answer is our imagination.
We can cooperate flexibly with countless numbers of strangers, because we alone, of all the animals on the planet, can create and believe fictions, fictional stories.
And as long as everybody believes in the same fiction, everybody obeys and follows the same rules, the same norms, the same values.
All other animals use their communication system only to describe reality.
A chimpanzee may say, "Look! There's a lion, let's run away!"
Or, "Look! There's a banana tree over there! Let's go and get bananas!"
Humans, in contrast, use their language not merely to describe reality, but also to create new realities, fictional realities.
A human can say, "Look, there is a god above the clouds!
And if you don't do what I tell you to do, when you die, God will punish you and send you to hell."
And if you all believe this story that I've invented, then you will follow the same norms and laws and values, and you can cooperate.
This is something only humans can do.
You can never convince a chimpanzee to give you a banana by promising him, "... after you die, you'll go to chimpanzee heaven ..."
(Laughter) "... and you'll receive lots and lots of bananas for your good deeds.
So now give me this banana."
No chimpanzee will ever believe such a story.
Only humans believe such stories, which is why we control the world, whereas the chimpanzees are locked up in zoos and research laboratories.
Now you may find it acceptable that yes, in the religious field, humans cooperate by believing in the same fictions.
Millions of people come together to build a cathedral or a mosque or fight in a crusade or a jihad, because they all believe in the same stories about God and heaven and hell.
But what I want to emphasize is that exactly the same mechanism underlies all other forms of mass-scale human cooperation, not only in the religious field.
Take, for example, the legal field.
Most legal systems today in the world are based on a belief in human rights.
But what are human rights?
Human rights, just like God and heaven, are just a story that we've invented.
They are not an objective reality; they are not some biological effect about homo sapiens.
Take a human being, cut him open, look inside, you will find the heart, the kidneys, neurons, hormones, DNA, but you won't find any rights.
The only place you find rights are in the stories that we have invented and spread around over the last few centuries.
They may be very positive stories, very good stories, but they're still just fictional stories that we've invented.
The same is true of the political field.
The most important factors in modern politics are states and nations.
But what are states and nations?
They are not an objective reality.
A mountain is an objective reality.
You can see it, you can touch it, you can even smell it.
But a nation or a state, like Israel or Iran or France or Germany, this is just a story that we've invented and became extremely attached to.
The same is true of the economic field.
The most important actors today in the global economy are companies and corporations.
Many of you today, perhaps, work for a corporation, like Google or Toyota or McDonald's.
What exactly are these things?
They are what lawyers call legal fictions.
They are stories invented and maintained by the powerful wizards we call lawyers.
(Laughter) And what do corporations do all day?
Mostly, they try to make money.
Yet, what is money?
Again, money is not an objective reality; it has no objective value.
Take this green piece of paper, the dollar bill.
Look at it -- it has no value.
You cannot eat it, you cannot drink it, you cannot wear it.
But then came along these master storytellers -- the big bankers, the finance ministers, the prime ministers -- and they tell us a very convincing story: "Look, you see this green piece of paper?
It is actually worth 10 bananas."
And if I believe it, and you believe it, and everybody believes it, it actually works.
I can take this worthless piece of paper, go to the supermarket, give it to a complete stranger whom I've never met before, and get, in exchange, real bananas which I can actually eat.
This is something amazing.
You could never do it with chimpanzees.
Chimpanzees trade, of course: "Yes, you give me a coconut, I'll give you a banana."
That can work.
But, you give me a worthless piece of paper and you except me to give you a banana?
No way!
What do you think I am, a human?
(Laughter) Money, in fact, is the most successful story ever invented and told by humans, because it is the only story everybody believes.
Not everybody believes in God, not everybody believes in human rights, not everybody believes in nationalism, but everybody believes in money, and in the dollar bill.
Take, even, Osama Bin Laden.
He hated American politics and American religion and American culture, but he had no objection to American dollars.
He was quite fond of them, actually.
(Laughter) To conclude, then: We humans control the world because we live in a dual reality.
All other animals live in an objective reality.
Their reality consists of objective entities, like rivers and trees and lions and elephants.
We humans, we also live in an objective reality.
In our world, too, there are rivers and trees and lions and elephants.
But over the centuries, we have constructed on top of this objective reality a second layer of fictional reality, a reality made of fictional entities, like nations, like gods, like money, like corporations.
And what is amazing is that as history unfolded, this fictional reality became more and more powerful so that today, the most powerful forces in the world are these fictional entities.
Today, the very survival of rivers and trees and lions and elephants depends on the decisions and wishes of fictional entities, like the United States, like Google, like the World Bank -- entities that exist only in our own imagination.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Yuval, you have a new book out.
After Sapiens, you wrote another one, and it's out in Hebrew, but not yet translated into ...
Yuval Noah Harari: I'm working on the translation as we speak.
BG: In the book, if I understand it correctly, you argue that the amazing breakthroughs that we are experiencing right now not only will potentially make our lives better, but they will create -- and I quote you -- "... new classes and new class struggles, just as the industrial revolution did."
Can you elaborate for us?
YNH: Yes. In the industrial revolution, we saw the creation of a new class of the urban proletariat.
And much of the political and social history of the last 200 years involved what to do with this class, and the new problems and opportunities.
Now, we see the creation of a new massive class of useless people.
(Laughter) As computers become better and better in more and more fields, there is a distinct possibility that computers will out-perform us in most tasks and will make humans redundant.
And then the big political and economic question of the 21st century will be, "What do we need humans for?", or at least, "What do we need so many humans for?"
BG: Do you have an answer in the book?
YNH: At present, the best guess we have is to keep them happy with drugs and computer games ...
(Laughter) but this doesn't sound like a very appealing future.
BG: Ok, so you're basically saying in the book and now, that for all the discussion about the growing evidence of significant economic inequality, we are just kind of at the beginning of the process?
YNH: Again, it's not a prophecy; it's seeing all kinds of possibilities before us.
One possibility is this creation of a new massive class of useless people.
Another possibility is the division of humankind into different biological castes, with the rich being upgraded into virtual gods, and the poor being degraded to this level of useless people.
BG: I feel there is another TED talk coming up in a year or two.
Thank you, Yuval, for making the trip.
YNH: Thanks!
(Applause)
Imagine a place where your neighbors greet your children by name; a place with splendid vistas; a place where you can drive just 20 minutes and put your sailboat on the water.
It's a seductive place, isn't it?
I don't live there.
(Laughter) But I did journey on a 27,000-mile trip for two years, to the fastest-growing and whitest counties in America.
What is a Whitopia?
I define Whitopia in three ways: First, a Whitopia has posted at least six percent population growth since 2000.
Secondly, the majority of that growth comes from white migrants.
And third, the Whitopia has an ineffable charm, a pleasant look and feel, a je Ne sais quoi.
(Laughter) To learn how and why Whitopias are ticking, I immersed myself for several months apiece in three of them: first, St. George, Utah; second, Coeur d'Alene, Idaho; and third, Forsyth County, Georgia.
First stop, St. George -- a beautiful town of red rock landscapes.
In the 1850s, Brigham Young dispatched families to St. George to grow cotton because of the hot, arid climate.
And so they called it Utah's Dixie, and the name sticks to this day.
I approached my time in each Whitopia like an anthropologist.
I made detailed spreadsheets of all the power brokers in the communities, who I needed to meet, where I needed to be, and I threw myself with gusto in these communities.
I went to zoning board meetings, I went to Democratic clubs and Republican clubs.
I went to poker nights.
In St. George, I rented a home at the Entrada, one of the town's premier gated communities.
There were no Motel 6's or Howard Johnsons for me.
I lived in Whitopia as a resident, and not like a visitor.
I rented myself this home by phone.
(Laughter) (Applause) Golf is the perfect seductive symbol of Whitopia.
When I went on my journey, I had barely ever held a golf club.
By the time I left, I was golfing at least three times a week.
(Laughter) Golf helps people bond.
Some of the best interviews I ever scored during my trip were on the golf courses.
One venture capitalist, for example, invited me to golf in his private club that had no minority members.
I also went fishing.
(Laughter) Because I had never fished, this fellow had to teach me how to cast my line and what bait to use.
I also played poker every weekend.
It was Texas Hold 'em with a $10 buy-in.
My poker mates may have been bluffing about the hands that they drew, but they weren't bluffing about their social beliefs.
Some of the most raw, salty conversations I ever had during my journey were at the poker table.
I'm a gung ho entertainer.
I love to cook, I hosted many dinner parties, and in return, people invited me to their dinner parties, and to their barbecues, and to their pool parties, and to their birthday parties.
But it wasn't all fun.
Immigration turned out to be a big issue in this Whitopia.
The St. George's Citizens Council on Illegal Immigration held regular and active protests against immigration, and so what I gleaned from this Whitopia is what a hot debate this would become.
It was a real-time preview, and so it has become.
Next stop: Almost Heaven, a cabin I rented for myself in Coeur d'Alene, in the beautiful North Idaho panhandle.
I rented this place for myself, also by phone.
(Laughter) The book "A Thousand Places To See Before You Die" lists Coeur d'Alene -- it's a gorgeous paradise for huntsmen, boatmen and fishermen.
My growing golf skills came in handy in Coeur d'Alene.
I golfed with retired LAPD cops.
In 1993, around 11,000 families and cops fled Los Angeles after the L.A. racial unrest, for North Idaho, and they've built an expatriated community.
Given the conservatism of these cops, there's no surprise that North Idaho has a strong gun culture.
In fact, it is said, North Idaho has more gun dealers than gas stations.
So what's a resident to do to fit in?
I hit the gun club.
When I rented a gun, the gentleman behind the counter was perfectly pleasant and kind, until I showed him my New York City driver's license.
That's when he got nervous.
I'm not as bad a shot as I thought I might have been.
What I learned from North Idaho is the peculiar brand of paranoia that can permeate a community when so many cops and guns are around.
In North Idaho, in my red pickup truck, I kept a notepad.
And in that notepad I counted more Confederate flags than black people.
In North Idaho, I found Confederate flags on key chains, on cellphone paraphernalia, and on cars.
About a seven-minute drive from my hidden lake cabin was the compound of Aryan Nations, the white supremacist group.
America's Promise Ministries, the religious arm of Aryan Nations, happened to have a three-day retreat during my visit.
So I decided to crash it.
(Laughter) I'm the only non-Aryan journalist I'm aware of ever to have done so.
(Laughter) Among the many memorable episodes of that retreat...
(Laughter) ...is when Abe, an Aryan, sidled up next to me.
He slapped my knee, and he said, "Hey Rich, I just want you to know one thing.
We are not white supremacists. We are white separatists.
We don't think we're better than you, we just want to be away from you."
(Laughter) Indeed, most white people in Whitopia are neither white supremacists or white separatists; in fact, they're not there for explicitly racial reasons at all.
Rather, they emigrate there for friendliness, comfort, security, safety -- reasons that they implicitly associate to whiteness in itself.
Next stop was Georgia.
In Georgia, I stayed in an exurb north of Atlanta.
In Utah, I found poker; in Idaho, I found guns; in Georgia, I found God.
(Laughter) The way that I immersed myself in this Whitopia was to become active at First Redeemer Church, a megachurch that's so huge that it has golf carts to escort the congregants around its many parking lots on campus.
I was active in the youth ministry.
And for me, personally, I was more comfortable in this Whitopia than say, in a Colorado, or an Idaho, or even a suburban Boston.
That is because [there], in Georgia, white people and black people are more historically familiar to one another.
I was less exotic in this Whitopia.
(Laughter) But what does it all mean?
Whitopian dreaming, Whitopia migration, is a push-pull phenomenon, full of alarming pushes and alluring pulls, and Whitopia operates at the level of conscious and unconscious bias.
It's possible for people to be in Whitopia not for racist reasons, though it has racist outcomes.
Many Whitopians feel pushed by illegals, social welfare abuse, minorities, density, crowded schools.
Many Whitopians feel pulled by merit, freedom, the allure of privatism -- privatized places, privatized people, privatized things.
And I learned in Whitopia how a country can have racism without racists.
Many of my smug urban liberal friends couldn't believe I would go on such a venture.
The reality is that many white Americans are affable and kind.
Interpersonal race relations -- how we treat each other as human beings -- are vastly better than in my parents' generation.
Can you imagine me going to Whitopia 40 years ago?
What a journey that would have been.
(Laughter) And yet, some things haven't changed.
America is as residentially and educationally segregated today as it was in 1970.
As Americans, we often find ways to cook for each other, to dance with each other, to host with each other, but why can't that translate into how we treat each other as communities?
It's a devastating irony, how we have gone forward as individuals, and backwards as communities.
One of the Whitopian outlooks that really hit me was a proverbial saying: "One black man is a delightful dinner guest; 50 black men is a ghetto."
One of the big contexts animating my Whitopian journey was the year 2042.
By 2042, white people will no longer be the American majority.
As such, will there be more Whitopias?
In looking at this, the danger of Whitopia is that the more segregation we have, the less we can look at and confront conscious and unconscious bias.
I ventured on my two-year, 27,000 mile journey to learn where, why, and how white people are fleeing, but I didn't expect to have so much fun on my journey.
(Laughter) I didn't expect to learn so much about myself.
I don't expect I'll be living in a Whitopia -- or a Blacktopia, for that matter.
I do plan to continue golfing every chance I get.
(Laughter) And I'll just have to leave the guns and megachurches back in Whitopia.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I love infographics.
As an information designer, I've worked with all sorts of data over the past 25 years.
I have a few insights to share, but first: a little history.
Communication is the encoding, transmission and decoding of information.
Breakthroughs in communication mark turning points in human culture.
Oracy, literacy and numeracy were great developments in communication.
They allow us to encode ideas into words and quantities into numbers.
Without communication, we'd still be stuck in the Stone Ages.
Although humans have been around for a quarter million years, it was only 8,000 years ago that proto-writings began to surface.
Nearly 3,000 years later, the first proper writing systems took shape.
Maps have been around for millennia and diagrams for hundreds of years, but representing quantities through graphics is a relatively new development.
It wasn't until 1786 that William Playfair invented the first bar chart, giving birth to visual display of quantitative information.
Fifteen years later, he introduced the first pie and area charts.
His inventions are still the most commonly used chart forms today.
Florence Nightingale invented the coxcomb in 1857 for a presentation to Queen Victoria on troop mortality.
Highlighted in blue, she showed how most troops' deaths could have been prevented.
Shortly after, Charles Minard charted Napoleon's march on Moscow, illustrating how an army of 422,000 dwindled to just 10,000 as battles, geography and freezing temperatures took their toll.
He combined a Sankey diagram with cartography and a line chart for temperature.
I get excited when I get lots of data to play with, especially when it yields an interesting chart form.
Here, Nightingale's coxcomb was the inspiration to organize data on thousands of federal energy subsidies, scrutinizing the lack of investment in renewables over fossil fuels.
This Sankey diagram illustrates the flow of energy through the US economy, emphasizing how nearly half of the energy used is lost as waste heat.
I love it when data can be sculpted into beautiful shapes.
Here, the personal and professional connections of the women of Silicon Valley can be woven into arcs, same as the collaboration of inventors birthing patents across the globe can be mapped.
I've even made charts for me.
I'm a numbers person, so I rarely win at Scrabble.
I made this diagram to remember all the two- and three-letter words in the official Scrabble dictionary.
(Laughter) Knowing these 1,168 words certainly is a game changer.
(Laughter) Sometimes I produce code to quickly generate graphics from thousands of data points.
Coding also enables me to produce interactive graphics.
Now we can navigate information on our own terms.
Exotic chart forms certainly look cool, but something as simple as a little dot may be all you need to solve a particular thinking task.
In 2006, the "New York Times" redesigned their "Markets" section, cutting it down from eight pages of stock listings to just one and a half pages of essential market data.
We listed performance metrics for the most common stocks, but I wanted to help investors see how the stocks are doing.
So I added a simple little dot to show the current price relative to its one-year range.
At a glance, value investors can pick out stocks trading near their lows by looking for dots to the left.
Momentum investors can find stocks on an upward trajectory via dots to the right.
Shortly after, the "Wall Street Journal" copied the design.
Simplicity is often the goal for most graphics, but sometimes we need to embrace complexity and show large data sets in their full glory.
Alec Gallup, the former chairman of the Gallup Organization, once handed me a very thick book.
It was his family's legacy: hundreds of pages covering six decades of presidential approval data.
I told him the entire book could be graphed on a single page.
"Impossible," he said.
And here it is: 25,000 data points on a single page.
At a glance, one sees that most presidents start with a high approval rating, but few keep it.
Events like wars initially boost approval; scandals trigger declines.
These major events were annotated in the graphic but not in the book.
The point is, graphics can transmit data with incredible efficiency.
Graphicacy -- the ability to read and write graphics -- is still in its infancy.
New chart forms will emerge and specialized dialects will evolve.
Graphics that help us think faster or see a book's worth of information on a single page are the key to unlocking new discoveries.
Our visual cortex was built to decode complex information and is a master at pattern recognition.
Graphicacy enables us to harness our built-in GPU to process mountains of data and find the veins of gold hiding within.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
A few years ago, I got a call from the highest ranking legal official in the state of Georgia: the attorney general.
That moment was a wake-up call.
It was 2013, and the city of Atlanta was hosting the Final Four basketball tournament.
The AG called to ask if the company that I worked for could help sponsor billboards that would be put up around the city as part of an anti-human trafficking campaign.
He said this was important because sex trafficking spikes with big sporting events and with conventions.
And the billboards would help to raise awareness.
Now, if I'm being honest with you, my first inclination was to politely decline.
(Laughter) Let's face it -- there are thousands of things that corporate America could get involved in.
Sex trafficking seemed a little messy.
Little bit too difficult, something that is better left for someone else.
But then I started to understand and learn how big the problem really is.
And that it's rampant in my company's home town.
I lived and worked in Atlanta for years.
I practice law here.
And yet, I had no idea that the birthplace of my children is among the most prevalent cities for sex trafficking in the US.
At last report, Atlanta's illegal sex trade has generated up to 290 million dollars a year.
That's more money that the city's illegal gun and drug trade combined.
So we stepped up and we helped with the billboards.
But I couldn't help feeling like it wasn't enough.
The parent in me, the mother in me needed to do more.
I started talking to people about this and inevitably, I was surprised, because the conversation would turn from curiosity: "Really? This happens here?"
to empathy: "Wow, we've got to do something about that."
To blame: "You're not telling me that every prostitute is a victim, are you?
I mean, don't they know what they're getting into?"
I get it, I understand why people are confused.
So, to be clear, the people that I'm talking about do not choose this life.
They're forced, defrauded or coerced.
That's actually the legal definition for human trafficking under federal law, for adults.
Now, when it comes to kids, any minor under 18 that's transported, facilitated or used for commercial sex, is automatically a victim.
Regardless of whether force, fraud or coercion is used.
This crime knows no age, gender or socioeconomic barrier.
I'm talking about the 16-year-old girl that I met in Washington, DC.
She had been trafficked from the time she was 14 until she was 16.
She was a victim of the foster care system.
And she told me she'd been sold up to five times a day.
She didn't even know the term "human trafficking;" she thought that it was just a part of her life as a foster care kid.
Sex trafficking also shows up in affluent areas and gated communities.
And men lure young girls into sex trafficking situations with promises of modeling contracts, cell phones.
Sometimes they're just kidnapped right off the street.
In the US, an estimated 200,000 to 300,000 girls and boys are anticipated to be used for commercial sex trafficking every year.
You heard that right -- girls and boys.
Worldwide, the International Labor Organization estimates that up to one million children a year are vulnerable for sex trafficking.
Those numbers are huge.
And so while the billboards are great for raising awareness generally, they're just not enough to put an end to this problem.
I believe that if we're going to be serious about sex trafficking, we can't legislate or arrest our way out of modern-day slavery.
If we really want to end sex trafficking in the US, we have to systematically educate and target demand.
And I think the business community is in the perfect position to do just that.
So, sex trafficking is big business.
And I'm proposing a business plan that starts with the customer.
And in the sex trade, the customer is referred to as a John.
He is the man that fuels the demand for sex trafficking.
Johns do not fit into neat stereotypes.
But there is one universal truth: no John, no buyer, no victim.
So if we want to start to put a dent in sex trafficking, we have to get to John.
And businesses can do that while he's at work.
There's an organization called Businesses Ending Slavery and Trafficking, or BEST for short.
And when they launched in 2012, they did a study of Seattle-based Johns.
And you know what they found out?
Johns are everyday guys, employed at local businesses.
They range in age from 18 to 84.
Johns are dads.
Johns have admitted that they buy sex when they are traveling for business, when they're going to sporting events or when they're in the military.
But here's the kicker.
BEST study determined that web-based sex buying spikes at 2pm in the afternoon.
Which means that these Johns are likely buying sex in the middle of the workday.
I believe that there is a way to stop Johns in the middle of the workday from buying sex.
And businesses can do it in three simple ways.
The first is with a policy.
A policy that clearly says, the company prohibits sex-buying during work, with company resources or on company time.
That's right.
I'm saying that your handbook has to specifically give an example that says no sex-buying while you're traveling, at the international trade show, because that's where it's happening.
Now, a policy is only as good as its enforcement and its communication.
Several studies have indicated from Johns that the best way to deter them is public humiliation and embarrassment.
So, businesses who catch Johns buying sex, using company-based equipment or company resources, but cut them a break or sweep it under the rug and don't fire them, are complicit in fueling demand.
Now, a policy is one of the best ways to start.
The second way is educating the workforce.
Businesses can go a long way in simply training their workforce about the signs and the red flags of human trafficking.
This was my "aha!" moment for how our company could make a big difference.
Our nation's highways, airports and truck stops are literally used as modern-day slave routes.
Our company has more than 100,000 drivers all over the country, all over the world.
And so it made perfect sense to train them to see the red flags.
We don't want them jumping out there and doing things on their own, so we want them to call a phone number, the hotline, and let law enforcement intervene.
So to do this, we teamed up with an organization called Truckers Against Trafficking.
This Colorado-based organization had web-based support and materials that we gave to our truck drivers that gave them exactly what they needed to spot the red flags.
Like, hearing CB chatter on their radios about girls at nearby exits.
Or, seeing underaged women emerging from vehicles in the truck stop parking lots.
When we rolled out this training, a few brave drivers admitted they had seen these women, knocking on the cabs in the truck stops, looking for customers.
Now, they said that they weren't buying.
But they also didn't know enough to make a call.
And that's what we want them to do.
TAT's organization -- Truckers Against Trafficking -- also emphasizes the need for men to talk to other men about web-based sex buying and not buying commercial sex.
They feature men in uniform, proudly proclaiming why they don't buy.
If we're going to see a cultural shift in this atrocity, we need men talking to other men about the underlying issues fueling demand.
Because sometimes, Johns don't even know that they're purchasing girls who are enslaved.
Which brings me to my final way that businesses can help.
Every business has a special resource or a secret sauce or resource that they can bring to fight human trafficking.
For example, Visa, Master Card and American Express refuse to process transactions from backpage.com, an online sex site that sold commercial sex to the tune of nine million dollars a month.
In April of 2018, backpage.com and affiliated websites were shut down, and the FBI seized all their assets.
Hiring survivors is another way that any company can help.
Randstad, an organization that works with companies to find survivors who need good jobs, has an excellent program, called Hire Hope.
We've used this program; we know that it works.
In addition to training their flight attendants and their airline crew, Delta Air Lines also offers SkyMiles, through a program called SkyWish, to survivors to help them escape their traffickers and reunite with their families.
There are thousands of things that businesses can do.
They just have to decide what to do to join the fight.
No one can justify slavery today.
But I believe it remains one of the greatest civil rights atrocities of our time.
Fortunately, the business community is uniquely positioned to help train their employees, to enforce policies and to help use their special resources to fight human trafficking.
And what about you?
What if you decided to learn the red flags?
What if you decided to look at the signs that are all around you and make a call?
There is no penalty for calling law enforcement when you see something that doesn't sit right.
Together, we can all protect our children, we can educate the workforces around us and improve society, where we all live and work with John.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the past decade, I've been studying non-state armed groups: armed organizations like terrorists, insurgents or militias.
I document what these groups do when they're not shooting.
My goal is to better understand these violent actors and to study ways to encourage transition from violent engagement to nonviolent confrontation.
I work in the field, in the policy world and in the library.
Understanding non-state armed groups is key to solving most ongoing conflict, because war has changed.
It used to be a contest between states.
No longer.
It is now a conflict between states and non-state actors.
For example, of the 216 peace agreements signed between 1975 and 2011, 196 of them were between a state and a non-state actor.
So we need to understand these groups; we need to either engage them or defeat them in any conflict resolution process that has to be successful.
So how do we do that?
We need to know what makes these organizations tick.
We know a lot about how they fight, why they fight, but no one looks at what they're doing when they're not fighting.
Yet, armed struggle and unarmed politics are related.
It is all part of the same organization.
We cannot understand these groups, let alone defeat them, if we don't have the full picture.
And armed groups today are complex organizations.
Take the Lebanese Hezbollah, known for its violent confrontation against Israel.
But since its creation in the early 1980s, Hezbollah has also set up a political party, a social-service network, and a military apparatus.
Similarly, the Palestinian Hamas, known for its suicide attacks against Israel, also runs the Gaza Strip since 2007.
So these groups do way more than just shoot.
They multi-task.
They set up complex communication machines -- radio stations, TV channels, Internet websites and social media strategies.
And up here, you have the ISIS magazine, printed in English and published to recruit.
Armed groups also invest in complex fund-raising -- not looting, but setting up profitable businesses; for example, construction companies.
Now, these activities are keys.
They allow these groups to increase their strength, increase their funds, to better recruit and to build their brand.
Armed groups also do something else: they build stronger bonds with the population by investing in social services.
They build schools, they run hospitals, they set up vocational-training programs or micro-loan programs.
Hezbollah offers all of these services and more.
Armed groups also seek to win the population over by offering something that the state is not providing: safety and security.
The initial rise of the Taliban in war-torn Afghanistan, or even the beginning of the ascent of ISIS, can be understood also by looking at these groups' efforts to provide security.
Now, unfortunately, in these cases, the provision of security came at an unbearably high price for the population.
But in general, providing social services fills a gap, a governance gap left by the government, and allows these groups to increase their strength and their power.
For example, the 2006 electoral victory of the Palestinian Hamas cannot be understood without acknowledging the group's social work.
Now, this is a really complex picture, yet in the West, when we look at armed groups, we only think of the violent side.
But that's not enough to understand these groups' strength, strategy or long-term vision.
These groups are hybrid.
They rise because they fill a gap left by the government, and they emerge to be both armed and political, engage in violent struggle and provide governance.
And the more these organizations are complex and sophisticated, the less we can think of them as the opposite of a state.
Now, what do you call a group like Hezbollah?
They run part of a territory, they administer all their functions, they pick up the garbage, they run the sewage system.
Is this a state? Is it a rebel group?
Or maybe something else, something different and new?
And what about ISIS?
The lines are blurred.
We live in a world of states, non-states, and in-between, and the more states are weak, like in the Middle East today, the more non-state actors step in and fill that gap.
This matters for governments, because to counter these groups, they will have to invest more in non-military tools.
Filling that governance gap has to be at the center of any sustainable approach.
This also matters very much for peacemaking and peacebuilding.
If we better understand armed groups, we will better know what incentives to offer to encourage the transition from violence to nonviolence.
So in this new contest between states and non-states, military power can win some battles, but it will not give us peace nor stability.
To achieve these objectives, what we need is a long-term investment in filling that security gap, in filling that governance gap that allowed these groups to thrive in the first place.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to go right into the slides.
And all I'm going to try and prove to you with these slides is that I do just very straight stuff.
And my ideas are -- in my head, anyway -- they're very logical and relate to what's going on and problem solving for clients.
I either convince clients at the end that I solve their problems, or I really do solve their problems, because usually they seem to like it.
Let me go right into the slides.
Can you turn off the light? Down.
I like to be in the dark.
I don't want you to see what I'm doing up here.
(Laughter) Anyway, I did this house in Santa Monica, and it got a lot of notoriety.
In fact, it appeared in a porno comic book, which is the slide on the right.
(Laughter) This is in Venice.
I just show it because I want you to know I'm concerned about context.
On the left-hand side, I had the context of those little houses, and I tried to build a building that fit into that context.
When people take pictures of these buildings out of that context they look really weird, and my premise is that they make a lot more sense when they're photographed or seen in that space.
And then, once I deal with the context, I then try to make a place that's comfortable and private and fairly serene, as I hope you'll find that slide on the right.
And then I did a law school for Loyola in downtown L.A.
I was concerned about making a place for the study of law.
And we continue to work with this client.
The building on the right at the top is now under construction.
The garage on the right -- the gray structure -- will be torn down, finally, and several small classrooms will be placed along this avenue that we've created, this campus.
And it all related to the clients and the students from the very first meeting saying they felt denied a place.
They wanted a sense of place.
And so the whole idea here was to create that kind of space in downtown, in a neighborhood that was difficult to fit into.
And it was my theory, or my point of view, that one didn't upstage the neighborhood -- one made accommodations.
I tried to be inclusive, to include the buildings in the neighborhood, whether they were buildings I liked or not.
In the '60s I started working with paper furniture and made a bunch of stuff that was very successful in Bloomingdale's.
We even made flooring, walls and everything, out of cardboard.
And the success of it threw me for a loop.
I couldn't deal with the success of furniture -- I wasn't secure enough as an architect -- and so I closed it all up and made furniture that nobody would like.
(Laughter) So, nobody would like this.
And it was in this, preliminary to these pieces of furniture, that Ricky and I worked on furniture by the slice.
And after we failed, I just kept failing.
(Laughter) The piece on the left -- and that ultimately led to the piece on the right -- happened when the kid that was working on this took one of those long strings of stuff and folded it up to put it in the wastebasket.
And I put a piece of tape around it, as you see there, and realized you could sit on it, and it had a lot of resilience and strength and so on.
So, it was an accidental discovery.
I got into fish.
(Laughter) I mean, the story I tell is that I got mad at postmodernism -- at po-mo -- and said that fish were 500 million years earlier than man, and if you're going to go back, we might as well go back to the beginning.
And so I started making these funny things.
And they started to have a life of their own and got bigger -- as the one glass at the Walker.
And then, I sliced off the head and the tail and everything and tried to translate what I was learning about the form of the fish and the movement.
And a lot of my architectural ideas that came from it -- accidental, again -- it was an intuitive kind of thing, and I just kept going with it, and made this proposal for a building, which was only a proposal.
I did this building in Japan.
I was taken out to dinner after the contract for this little restaurant was signed.
And I love sake and Kobe and all that stuff.
And after I got -- I was really drunk -- I was asked to do some sketches on napkins.
(Laughter) And I made some sketches on napkins -- little boxes and Morandi-like things that I used to do.
And the client said, "Why no fish?"
And so I made a drawing with a fish, and I left Japan.
Three weeks later, I received a complete set of drawings saying we'd won the competition.
(Laughter) Now, it's hard to do. It's hard to translate a fish form, because they're so beautiful -- perfect -- into a building or object like this.
And Oldenburg, who I work with a little once in a while, told me I couldn't do it, and so that made it even more exciting.
But he was right -- I couldn't do the tail.
I started to get the head OK, but the tail I couldn't do.
It was pretty hard.
The thing on the right is a snake form, a ziggurat.
And I put them together, and you walk between them.
It was a dialog with the context again.
Now, if you saw a picture of this as it was published in Architectural Record -- they didn't show the context, so you would think, "God, what a pushy guy this is."
But a friend of mine spent four hours wandering around here looking for this restaurant.
Couldn't find it.
So ...
(Laughter) As for craft and technology and all those things that you've all been talking about, I was thrown for a complete loop.
This was built in six months.
The way we sent drawings to Japan: we used the magic computer in Michigan that does carved models, and we used to make foam models, which that thing scanned.
We made the drawings of the fish and the scales.
And when I got there, everything was perfect -- except the tail.
So, I decided to cut off the head and the tail.
And I made the object on the left for my show at the Walker.
And it's one of the nicest pieces I've ever made, I think.
And then Jay Chiat, a friend and client, asked me to do his headquarters building in L.A.
For reasons we don't want to talk about, it got delayed.
Toxic waste, I guess, is the key clue to that one.
And so we built a temporary building -- I'm getting good at temporary -- and we put a conference room in that's a fish.
And, finally, Jay dragged me to my hometown, Toronto, Canada.
And there is a story -- it's a real story -- about my grandmother buying a carp on Thursday, bringing it home, putting it in the bathtub when I was a kid.
I played with it in the evening.
When I went to sleep, the next day it wasn't there.
And the next night, we had gefilte fish.
(Laughter) And so I set up this interior for Jay's offices and I made a pedestal for a sculpture.
And he didn't buy a sculpture, so I made one.
I went around Toronto and found a bathtub like my grandmother's, and I put the fish in.
(Laughter) I play with funny people like [Claes] Oldenburg.
We've been friends for a long time.
And we've started to work on things.
A few years ago, we did a performance piece in Venice, Italy, called "Il Corso del Coltello" -- the Swiss Army knife.
And most of the imagery is -- (Laughter) Claes', but those two little boys are my sons, and they were Claes' assistants in the play.
He was the Swiss Army knife.
He was a souvenir salesman who always wanted to be a painter, and I was Frankie P. Toronto.
P for Palladio.
Dressed up like the AT&amp;T building by Claes -- (Laughter) with a fish hat.
The highlight of the performance was at the end.
This beautiful object, the Swiss Army knife, which I get credit for participating in.
And I can tell you -- it's totally an Oldenburg.
I had nothing to do with it.
The only thing I did was, I made it possible for them to turn those blades so you could sail this thing in the canal, because I love sailing.
(Laughter) We made it into a sailing craft.
I've been known to mess with things like chain link fencing.
I do it because it's a curious thing in the culture, when things are made in such great quantities, absorbed in such great quantities, and there's so much denial about them.
People hate it.
And I'm fascinated with that, which, like the paper furniture -- it's one of those materials.
And I'm always drawn to that.
And so I did a lot of dirty things with chain link, which nobody will forgive me for.
But Claes made homage to it in the Loyola Law School.
And that chain link is really expensive.
It's in perspective and everything.
And then we did a camp together for children with cancer.
And you can see, we started making a building together.
Of course, the milk can is his.
But we were trying to collide our ideas, to put objects next to each other.
Like a Morandi -- like the little bottles -- composing them like a still life.
And it seemed to work as a way to put he and I together.
Then Jay Chiat asked me to do this building on this funny lot in Venice, and I started with this three-piece thing, and you entered in the middle.
And Jay asked me what I was going to do with the piece in the middle.
And he pushed that.
And one day I had a -- oh, well, the other way.
I had the binoculars from Claes, and I put them there, and I could never get rid of them after that.
Oldenburg made the binoculars incredible when he sent me the first model of the real proposal.
It made my building look sick.
And it was this interaction between that kind of, up-the-ante stuff that became pretty interesting.
It led to the building on the left.
And I still think the Time magazine picture will be of the binoculars, you know, leaving out the -- what the hell.
I use a lot of metal in my work, and I have a hard time connecting with the craft.
The whole thing about my house, the whole use of rough carpentry and everything, was the frustration with the crafts available.
I said, "If I can't get the craft that I want, I'll use the craft I can get."
There were plenty of models for that, in Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, and many artists who were making beautiful art and sculpture with junk materials.
I went into the metal because it was a way of building a building that was a sculpture.
And it was all of one material, and the metal could go on the roof as well as the walls.
The metalworkers, for the most part, do ducts behind the ceilings and stuff.
I was given an opportunity to design an exhibit for the metalworkers' unions of America and Canada in Washington, and I did it on the condition that they become my partners in the future and help me with all future metal buildings, etc. etc.
And it's working very well to have these people, these craftsmen, interested in it.
I just tell the stories.
It's a way of connecting, at least, with some of those people that are so important to the realization of architecture.
The metal continued into a building -- Herman Miller, in Sacramento.
And it's just a complex of factory buildings.
And Herman Miller has this philosophy of having a place -- a people place.
I mean, it's kind of a trite thing to say, but it is real that they wanted to have a central place where the cafeteria would be, where the people would come and where the people working would interact.
So it's out in the middle of nowhere, and you approach it.
It's copper and galvanize.
I used the galvanize and copper in a very light gauge, so it would buckle.
I spent a lot of time undoing Richard Meier's aesthetic.
Everybody's trying to get the panels perfect, and I always try to get them sloppy and fuzzy.
And they end up looking like stone.
This is the central area.
There's a ramp.
And that little dome in there is a building by Stanley Tigerman.
Stanley was instrumental in my getting this job.
And when I was awarded the contract I, at the very beginning, asked the client if they would let Stanley do a cameo piece with me.
Because these were ideas that we were talking about, building things next to each other, making -- it's all about [a] metaphor for a city, maybe.
And so Stanley did the little dome thing.
And we did it over the phone and by fax.
He would send me a fax and show me something.
He'd made a building with a dome and he had a little tower.
I told him, "No, no, that's too ongepotchket.
I don't want the tower."
So he came back with a simpler building, but he put some funny details on it, and he moved it closer to my building.
And so I decided to put him in a depression.
I put him in a hole and made a kind of a hole that he sits in.
And so then he put two bridges -- this all happened on the fax, going back and forth over a couple of weeks' period.
And he put these two bridges with pink guardrails on it.
And so then I put this big billboard behind it.
And I call it, "David and Goliath."
And that's my cafeteria.
In Boston, we had that old building on the left.
It was a very prominent building off the freeway, and we added a floor and cleaned it up and fixed it up and used the kind of -- I thought -- the language of the neighborhood, which had these cornices, projecting cornices.
Mine got a little exuberant, but I used lead copper, which is a beautiful material, and it turns green in 100 years.
Instead of, like, copper in 10 or 15.
We redid the side of the building and re-proportioned the windows so it sort of fit into the space.
And it surprised both Boston and myself that we got it approved, because they have very strict kind of design guideline, and they wouldn't normally think I would fit them.
The detailing was very careful with the lead copper and making panels and fitting it tightly into the fabric of the existing building.
In Barcelona, on Las Ramblas for some film festival, I did the Hollywood sign going and coming, made a building out of it, and they built it.
I flew in one night and took this picture.
But they made it a third smaller than my model without telling me.
And then more metal and some chain link in Santa Monica -- a little shopping center.
And this is a laser laboratory at the University of Iowa, in which the fish comes back as an abstraction in the back.
It's the support labs, which, by some coincidence, required no windows.
I just joined the points.
In the curved part there's all the mechanical equipment.
That solid wall behind it is a pipe chase -- a pipe canyon -- and so it was an opportunity that I seized, because I didn't have to have any protruding ducts or vents or things in this form.
It gave me an opportunity to make a sculpture out of it.
This is a small house somewhere.
They've been building it so long I don't remember where it is.
It's in the West Valley.
And we started with the stream and built the house along the stream -- dammed it up to make a lake.
These are the models.
The reality, with the lake -- the workmanship is pretty bad.
And it reminded me why I play defensively in things like my house.
When you have to do something really cheaply, it's hard to get perfect corners and stuff.
That big metal thing is a passage, and in it is -- you go downstairs into the living room and then down into the bedroom, which is on the right.
It's kind of like a whole built town.
I was asked to do a hospital for schizophrenic adolescents at Yale.
I thought it was fitting for me to be doing that.
This is a house next to a Philip Johnson house in Minnesota.
The owners had a dilemma -- they asked Philip to do it.
He was too busy.
He didn't recommend me, by the way.
(Laughter) We ended up having to make it a sculpture, because the dilemma was, how do you build a building that doesn't look like the language?
Is it going to look like this beautiful estate is sub-divided?
Etc. etc.
You've got the idea.
And so we finally ended up making it.
These people are art collectors.
And we finally made it so it appears very sculptural from the main house and all the windows are on the other side.
And the building is very sculptural as you walk around it.
It's made of metal and the brown stuff is Fin-Ply -- it's that formed lumber from Finland.
We used it at Loyola on the chapel, and it didn't work.
I keep trying to make it work.
In this case we learned how to detail it.
In Cleveland, there's Burnham Mall, on the left.
It's never been finished.
Going out to the lake, you can see all those new buildings we built.
And we had the opportunity to build a building on this site.
There's a railroad track.
This is the city hall over here somewhere, and the courthouse.
And the centerline of the mall goes out.
Burnham had designed a railroad station that was never built, and so we followed.
Sohio is on the axis here, and we followed the axis, and they're two kind of goalposts.
And this is our building, which is a corporate headquarters for an insurance company.
We collaborated with Oldenburg and put the newspaper on top, folded.
The health club is fastened to the garage with a C-clamp, for Cleveland.
(Laughter) You drive down.
So it's about a 10-story C-clamp.
And all this stuff at the bottom is a museum, and an idea for a very fancy automobile entry.
This owner has a pet peeve about bad automobile entries.
And this would be a hotel.
So, the centerline of this thing -- we'd preserve it, and it would start to work with the scale of the new buildings by Pelli and Kohn Pederson Fox, etc., that are underway.
I feel much more comfortable down here.
This is a piece of property in Brentwood.
And a long time ago, about '82 or something, after my house -- I designed a house for myself that would be a village of several pavilions around a courtyard -- and the owner of this lot worked for me and built that actual model on the left.
And she came back, I guess wealthier or something -- something happened -- and asked me to design a house for her on this site.
And following that basic idea of the village, we changed it as we got into it.
I locked the house into the site by cutting the back end -- here you see on the photographs of the site -- slicing into it and putting all the bathrooms and dressing rooms like a retaining wall, creating a lower level zone for the master bedroom, which I designed like a kind of a barge, looking like a boat.
And that's it, built.
The dome was a request from the client.
She wanted a dome somewhere in the house.
She didn't care where.
When you sleep in this bedroom, I hope -- I mean, I haven't slept in it yet.
I've offered to marry her so I could sleep there, but she said I didn't have to do that.
But when you're in that room, you feel like you're on a kind of barge on some kind of lake.
And it's very private.
The landscape is being built around to create a private garden.
And then up above there's a garden on this side of the living room, and one on the other side.
I don't know how to do it from here.
Focus the one on the right.
It's up there.
Left -- it's my right.
Anyway, you enter into a garden with a beautiful grove of trees.
That's the living room.
A guest bedroom, which has this dome with marble on it.
And then you enter into the living room and then so on.
This is the bedroom.
You come down from this level along the stairway, and you enter the bedroom here, going into the lake.
And the bed is back in this space, with windows looking out onto the lake.
These Stonehenge things were designed to give foreground and to create a greater depth in this shallow lot.
The material is lead copper, like in the building in Boston.
And so it was an intent to make this small piece of land -- it's 100 by 250 -- into a kind of an estate by separating these areas and making the living room and dining room into this pavilion with a high space in it.
And this happened by accident that I got this right on axis with the dining room table.
It looks like I got a Baldessari painting for free.
But the idea is, the windows are all placed so you see pieces of the house outside.
Eventually this will be screened -- these trees will come up -- and it will be very private.
And you feel like you're in your own kind of village.
This is for Michael Eisner -- Disney.
We're doing some work for him.
And this is in Anaheim, California, and it's a freeway building.
You go under this bridge at about 65 miles an hour, and there's another bridge here.
And you're through this room in a split second, and the building will sort of reflect that.
On the backside, it's much more humane -- entrance, dining hall, etc.
And then this thing here -- I'm hoping as you drive by you'll hear the picket fence effect of the sound hitting it.
Kind of a fun thing to do.
I'm doing a building in Switzerland, Basel, which is an office building for a furniture company.
And we struggled with the image.
These are the early studies, but they have to sell furniture to normal people, so if I did the building and it was too fancy, then people might say, "Well, the furniture looks OK in his thing, but no, it ain't going to look good in my normal building."
So we've made a kind of pragmatic slab in the second phase here, and we've taken the conference facilities and made a villa out of them so that the communal space is very sculptural and separate.
And you're looking at it from the offices and you create a kind of interaction between these pieces.
This is in Paris, along the Seine.
Palais des Sports, the Gare de Lyon over here.
The Minister of Finance -- the guy that moved from the Louvre -- goes in here.
There's a new library across the river.
And back in here, in this already treed park, we're doing a very dense building called the American Center, which has a theater, apartments, dance school, an art museum, restaurants and all kinds of -- it's a very dense program -- bookstores, etc.
In a very tight, small -- this is the ground level.
And the French have this extraordinary way of screwing things up by taking a beautiful site and cutting the corner off.
They call it the plan coupe.
And I struggled with that thing -- how to get around the corner.
These are the models for it.
I showed you the other model, the one -- this is the way I organized myself so I could make the drawing -- so I understood the problem.
I was trying to get around this plan coupe -- how do you do it?
Apartments, etc.
And these are the kind of study models we did.
You can see why I was ready to commit suicide when this one was built.
But out of it came finally this resolution, where the elevator piece worked frontally to this, parallel to this street, and also parallel to here.
And then this kind of twist, with this balcony and the skirt, kind of like a ballerina lifting her skirt to let you into the foyer.
The restaurants here -- the apartments and the theater, etc.
So it would all be built in stone, in French limestone, except for this metal piece.
And it faces into a park.
And the idea was to make this express the energy of this.
On the side facing the street it's much more normal, except I slipped a few mansards down, so that coming on the point, these housing units made a gesture to the corner.
And this will be some kind of high-tech billboard.
If any of you guys have any ideas for it, please contact me.
I don't know what to do.
Jay Chiat is a glutton for punishment, and he hired me to do a house for him in the Hamptons.
And I keep thinking, "This is going to be the last fish."
I say, "I'm not going to do it anymore -- I don't want to do it anymore -- I'm not going to do it."
And then I do it.
(Laughter) There it is.
And this piece here is -- I don't know what it is.
I just added it so that we'd have enough money in the budget so we could take something out.
(Applause) This is Euro Disney, and I've worked with all of the guys that presented to you earlier.
We've had a lot of fun working together.
I think I'm from Mars for them, and they are for me, but somehow we all manage to work together, and I think, productively.
So far.
This is a shopping thing.
You come into the Magic Kingdom and the hotel that Tony Baxter's group is doing out here.
And then this is a kind of a shopping mall, with a rodeo and restaurants.
And another restaurant.
What I did -- because of the Paris skies being quite dull, I made a light grid that's perpendicular to the train station, to the route of the train.
It looks like it's kind of been there, and then crashed all these simpler forms into it.
The light grid will have a light, be lit up at night and give a kind of light ceiling.
In Switzerland -- Germany, actually -- on the Rhine across from Basel, we did a furniture factory and a furniture museum.
And I tried to -- there's a Nick Grimshaw building over here, there's an Oldenburg sculpture over here -- I tried to make a relationship urbanistically.
And I don't gave good slides to show -- it's just been completed -- but this piece here is this building, and these pieces here and here.
And as you pass by it's always part -- you see it as all of these pieces accrue and become part of an overall neighborhood.
It's plaster and just zinc.
And you wonder, if this is a museum, what it's going to be like inside?
If it's going to be so busy and crazy that you wouldn't show anything, and just wait.
I'm so cunning and clever -- I made it quiet and wonderful.
But on the outside it does scream out at you a bit.
It's actually basically three square rooms with a couple of skylights and stuff.
And from the building in the back, you see it as an iceberg floating by in the hills.
I know I'm over time.
See, that skylight goes down and becomes that one.
So it's pretty quiet inside.
This is the Disney Hall -- the concert hall.
It's a complicated project.
It has a chamber hall.
It's related to an existing Chandler Pavilion that was built with a lot of love and tears and caring.
And it's not a great building, but I approached it optimistically, that we would make a compositional relationship between us that would strengthen both of us.
And the plan of this -- it's a concert hall.
This is the foyer, which is kind of a garden structure.
There's commercial at the ground floor.
These are offices, which, really, in the competition, we didn't have to design.
But finally, there's a hotel there.
These were the kind of relationships made to the Chandler, composing these elevations together and relating them to the buildings that existed -- to MOCA, etc.
The acoustician in the competition gave us criteria, which led to this compartmentalized scheme, which we found out after the competition would not work at all.
But everybody liked these forms and liked the space, and so that's one of the problems of a competition.
You have to then try and get that back in some way.
And we studied many models.
These were the three buildings that were the ideal -- the Concertgebouw, Boston and Berlin.
Everybody liked the surround.
Actually, this is the smallest hall in size, and it has more seats than any of these because it has double balconies.
Our client doesn't want balconies, so -- and when we met our new acoustician, he told us this was the right shape or this was the right shape.
And we tried many shapes, trying to get the energy of the original design within an acoustical, acceptable format.
We finally settled on a shape that was the proportion of the Concertgebouw with the sloping outside walls, which the acoustician said were crucial to this and later decided they weren't, but now we have them.
(Laughter) And our idea is to make the seating carriage very sculptural and out of wood and like a big boat sitting in this plaster room.
That's the idea.
And the corners would have skylights and these columns would be structural.
And the nice thing about introducing columns is they give you a kind of sense of proscenium from wherever you sit, and create intimacy.
Now, this is not a final design -- these are just on the way to being -- and so I wouldn't take it literally, except the feeling of the space.
We studied the acoustics with laser stuff, and they bounce them off this and see where it all works.
But you get the sense of the hall in section.
Most halls come straight down into a proscenium.
In this case we're opening it back up and getting skylights in the four corners.
And so it will be quite a different shape.
(Laughter) The original building, because it was frog-like, fit nicely on the site and cranked itself well.
When you get into a box, it's harder to do it -- and here we are, struggling with how to put the hotel in.
And this is a teapot I designed for Alessi.
I just stuck it on there.
But this is how I do work. I do take pieces and bits and look at it and struggle with it and cut it away.
And of course it's not going to look like that, but it is the crazy way I tend to work.
And then finally, in L.A. I was asked to do a sculpture at the foot of Interstate Bank Tower, the highest building in L.A.
Larry Halprin is doing the stairs.
And I was asked to do a fish, and so I did a snake.
(Laughter) It's a public space, and I made it kind of a garden structure, and you can go in it.
It's a kiva, and Larry's putting some water in there, and it works much better than a fish.
In Barcelona I was asked to do a fish, and we're working on that, at the foot of a Ritz-Carlton Tower being done by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.
And the Ritz-Carlton Tower is being designed with exposed steel, non-fire proof, much like those old gas tanks.
And so we took the language of this exposed steel and used it, perverted it, into the form of the fish, and created a kind of a 19th-century contraption that looks like, that will sit -- this is the beach and the harbor out in front, and this is really a shopping center with department stores.
And we split these bridges.
Originally, this was all solid with a hole in it.
We cut them loose and made several bridges and created a kind of a foreground for this hotel.
We showed this to the hotel people the other day, and they were terrified and said that nobody would come to the Ritz-Carlton anymore, because of this fish.
(Laughter) And finally, I just threw these in -- Lou Danziger.
I didn't expect Lou Danziger to be here, but this is a building I did for him in 1964, I think.
A little studio -- and it's sadly for sale.
Time goes on.
And this is my son working with me on a small fast-food thing.
He designed the robot as the cashier, and the head moves, and I did the rest of it.
And the food wasn't as good as the stuff, and so it failed.
It should have been the other way around -- the food should have been good first.
Thank you very much.
Today, I want to talk to you about dreams.
I have been a lucid dreamer my whole life, and it's cooler than in the movies.
(Laughter) Beyond flying, breathing fire, and making hot men spontaneously appear ...
(Laughter) I can do things like read and write music.
Fun fact is that I wrote my personal statement to college in a dream.
And I did accepted. So, yeah.
I am a very visual thinker.
I think in pictures, not words.
To me, words are more like instincts and language.
There are many people like me; Nikola Tesla, for example, who could visualize, design, test, and troubleshoot everything -- all of his inventions -- in his mind, accurately.
Language is kind of exclusive to our species, anyway.
I am a bit more primitive, like a beta version of Google Translate.
(Laughter) My brain has the ability to hyper-focus on things that interest me.
For example, once I had an affair with calculus that lasted longer than some celebrity marriages.
(Laughter) There are some other unusual things about me.
You may have noticed that I don't have much inflection in my voice.
That's why people often confuse me with a GPS.
(Laughter) This can make basic communication a challenge, unless you need directions.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause) A few years ago, when I started doing presentations, I went to get head shots done for the first time.
The photographer told me to look flirty.
(Laughter) And I had no idea what she was talking about.
(Laughter) She said, "Do that thing, you know, with your eyes, when you're flirting with guys."
"What thing?" I asked.
"You know, squint."
And so I tried, really.
It looked something like this.
(Laughter) I looked like I was searching for Waldo.
(Laughter) There's a reason for this, as there is a reason that Waldo is hiding.
(Laughter) I have Asperger's, a high-functioning form of autism that impairs the basic social skills one is expected to display.
It's made life difficult in many ways, and growing up, I struggled to fit in socially.
My friends would tell jokes, but I didn't understand them.
My personal heroes were George Carlin and Stephen Colbert -- and they taught me humor.
My personality switched from being shy and awkward to being defiant and cursing out a storm.
Needless to say, I did not have many friends.
I was also hypersensitive to texture.
The feel of water on my skin was like pins and needles, and so for years, I refused to shower.
I can assure you that my hygiene routine is up to standards now, though.
(Laughter) I had to do a lot to get here, and my parents -- things kind of got out of control when I was sexually assaulted by a peer, and on top of everything, it made a difficult situation worse.
And I had to travel 2,000 miles across the country to get treatment, but within days of them prescribing a new medication, my life turned into an episode of the Walking Dead.
I became paranoid, and began to hallucinate that rotting corpses were coming towards me.
My family finally rescued me, but by that time, I had lost 19 pounds in those three weeks, as well as developing severe anemia, and was on the verge of suicide.
I transferred to a new treatment center that understood my aversions, my trauma, and my social anxiety, and they knew how to treat it, and I got the help I finally needed.
And after 18 months of hard work, I went on to do incredible things.
One of the things with Asperger's is that oftentimes, these people have a very complex inner life, and I know for myself, I have a very colorful personality, rich ideas, and just a lot going on in my mind.
But there's a gap between where that stands, and how I communicate it with the rest of the world.
And this can make basic communication a challenge.
Not many places would hire me, due to my lack of social skills, which is why I applied to Waffle House.
(Laughter) Waffle House is an exceptional 24-hour diner -- (Laughter) (Applause) thank you -- where you can order your hash browns the many ways that someone would dispose of a human corpse ...
(Laughter) Sliced, diced, peppered, chunked, topped, capped, and covered.
(Laughter) As social norms would have it, you should only go to Waffle House at an ungodly hour in the night.
(Laughter) So one time, at 2 am, I was chatting with a waitress, and I asked her, "What's the most ridiculous thing that's happened to you on the job?"
And she told me that one time, a man walked in completely naked.
(Laughter) I said, "Great! Sign me up for the graveyard shift!"
(Laughter) Needless to say, Waffle House did not hire me.
So in terms of having Asperger's, it can be viewed as a disadvantage, and sometimes it is a real pain in the butt, but it's also the opposite.
It's a gift, and it allows me to think innovatively.
At 19, I won a research competition for my research on coral reefs, and I ended up speaking at the UN Convention of Biological Diversity, presenting this research.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) And at 22, I'm getting ready to graduate college, and I am a co-founder of a biotech company called AutismSees.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) But consider what I had to do to get here: 25 therapists, 11 misdiagnoses, and years of pain and trauma.
I spent a lot of time thinking if there's a better way, and I think there is: autism-assistive technology.
This technology could play an integral role in helping people with autistic spectrum disorder, or ASD.
The app Podium, released by my company, AutismSees, has the ability to independently assess and help develop communication skills.
In addition to this, it tracks eye contact through camera and simulates a public-speaking and job-interview experience.
And so maybe one day, Waffle House will hire me, after practicing on it some more.
(Laughter) And one of the great things is that I've used Podium to help me prepare for today, and it's been a great help.
But it's more than that.
There's more that can be done.
For people with ASD -- it has been speculated that many innovative scientists, researchers, artists, and engineers have it; like, for example, Emily Dickinson, Jane Austen, Isaac Newton, and Bill Gates are some examples.
But the problem that's encountered is that these brilliant ideas often can't be shared if there are communication roadblocks.
And so, many people with autism are being overlooked every day, and they're being taken advantage of.
So my dream for people with autism is to change that, to remove the roadblocks that prevent them from succeeding.
One of the reasons I love lucid dreaming is because it allows me to be free, without judgment of social and physical consequences.
When I'm flying over scenes that I create in my mind, I am at peace.
I am free from judgment, and so I can do whatever I want, you know?
I'm making out with Brad Pitt, and Angelina is totally cool with it.
(Laughter) But the goal of autism-assistive technology is bigger than that, and more important.
My goal is to shift people's perspective of autism and people with higher-functioning Asperger's because there is a lot they can do.
I mean, look at Temple Grandin, for example.
And by doing so, we allow people to share their talents with this world and move this world forward.
In addition, we give them the courage to pursue their dreams in the real world, in real time.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
I will always remember the first time I met the girl in the blue uniform.
I was eight at the time, living in the village with my grandmother, who was raising me and other children.
Famine had hit my country of Zimbabwe, and we just didn't have enough to eat.
We were hungry.
And that's when the girl in the blue uniform came to my village with the United Nations to feed the children.
As she handed me my porridge, I asked her why she was there, and without hesitation, she said, "As Africans, we must uplift all the people of Africa."
I had absolutely no idea what she meant.
(Laughter) But her words stuck with me.
Two years later, famine hit my country for the second time.
My grandmother had no choice but to send me to the city to live with an aunt I had never met before.
So at the age of 10, I found myself in school for the very first time.
And there, at the city school, I would experience what it was to be unequal.
You see, in the village, we were all equal.
But in the eyes and the minds of the other kids, I was not their equal.
I couldn't speak English, and I was way behind in terms of reading and writing.
But this feeling of inequality would get even more complex.
Every school holiday spent back in the village with my grandmother made me consciously aware of the inequalities this incredible opportunity had created within my own family.
Suddenly, I had much more than the rest of my village.
And in their eyes, I was no longer their equal.
I felt guilty.
But I thought about the girl in the blue uniform, and I remember thinking, "That's who I want to be -- someone like her, someone who uplifts other people."
This childhood experience led me to the United Nations, and to my current role with UN Women, where we are addressing one of the greatest inequalities that affects more than half of the world's population -- women and girls.
Today, I want to share with you a simple idea that seeks to uplift all of us together.
Eight months ago, under the visionary leadership of Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, head of UN Women, we launched a groundbreaking initiative called HeForShe, inviting men and boys from around the world to stand in solidarity with each other and with women, to create a shared vision for gender equality.
This is an invitation for those who believe in equality for women and men, and those who don't yet know that they believe.
The initiative is based on a simple idea: that what we share is much more powerful than what divides us.
We all feel the same things.
We all want the same things, even when those things sometimes remain unspoken.
HeForShe is about uplifting all of us, women and men together.
It's moving us towards an inflection point for gender equality.
Imagine a blank page with one horizontal line splitting it in half.
Now imagine that women are represented here, and men are represented here.
In our current population, HeForShe is about moving the 3.2 billion men, one man at a time, across that line, so that ultimately, men can stand alongside women and be on the right side of history, making gender equality a reality in the 21st century.
However, engaging men in the movement would prove quite controversial.
Why invite men? They are the problem.
(Laughter) In fact, men don't care, we were told.
But something incredible happened when we launched HeForShe.
In just three days, more than 100,000 men had signed up and committed to be agents of change for equality.
Within that first week, at least one man in every single country in the world stood up to be counted, and within that same week, HeForShe created more than 1.2 billion conversations on social media.
And that's when the emails started pouring in, sometimes as many as a thousand a day.
We heard from a man out of Zimbabwe, who, after hearing about HeForShe, created a "husband school."
(Laughter) He literally went around his village, hand-picking all of the men that were abusive to their partners, and committed to turn them into better husbands and fathers.
In Pune, India, a youth advocate organized an innovative bicycle rally, mobilizing 700 cyclists to share the HeForShe messages within their own community.
In another impact story, a man sent a very personal note of something that had happened in his own community.
He wrote, "Dear Madam, I have lived all of my life next door to a man who continuously beats up his wife.
Two weeks ago, I was listening to my radio, and your voice came on, and you spoke about something called the HeForShe, and the need for men to play their role.
Within a few hours, I heard the woman cry again next door, but for the first time, I didn't just sit there.
I felt compelled to do something, so I went over and I confronted the husband.
Madam, it has been two weeks, and the woman has not cried since.
Thank you for giving me a voice."
(Applause) Personal impact stories such as these show that we are tapping into something within men, but getting to a world where women and men are equal is not just a matter of bringing men to the cause.
We want concrete, systematic, structural change that can equalize the political, economic and social realities for women and men.
We are asking men to make concrete actions, calling them to intervene at a personal level, to change their behavior.
We are calling upon governments, businesses, universities, to change their policies.
We want male leaders to become role models and change agents within their own institutions.
Already, a number of prominent men and leaders have stepped up and made some concrete HeForShe commitments.
In a few early success stories, a leading French hospitality company, Accor, has committed to eliminate the pay gap for all of its 180,000 employees by 2020.
(Applause) The government of Sweden, under its current feminist government, has committed to close both the employment and the pay gap for all of its citizens within the current electoral term.
In Japan, the University of Nagoya is building, as part of their HeForShe commitments, what will become one of Japan's leading gender-research centers.
Now, eight months later, a movement is building.
We are seeing men sign up from every single walk of life, and from every single corner in the world, from the United Nations' own Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to the Secretary-Generals of NATO and the EU Council, from the prime minister of Bhutan to the president of Sierra Leone.
In Europe alone, all the male EU Commissioners and the members of Parliament of the Swedish and Iceland governments have signed up to be HeForShe.
In fact, one in 20 men in Iceland has joined the movement.
The rallying call of our passionate goodwill ambassador, Emma Watson, has garnered more than five billion media impressions, mobilizing hundreds and thousands of students around the world to create more than a hundred HeForShe student associations.
Now this is the beginning of the vision that HeForShe has for the world that we want to see.
Einstein once said, "A human being is part of the whole ...
but he experiences himself, his thoughts and feelings, as something separate from the rest ...
This delusion is a kind of prison for us ...
Our task must be to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of compassion."
If women and men are part of a greater whole, as Einstein suggests, it is my hope that HeForShe can help free us to realize that it is not our gender that defines us, but ultimately, our shared humanity.
HeForShe is tapping into women's and men's dreams, the dreams that we have for ourselves, and the dreams that we have for our families, our children, friends, communities.
So that's what it is about.
HeForShe is about uplifting all of us together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You spend weeks studying for an important test.
On the big day, you wait nervously as your teacher hands it out.
Youre working your way through, when youre asked to define ataraxia. You know youve seen it before, but your mind goes blank.
What just happened?
The answer lies in the complex relationship between stress and memory.
There are many types and degrees of stress and different kinds of memory, but were going to focus on how short-term stress impacts your memory for facts.
To start, it helps to understand how this kind of memory works.
Facts you read, hear, or study become memories through a process with three main steps.
First comes acquisition: the moment you encounter a new piece of information.
Each sensory experience activates a unique set of brain areas.
In order to become lasting memories, these sensory experiences have to be consolidated by the hippocampus, influenced by the amygdala, which emphasizes experiences associated with strong emotions.
The hippocampus then encodes memories, probably by strengthening the synaptic connections stimulated during the original sensory experience.
Once a memory has been encoded, it can be remembered, or retrieved, later.
Memories are stored all over the brain, and its likely the prefrontal cortex that signals for their retrieval.
So how does stress affect each of these stages?
In the first two stages, moderate stress can actually help experiences enter your memory.
Your brain responds to stressful stimuli by releasing hormones known as corticosteroids, which activate a process of threat-detection and threat-response in the amygdala.
The amygdala prompts your hippocampus to consolidate the stress-inducing experience into a memory.
Meanwhile, the flood of corticosteroids from stress stimulates your hippocampus, also prompting memory consolidation.
But even though some stress can be helpful, extreme and chronic stress can have the opposite effect.
Researchers have tested this by injecting rats directly with stress hormones.
As they gradually increased the dose of corticosteroids, the rats performance on memory tests increased at first, but dropped off at higher doses.
In humans, we see a similar positive effect with moderate stress.
But that only appears when the stress is related to the memory task so while time pressure might help you memorize a list, having a friend scare you will not.
And the weeks, months, or even years of sustained corticosteroids that result from chronic stress can damage the hippocampus and decrease your ability to form new memories.
It would be nice if some stress also helped us remember facts, but unfortunately, the opposite is true.
The act of remembering relies on the prefrontal cortex, which governs thought, attention, and reasoning.
When corticosteroids stimulate the amygdala, the amygdala inhibits, or lessens the activity of, the prefrontal cortex.
The reason for this inhibition is so the fight/flight/freeze response can overrule slower, more reasoned thought in a dangerous situation.
But that can also have the unfortunate effect of making your mind go blank during a test.
And then the act of trying to remember can itself be a stressor, leading to a vicious cycle of more corticosteroid release and an even smaller chance of remembering.
So what can you do to turn stress to your advantage and stay calm and collected when it matters the most?
First, if you know a stressful situation like a test is coming, try preparing in conditions similar to the stressful environment.
Novelty can be a stressor.
Completing practice questions under time pressure, or seated at a desk rather than on a couch, can make your stress response to these circumstances less sensitive during the test itself.
Exercise is another useful tool.
Increasing your heart and breathing rate is linked to chemical changes in your brain that help reduce anxiety and increase your sense of well-being.
Regular exercise is also widely thought to improve sleeping patterns, which comes in handy the night before a test.
And on the actual test day, try taking deep breaths to counteract your bodys flight/fight/freeze response.
Deep breathing exercises have shown measurable reduction in test anxiety in groups ranging from third graders to nursing students.
So the next time you find your mind going blank at a critical moment, take a few deep breaths until you remember ataraxia: a state of calmness, free from anxiety.
So, as a child, I used to spend all of my time at my great-grandmother's house.
On hot, humid, summer days, I would dash across the floor and stick my face in front of her only air conditioner.
But I didn't realize that that simple experience, though brief, was a privileged one in our community.
Growing up, stories of next-door neighbors having to set up fake energy accounts or having to steal energy seemed normal to me.
During the winter, struggling to get warm, my neighbors would have no choice but to bypass the meter after their heat was shut off, just to keep their family comfortable for one more day.
These kinds of dangerous incidents can take root when people are faced with impossible choices.
In the US, the average American spends three percent of their income on energy.
In contrast, low-income and rural populations can spend 20, even 30 percent of their income on energy.
In 2015, this caused over 25 million people to skip meals to provide power to their homes.
This is when energy becomes a burden.
But energy burdens are so much more than just a number.
They present impossible and perilous choices: Do you take your child to get her flu medicine, or do you feed her?
Or do you keep her warm?
It's an impossible choice, and nearly every month, seven million people choose between medicine and energy.
This exposes a much larger and systemic issue.
Families with high energy burdens are disproportionately people of color, who spend more per square foot than their white counterparts.
But it's also nurses, veterans and even schoolteachers who fall into the mass of 37 million people a year who are unable to afford energy for their most basic needs.
As a result, those with high energy burdens have a greater likelihood of conditions like heart disease and asthma.
Look -- given our rockets to Mars and our pocket-sized AI, we have the tools to address these systemic inequities.
The technology is here.
Cost of renewables, insulation, microgrids and smart home technology are all decreasing.
However, even as we approach cost parity, the majority of those who own solar earn much more than the average American.
This is why, when I was 22, I founded the nonprofit RETI.
Our mission is to alleviate energy burdens by working with communities, utilities and government agencies alike to provide equitable access to clean energy, energy efficiency and energy technology.
But there's no one way to solve this.
I believe in the power of local communities, in the transforming effect of relationships.
So we start by working directly with the communities that have the highest energy burdens.
We host workshops and events for communities to learn about energy poverty, and how making even small updates to their homes like better insulation for windows and water heaters can go a long way to maximize efficiency.
We're connecting neighborhoods to community solar and spearheading community-led smart home research and installation programs to help families bring down their energy bills.
We're even working directly with elected officials, advocating for more equitable pricing, because to see this vision of energy equity and resilience succeed, we have to work together sustainably.
Now, the US spends over three billion a year on energy bill payment assistance.
And these programs do help millions of people, but they're only able to help a fraction of those in need.
In fact, there is a 47-billion-dollar home-energy affordability gap, so assistance alone is not sustainable.
But by building energy equity and resilience into our communities, we can assure fair and impartial access to energy that is clean, reliable and affordable.
At scale, microgrid technology, clean technology and energy efficiency dramatically improve public health.
And for those with high energy burdens, it can help them reclaim 20 percent of their income -- 20 percent of a person's income who's struggling to make ends meet.
This is life-changing.
This is an opportunity for families to use their energy savings to sponsor their future.
I think back to my great-grandmother and her neighbors, the impossible choices that they had to make and the effect it had on our whole community.
But this is not just about them.
There are millions nationwide having to make the same impossible choices today.
And I know high energy burdens are a tremendous barrier to overcome, but through relationships with communities and technology, we have the paths to overcome them.
And when we do, we will all be more resilient.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What do you do when you have a headache?
You swallow an aspirin.
But for this pill to get to your head, where the pain is, it goes through your stomach, intestines and various other organs first.
Swallowing pills is the most effective and painless way of delivering any medication in the body.
The downside, though, is that swallowing any medication leads to its dilution.
And this is a big problem, particularly in HIV patients.
When they take their anti-HIV drugs, these drugs are good for lowering the virus in the blood, and increasing the CD4 cell counts.
But they are also notorious for their adverse side effects, but mostly bad, because they get diluted by the time they get to the blood, and worse, by the time they get to the sites where it matters most: within the HIV viral reservoirs.
These areas in the body -- such as the lymph nodes, the nervous system, as well as the lungs -- where the virus is sleeping, and will not readily get delivered in the blood of patients that are under consistent anti-HIV drugs therapy.
However, upon discontinuation of therapy, the virus can awake and infect new cells in the blood.
Now, all this is a big problem in treating HIV with the current drug treatment, which is a life-long treatment that must be swallowed by patients.
One day, I sat and thought, "Can we deliver anti-HIV directly within its reservoir sites, without the risk of drug dilution?"
As a laser scientist, the answer was just before my eyes: Lasers, of course.
If they can be used for dentistry, for diabetic wound-healing and surgery, they can be used for anything imaginable, including transporting drugs into cells.
As a matter of fact, we are currently using laser pulses to poke or drill extremely tiny holes, which open and close almost immediately in HIV-infected cells, in order to deliver drugs within them.
"How is that possible?" you may ask.
Well, we shine a very powerful but super-tiny laser beam onto the membrane of HIV-infected cells while these cells are immersed in liquid containing the drug.
The laser pierces the cell, while the cell swallows the drug in a matter of microseconds.
Before you even know it, the induced hole becomes immediately repaired.
Now, we are currently testing this technology in test tubes or in Petri dishes, but the goal is to get this technology in the human body, apply it in the human body.
"How is that possible?" you may ask.
Well, the answer is: through a three-headed device.
Using the first head, which is our laser, we will make an incision in the site of infection.
Using the second head, which is a camera, we meander to the site of infection.
Finally, using a third head, which is a drug-spreading sprinkler, we deliver the drugs directly at the site of infection, while the laser is again used to poke those cells open.
Well, this might not seem like much right now.
But one day, if successful, this technology can lead to complete eradication of HIV in the body.
Yes. A cure for HIV.
This is every HIV researcher's dream -- in our case, a cure lead by lasers.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For more than 100 years, the telephone companies have provided wiretapping assistance to governments.
For much of this time, this assistance was manual.
Surveillance took place manually and wires were connected by hand.
Calls were recorded to tape.
But as in so many other industries, computing has changed everything.
The telephone companies built surveillance features into the very core of their networks.
I want that to sink in for a second: Our telephones and the networks that carry our calls were wired for surveillance first.
First and foremost.
So what that means is that when you're talking to your spouse, your children, a colleague or your doctor on the telephone, someone could be listening.
Now, that someone might be your own government; it could also be another government, a foreign intelligence service, or a hacker, or a criminal, or a stalker or any other party that breaks into the surveillance system, that hacks into the surveillance system of the telephone companies.
But while the telephone companies have built surveillance as a priority, Silicon Valley companies have not.
And increasingly, over the last couple years, Silicon Valley companies have built strong encryption technology into their communications products that makes surveillance extremely difficult.
For example, many of you might have an iPhone, and if you use an iPhone to send a text message to other people who have an iPhone, those text messages cannot easily be wiretapped.
And in fact, according to Apple, they're not able to even see the text messages themselves.
Likewise, if you use FaceTime to make an audio call or a video call with one of your friends or loved ones, that, too, cannot be easily wiretapped.
And it's not just Apple.
WhatsApp, which is now owned by Facebook and used by hundreds of millions of people around the world, also has built strong encryption technology into its product, which means that people in the Global South can easily communicate without their governments, often authoritarian, wiretapping their text messages.
So, after 100 years of being able to listen to any telephone call -- anytime, anywhere -- you might imagine that government officials are not very happy.
And in fact, that's what's happening.
Government officials are extremely mad.
And they're not mad because these encryption tools are now available.
What upsets them the most is that the tech companies have built encryption features into their products and turned them on by default.
It's the default piece that matters.
In short, the tech companies have democratized encryption.
And so, government officials like British Prime Minister David Cameron, they believe that all communications -- emails, texts, voice calls -- all of these should be available to governments, and encryption is making that difficult.
Now, look -- I'm extremely sympathetic to their point of view.
We live in a dangerous time in a dangerous world, and there really are bad people out there.
There are terrorists and other serious national security threats that I suspect we all want the FBI and the NSA to monitor.
But those surveillance features come at a cost.
The reason for that is that there is no such thing as a terrorist laptop, or a drug dealer's cell phone.
We all use the same communications devices.
What that means is that if the drug dealers' telephone calls or the terrorists' telephone calls can be intercepted, then so can the rest of ours, too.
And I think we really need to ask: Should a billion people around the world be using devices that are wiretap friendly?
So the scenario of hacking of surveillance systems that I've described -- this is not imaginary.
In 2009, the surveillance systems that Google and Microsoft built into their networks -- the systems that they use to respond to lawful surveillance requests from the police -- those systems were compromised by the Chinese government, because the Chinese government wanted to figure out which of their own agents the US government was monitoring.
By the same token, in 2004, the surveillance system built into the network of Vodafone Greece -- Greece's largest telephone company -- was compromised by an unknown entity, and that feature, the surveillance feature, was used to wiretap the Greek Prime Minister and members of the Greek cabinet.
The foreign government or hackers who did that were never caught.
And really, this gets to the very problem with these surveillance features, or backdoors.
When you build a backdoor into a communications network or piece of technology, you have no way of controlling who's going to go through it.
You have no way of controlling whether it'll be used by your side or the other side, by good guys, or by bad guys.
And so for that reason, I think that it's better to build networks to be as secure as possible.
Yes, this means that in the future, encryption is going to make wiretapping more difficult.
It means that the police are going to have a tougher time catching bad guys.
But the alternative would mean to live in a world where anyone's calls or anyone's text messages could be surveilled by criminals, by stalkers and by foreign intelligence agencies.
And I don't want to live in that kind of world.
And so right now, you probably have the tools to thwart many kinds of government surveillance already on your phones and already in your pockets, you just might not realize how strong and how secure those tools are, or how weak the other ways you've used to communicate really are.
And so, my message to you is this: We need to use these tools.
We need to secure our telephone calls.
We need to secure our text messages.
I want you to use these tools.
I want you to tell your loved ones, I want you to tell your colleagues: Use these encrypted communications tools.
Don't just use them because they're cheap and easy, but use them because they're secure.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a painting from the 16th century from Lucas Cranach the Elder.
It shows the famous Fountain of Youth.
If you drink its water or you bathe in it, you will get health and youth.
Every culture, every civilization has dreamed of finding eternal youth.
There are people like Alexander the Great or Ponce De Len, the explorer, who spent much of their life chasing the Fountain of Youth.
They didn't find it.
But what if there was something to it?
What if there was something to this Fountain of Youth?
I will share an absolutely amazing development in aging research that could revolutionize the way we think about aging and how we may treat age-related diseases in the future.
It started with experiments that showed, in a recent number of studies about growing, that animals -- old mice -- that share a blood supply with young mice can get rejuvenated.
This is similar to what you might see in humans, in Siamese twins, and I know this sounds a bit creepy.
But what Tom Rando, a stem-cell researcher, reported in 2007, was that old muscle from a mouse can be rejuvenated if it's exposed to young blood through common circulation.
This was reproduced by Amy Wagers at Harvard a few years later, and others then showed that similar rejuvenating effects could be observed in the pancreas, the liver and the heart.
But what I'm most excited about, and several other labs as well, is that this may even apply to the brain.
So, what we found is that an old mouse exposed to a young environment in this model called parabiosis, shows a younger brain -- and a brain that functions better.
And I repeat: an old mouse that gets young blood through shared circulation looks younger and functions younger in its brain.
So when we get older -- we can look at different aspects of human cognition, and you can see on this slide here, we can look at reasoning, verbal ability and so forth.
And up to around age 50 or 60, these functions are all intact, and as I look at the young audience here in the room, we're all still fine.
(Laughter) But it's scary to see how all these curves go south.
And as we get older, diseases such as Alzheimer's and others may develop.
We know that with age, the connections between neurons -- the way neurons talk to each other, the synapses -- they start to deteriorate; neurons die, the brain starts to shrink, and there's an increased susceptibility for these neurodegenerative diseases.
One big problem we have -- to try to understand how this really works at a very molecular mechanistic level -- is that we can't study the brains in detail, in living people.
We can do cognitive tests, we can do imaging -- all kinds of sophisticated testing.
But we usually have to wait until the person dies to get the brain and look at how it really changed through age or in a disease.
This is what neuropathologists do, for example.
So, how about we think of the brain as being part of the larger organism.
Could we potentially understand more about what happens in the brain at the molecular level if we see the brain as part of the entire body?
So if the body ages or gets sick, does that affect the brain?
And vice versa: as the brain gets older, does that influence the rest of the body?
And what connects all the different tissues in the body is blood.
Blood is the tissue that not only carries cells that transport oxygen, for example, the red blood cells, or fights infectious diseases, but it also carries messenger molecules, hormone-like factors that transport information from one cell to another, from one tissue to another, including the brain.
So if we look at how the blood changes in disease or age, can we learn something about the brain?
We know that as we get older, the blood changes as well, so these hormone-like factors change as we get older.
And by and large, factors that we know are required for the development of tissues, for the maintenance of tissues -- they start to decrease as we get older, while factors involved in repair, in injury and in inflammation -- they increase as we get older.
So there's this unbalance of good and bad factors, if you will.
And to illustrate what we can do potentially with that, I want to talk you through an experiment that we did.
We had almost 300 blood samples from healthy human beings 20 to 89 years of age, and we measured over 100 of these communication factors, these hormone-like proteins that transport information between tissues.
And what we noticed first is that between the youngest and the oldest group, about half the factors changed significantly.
So our body lives in a very different environment as we get older, when it comes to these factors.
And using statistical or bioinformatics programs, we could try to discover those factors that best predict age -- in a way, back-calculate the relative age of a person.
And the way this looks is shown in this graph.
So, on the one axis you see the actual age a person lived, the chronological age.
So, how many years they lived.
And then we take these top factors that I showed you, and we calculate their relative age, their biological age.
And what you see is that there is a pretty good correlation, so we can pretty well predict the relative age of a person.
But what's really exciting are the outliers, as they so often are in life.
You can see here, the person I highlighted with the green dot is about 70 years of age but seems to have a biological age, if what we're doing here is really true, of only about 45.
So is this a person that actually looks much younger than their age?
But more importantly: Is this a person who is maybe at a reduced risk to develop an age-related disease and will have a long life -- will live to 100 or more?
On the other hand, the person here, highlighted with the red dot, is not even 40, but has a biological age of 65.
Is this a person at an increased risk of developing an age-related disease?
So in our lab, we're trying to understand these factors better, and many other groups are trying to understand, what are the true aging factors, and can we learn something about them to possibly predict age-related diseases?
So what I've shown you so far is simply correlational, right?
You can just say, "Well, these factors change with age," but you don't really know if they do something about aging.
So what I'm going to show you now is very remarkable and it suggests that these factors can actually modulate the age of a tissue.
And that's where we come back to this model called parabiosis.
So, parabiosis is done in mice by surgically connecting the two mice together, and that leads then to a shared blood system, where we can now ask, "How does the old brain get influenced by exposure to the young blood?"
And for this purpose, we use young mice that are an equivalency of 20-year-old people, and old mice that are roughly 65 years old in human years.
What we found is quite remarkable.
We find there are more neural stem cells that make new neurons in these old brains.
There's an increased activity of the synapses, the connections between neurons.
There are more genes expressed that are known to be involved in the formation of new memories.
And there's less of this bad inflammation.
But we observed that there are no cells entering the brains of these animals.
So when we connect them, there are actually no cells going into the old brain, in this model.
Instead, we've reasoned, then, that it must be the soluble factors, so we could collect simply the soluble fraction of blood which is called plasma, and inject either young plasma or old plasma into these mice, and we could reproduce these rejuvenating effects, but what we could also do now is we could do memory tests with mice.
As mice get older, like us humans, they have memory problems.
It's just harder to detect them, but I'll show you in a minute how we do that.
But we wanted to take this one step further, one step closer to potentially being relevant to humans.
What I'm showing you now are unpublished studies, where we used human plasma, young human plasma, and as a control, saline, and injected it into old mice, and asked, can we again rejuvenate these old mice?
Can we make them smarter?
And to do this, we used a test. It's called a Barnes maze.
This is a big table that has lots of holes in it, and there are guide marks around it, and there's a bright light, as on this stage here.
The mice hate this and they try to escape, and find the single hole that you see pointed at with an arrow, where a tube is mounted underneath where they can escape and feel comfortable in a dark hole.
So we teach them, over several days, to find this space on these cues in the space, and you can compare this for humans, to finding your car in a parking lot after a busy day of shopping.
(Laughter) Many of us have probably had some problems with that.
So, let's look at an old mouse here.
This is an old mouse that has memory problems, as you'll notice in a moment.
It just looks into every hole, but it didn't form this spacial map that would remind it where it was in the previous trial or the last day.
In stark contrast, this mouse here is a sibling of the same age, but it was treated with young human plasma for three weeks, with small injections every three days.
And as you noticed, it almost looks around, "Where am I?" -- and then walks straight to that hole and escapes.
So, it could remember where that hole was.
So by all means, this old mouse seems to be rejuvenated -- it functions more like a younger mouse.
And it also suggests that there is something not only in young mouse plasma, but in young human plasma that has the capacity to help this old brain.
So to summarize, we find the old mouse, and its brain in particular, are malleable.
They're not set in stone; we can actually change them.
It can be rejuvenated.
Young blood factors can reverse aging, and what I didn't show you -- in this model, the young mouse actually suffers from exposure to the old.
So there are old-blood factors that can accelerate aging.
And most importantly, humans may have similar factors, because we can take young human blood and have a similar effect.
Old human blood, I didn't show you, does not have this effect; it does not make the mice younger.
So, is this magic transferable to humans?
We're running a small clinical study at Stanford, where we treat Alzheimer's patients with mild disease with a pint of plasma from young volunteers, 20-year-olds, and do this once a week for four weeks, and then we look at their brains with imaging.
We test them cognitively, and we ask their caregivers for daily activities of living.
What we hope is that there are some signs of improvement from this treatment.
And if that's the case, that could give us hope that what I showed you works in mice might also work in humans.
Now, I don't think we will live forever.
But maybe we discovered that the Fountain of Youth is actually within us, and it has just dried out.
And if we can turn it back on a little bit, maybe we can find the factors that are mediating these effects, we can produce these factors synthetically and we can treat diseases of aging, such as Alzheimer's disease or other dementias.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'd like to introduce you to an emerging area of science, one that is still speculative but hugely exciting, and certainly one that's growing very rapidly.
Quantum biology asks a very simple question: Does quantum mechanics -- that weird and wonderful and powerful theory of the subatomic world of atoms and molecules that underpins so much of modern physics and chemistry -- also play a role inside the living cell?
In other words: Are there processes, mechanisms, phenomena in living organisms that can only be explained with a helping hand from quantum mechanics?
Now, quantum biology isn't new; it's been around since the early 1930s.
But it's only in the last decade or so that careful experiments -- in biochemistry labs, using spectroscopy -- have shown very clear, firm evidence that there are certain specific mechanisms that require quantum mechanics to explain them.
Quantum biology brings together quantum physicists, biochemists, molecular biologists -- it's a very interdisciplinary field.
I come from quantum physics, so I'm a nuclear physicist.
I've spent more than three decades trying to get my head around quantum mechanics.
One of the founders of quantum mechanics, Niels Bohr, said, If you're not astonished by it, then you haven't understood it.
So I sort of feel happy that I'm still astonished by it.
That's a good thing.
But it means I study the very smallest structures in the universe -- the building blocks of reality.
If we think about the scale of size, start with an everyday object like the tennis ball, and just go down orders of magnitude in size -- from the eye of a needle down to a cell, down to a bacterium, down to an enzyme -- you eventually reach the nano-world.
Now, nanotechnology may be a term you've heard of.
A nanometer is a billionth of a meter.
My area is the atomic nucleus, which is the tiny dot inside an atom.
It's even smaller in scale.
This is the domain of quantum mechanics, and physicists and chemists have had a long time to try and get used to it.
Biologists, on the other hand, have got off lightly, in my view.
They are very happy with their balls-and-sticks models of molecules.
(Laughter) The balls are the atoms, the sticks are the bonds between the atoms.
And when they can't build them physically in the lab, nowadays, they have very powerful computers that will simulate a huge molecule.
This is a protein made up of 100,000 atoms.
It doesn't really require much in the way of quantum mechanics to explain it.
Quantum mechanics was developed in the 1920s.
It is a set of beautiful and powerful mathematical rules and ideas that explain the world of the very small.
And it's a world that's very different from our everyday world, made up of trillions of atoms.
It's a world built on probability and chance.
It's a fuzzy world.
It's a world of phantoms, where particles can also behave like spread-out waves.
If we imagine quantum mechanics or quantum physics, then, as the fundamental foundation of reality itself, then it's not surprising that we say quantum physics underpins organic chemistry.
After all, it gives us the rules that tell us how the atoms fit together to make organic molecules.
Organic chemistry, scaled up in complexity, gives us molecular biology, which of course leads to life itself.
So in a way, it's sort of not surprising.
It's almost trivial.
You say, "Well, of course life ultimately must depend of quantum mechanics."
But so does everything else.
So does all inanimate matter, made up of trillions of atoms.
Ultimately, there's a quantum level where we have to delve into this weirdness.
But in everyday life, we can forget about it.
Because once you put together trillions of atoms, that quantum weirdness just dissolves away.
Quantum biology isn't about this.
Quantum biology isn't this obvious.
Of course quantum mechanics underpins life at some molecular level.
Quantum biology is about looking for the non-trivial -- the counterintuitive ideas in quantum mechanics -- and to see if they do, indeed, play an important role in describing the processes of life.
Here is my perfect example of the counterintuitiveness of the quantum world.
This is the quantum skier.
He seems to be intact, he seems to be perfectly healthy, and yet, he seems to have gone around both sides of that tree at the same time.
Well, if you saw tracks like that you'd guess it was some sort of stunt, of course.
But in the quantum world, this happens all the time.
Particles can multitask, they can be in two places at once.
They can do more than one thing at the same time.
Particles can behave like spread-out waves.
It's almost like magic.
Physicists and chemists have had nearly a century of trying to get used to this weirdness.
I don't blame the biologists for not having to or wanting to learn quantum mechanics.
You see, this weirdness is very delicate; and we physicists work very hard to maintain it in our labs.
We cool our system down to near absolute zero, we carry out our experiments in vacuums, we try and isolate it from any external disturbance.
That's very different from the warm, messy, noisy environment of a living cell.
Biology itself, if you think of molecular biology, seems to have done very well in describing all the processes of life in terms of chemistry -- chemical reactions.
And these are reductionist, deterministic chemical reactions, showing that, essentially, life is made of the same stuff as everything else, and if we can forget about quantum mechanics in the macro world, then we should be able to forget about it in biology, as well.
Well, one man begged to differ with this idea.
Erwin Schrdinger, of Schrdinger's Cat fame, was an Austrian physicist.
He was one of the founders of quantum mechanics in the 1920s.
In 1944, he wrote a book called "What is Life?"
It was tremendously influential.
It influenced Francis Crick and James Watson, the discoverers of the double-helix structure of DNA.
To paraphrase a description in the book, he says: At the molecular level, living organisms have a certain order, a structure to them that's very different from the random thermodynamic jostling of atoms and molecules in inanimate matter of the same complexity.
In fact, living matter seems to behave in this order, in a structure, just like inanimate matter cooled down to near absolute zero, where quantum effects play a very important role.
There's something special about the structure -- the order -- inside a living cell.
So, Schrdinger speculated that maybe quantum mechanics plays a role in life.
It's a very speculative, far-reaching idea, and it didn't really go very far.
But as I mentioned at the start, in the last 10 years, there have been experiments emerging, showing where some of these certain phenomena in biology do seem to require quantum mechanics.
I want to share with you just a few of the exciting ones.
This is one of the best-known phenomena in the quantum world, quantum tunneling.
The box on the left shows the wavelike, spread-out distribution of a quantum entity -- a particle, like an electron, which is not a little ball bouncing off a wall.
It's a wave that has a certain probability of being able to permeate through a solid wall, like a phantom leaping through to the other side.
You can see a faint smudge of light in the right-hand box.
Quantum tunneling suggests that a particle can hit an impenetrable barrier, and yet somehow, as though by magic, disappear from one side and reappear on the other.
The nicest way of explaining it is if you want to throw a ball over a wall, you have to give it enough energy to get over the top of the wall.
In the quantum world, you don't have to throw it over the wall, you can throw it at the wall, and there's a certain non-zero probability that it'll disappear on your side, and reappear on the other.
This isn't speculation, by the way.
We're happy -- well, "happy" is not the right word -- (Laughter) we are familiar with this.
(Laughter) Quantum tunneling takes place all the time; in fact, it's the reason our Sun shines.
The particles fuse together, and the Sun turns hydrogen into helium through quantum tunneling.
Back in the 70s and 80s, it was discovered that quantum tunneling also takes place inside living cells.
Enzymes, those workhorses of life, the catalysts of chemical reactions -- enzymes are biomolecules that speed up chemical reactions in living cells, by many, many orders of magnitude.
And it's always been a mystery how they do this.
Well, it was discovered that one of the tricks that enzymes have evolved to make use of, is by transferring subatomic particles, like electrons and indeed protons, from one part of a molecule to another via quantum tunneling.
It's efficient, it's fast, it can disappear -- a proton can disappear from one place, and reappear on the other.
Enzymes help this take place.
This is research that's been carried out back in the 80s, particularly by a group in Berkeley, Judith Klinman.
Other groups in the UK have now also confirmed that enzymes really do this.
Research carried out by my group -- so as I mentioned, I'm a nuclear physicist, but I've realized I've got these tools of using quantum mechanics in atomic nuclei, and so can apply those tools in other areas as well.
One question we asked is whether quantum tunneling plays a role in mutations in DNA.
Again, this is not a new idea; it goes all the way back to the early 60s.
The two strands of DNA, the double-helix structure, are held together by rungs; it's like a twisted ladder.
And those rungs of the ladder are hydrogen bonds -- protons, that act as the glue between the two strands.
So if you zoom in, what they're doing is holding these large molecules -- nucleotides -- together.
Zoom in a bit more.
So, this a computer simulation.
The two white balls in the middle are protons, and you can see that it's a double hydrogen bond.
One prefers to sit on one side; the other, on the other side of the two strands of the vertical lines going down, which you can't see.
It can happen that these two protons can hop over.
Watch the two white balls.
They can jump over to the other side.
If the two strands of DNA then separate, leading to the process of replication, and the two protons are in the wrong positions, this can lead to a mutation.
This has been known for half a century.
The question is: How likely are they to do that, and if they do, how do they do it?
Do they jump across, like the ball going over the wall?
Or can they quantum-tunnel across, even if they don't have enough energy?
Early indications suggest that quantum tunneling can play a role here.
We still don't know yet how important it is; this is still an open question.
It's speculative, but it's one of those questions that is so important that if quantum mechanics plays a role in mutations, surely this must have big implications, to understand certain types of mutations, possibly even those that lead to turning a cell cancerous.
Another example of quantum mechanics in biology is quantum coherence, in one of the most important processes in biology, photosynthesis: plants and bacteria taking sunlight, and using that energy to create biomass.
Quantum coherence is the idea of quantum entities multitasking.
It's the quantum skier.
It's an object that behaves like a wave, so that it doesn't just move in one direction or the other, but can follow multiple pathways at the same time.
Some years ago, the world of science was shocked when a paper was published showing experimental evidence that quantum coherence takes place inside bacteria, carrying out photosynthesis.
The idea is that the photon, the particle of light, the sunlight, the quantum of light captured by a chlorophyll molecule, is then delivered to what's called the reaction center, where it can be turned into chemical energy.
And in getting there, it doesn't just follow one route; it follows multiple pathways at once, to optimize the most efficient way of reaching the reaction center without dissipating as waste heat.
Quantum coherence taking place inside a living cell.
A remarkable idea, and yet evidence is growing almost weekly, with new papers coming out, confirming that this does indeed take place.
My third and final example is the most beautiful, wonderful idea.
It's also still very speculative, but I have to share it with you.
The European robin migrates from Scandinavia down to the Mediterranean, every autumn, and like a lot of other marine animals and even insects, they navigate by sensing the Earth's magnetic field.
Now, the Earth's magnetic field is very, very weak; it's 100 times weaker than a fridge magnet, and yet it affects the chemistry -- somehow -- within a living organism.
That's not in doubt -- a German couple of ornithologists, Wolfgang and Roswitha Wiltschko, in the 1970s, confirmed that indeed, the robin does find its way by somehow sensing the Earth's magnetic field, to give it directional information -- a built-in compass.
The puzzle, the mystery was: How does it do it?
Well, the only theory in town -- we don't know if it's the correct theory, but the only theory in town -- is that it does it via something called quantum entanglement.
Inside the robin's retina -- I kid you not -- inside the robin's retina is a protein called cryptochrome, which is light-sensitive.
Within cryptochrome, a pair of electrons are quantum-entangled.
Now, quantum entanglement is when two particles are far apart, and yet somehow remain in contact with each other.
Even Einstein hated this idea; he called it "spooky action at a distance."
(Laughter) So if Einstein doesn't like it, then we can all be uncomfortable with it.
Two quantum-entangled electrons within a single molecule dance a delicate dance that is very sensitive to the direction the bird flies in the Earth's magnetic field.
We don't know if it's the correct explanation, but wow, wouldn't it be exciting if quantum mechanics helps birds navigate?
Quantum biology is still in it infancy.
It's still speculative.
But I believe it's built on solid science.
I also think that in the coming decade or so, we're going to start to see that actually, it pervades life -- that life has evolved tricks that utilize the quantum world.
Watch this space.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The child's symptoms begin with mild fever, headache, muscle pains, followed by vomiting and diarrhea, then bleeding from the mouth, nose and gums.
Death follows in the form of organ failure from low blood pressure.
Sounds familiar?
If you're thinking this is Ebola, actually, in this case, it's not.
It's an extreme form of dengue fever, a mosquito-born disease which also does not have an effective therapy or a vaccine, and kills 22,000 people each year.
That is actually twice the number of people that have been killed by Ebola in the nearly four decades that we've known about it.
As for measles, so much in the news recently, the death toll is actually tenfold higher.
Yet for the last year, it has been Ebola that has stolen all of the headlines and the fear.
Clearly, there is something deeply rooted about it, something which scares us and fascinates us more than other diseases.
But what is it, exactly?
Well, it's hard to acquire Ebola, but if you do, the risk of a horrible death is high.
Why?
Because right now, we don't have any effective therapy or vaccine available.
And so, that's the clue.
We may have it someday.
So we rightfully fear Ebola, because it doesn't kill as many people as other diseases.
In fact, it's much less transmissible than viruses such as flu or measles.
We fear Ebola because of the fact that it kills us and we can't treat it.
We fear the certain inevitability that comes with Ebola.
Ebola has this inevitability that seems to defy modern medical science.
But wait a second, why is that?
We've known about Ebola since 1976.
We've known what it's capable of.
We've had ample opportunity to study it in the 24 outbreaks that have occurred.
And in fact, we've actually had vaccine candidates available now for more than a decade.
Why is that those vaccines are just going into clinical trials now?
This goes to the fundamental problem we have with vaccine development for infectious diseases.
It goes something like this: The people most at risk for these diseases are also the ones least able to pay for vaccines.
This leaves little in the way of market incentives for manufacturers to develop vaccines, unless there are large numbers of people who are at risk in wealthy countries.
It's simply too commercially risky.
As for Ebola, there is absolutely no market at all, so the only reason we have two vaccines in late-stage clinical trials now, is actually because of a somewhat misguided fear.
Ebola was relatively ignored until September 11 and the anthrax attacks, when all of a sudden, people perceived Ebola as, potentially, a bioterrorism weapon.
Why is it that the Ebola vaccine wasn't fully developed at this point?
Well, partially, because it was really difficult -- or thought to be difficult -- to weaponize the virus, but mainly because of the financial risk in developing it.
And this is really the point.
The sad reality is, we develop vaccines not based upon the risk the pathogen poses to people, but on how economically risky it is to develop these vaccines.
Vaccine development is expensive and complicated.
It can cost hundreds of millions of dollars to take even a well-known antigen and turn it into a viable vaccine.
Fortunately for diseases like Ebola, there are things we can do to remove some of these barriers.
The first is to recognize when there's a complete market failure.
In that case, if we want vaccines, we have to provide incentives or some type of subsidy.
We also need to do a better job at being able to figure out which are the diseases that most threaten us.
By creating capabilities within countries, we then create the ability for those countries to create epidemiological and laboratory networks which are capable of collecting and categorizing these pathogens.
The data from that then can be used to understand the geographic and genetic diversity, which then can be used to help us understand how these are being changed immunologically, and what type of reactions they promote.
So these are the things that can be done, but to do this, if we want to deal with a complete market failure, we have to change the way we view and prevent infectious diseases.
We have to stop waiting until we see evidence of a disease becoming a global threat before we consider it as one.
So, for Ebola, the paranoid fear of an infectious disease, followed by a few cases transported to wealthy countries, led the global community to come together, and with the work of dedicated vaccine companies, we now have these: Two Ebola vaccines in efficacy trials in the Ebola countries -- (Applause) and a pipeline of vaccines that are following behind.
Every year, we spend billions of dollars, keeping a fleet of nuclear submarines permanently patrolling the oceans to protect us from a threat that almost certainly will never happen.
And yet, we spend virtually nothing to prevent something as tangible and evolutionarily certain as epidemic infectious diseases.
And make no mistake about it -- it's not a question of "if," but "when."
These bugs are going to continue to evolve and they're going to threaten the world.
And vaccines are our best defense.
So if we want to be able to prevent epidemics like Ebola, we need to take on the risk of investing in vaccine development and in stockpile creation.
And we need to view this, then, as the ultimate deterrent -- something we make sure is available, but at the same time, praying we never have to use it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Over a million people are killed each year in disasters.
Two and a half million people will be permanently disabled or displaced, and the communities will take 20 to 30 years to recover and billions of economic losses.
If you can reduce the initial response by one day, you can reduce the overall recovery by a thousand days, or three years.
See how that works?
If the initial responders can get in, save lives, mitigate whatever flooding danger there is, that means the other groups can get in to restore the water, the roads, the electricity, which means then the construction people, the insurance agents, all of them can get in to rebuild the houses, which then means you can restore the economy, and maybe even make it better and more resilient to the next disaster.
A major insurance company told me that if they can get a homeowner's claim processed one day earlier, it'll make a difference of six months in that person getting their home repaired.
And that's why I do disaster robotics -- because robots can make a disaster go away faster.
Now, you've already seen a couple of these.
These are the UAVs.
These are two types of UAVs: a rotorcraft, or hummingbird; a fixed-wing, a hawk.
And they're used extensively since 2005 -- Hurricane Katrina.
Let me show you how this hummingbird, this rotorcraft, works.
Fantastic for structural engineers.
Being able to see damage from angles you can't get from binoculars on the ground or from a satellite image, or anything flying at a higher angle.
But it's not just structural engineers and insurance people who need this.
You've got things like this fixed-wing, this hawk.
Now, this hawk can be used for geospatial surveys.
That's where you're pulling imagery together and getting 3D reconstruction.
We used both of these at the Oso mudslides up in Washington State, because the big problem was geospatial and hydrological understanding of the disaster -- not the search and rescue.
The search and rescue teams had it under control and knew what they were doing.
The bigger problem was that river and mudslide might wipe them out and flood the responders.
And not only was it challenging to the responders and property damage, it's also putting at risk the future of salmon fishing along that part of Washington State.
So they needed to understand what was going on.
In seven hours, going from Arlington, driving from the Incident Command Post to the site, flying the UAVs, processing the data, driving back to Arlington command post -- seven hours.
We gave them in seven hours data that they could take only two to three days to get any other way -- and at higher resolution.
It's a game changer.
And don't just think about the UAVs.
I mean, they are sexy -- but remember, 80 percent of the world's population lives by water, and that means our critical infrastructure is underwater -- the parts that we can't get to, like the bridges and things like that.
And that's why we have unmanned marine vehicles, one type of which you've already met, which is SARbot, a square dolphin.
It goes underwater and uses sonar.
Well, why are marine vehicles so important and why are they very, very important?
They get overlooked.
Think about the Japanese tsunami -- 400 miles of coastland totally devastated, twice the amount of coastland devastated by Hurricane Katrina in the United States.
You're talking about your bridges, your pipelines, your ports -- wiped out.
And if you don't have a port, you don't have a way to get in enough relief supplies to support a population.
That was a huge problem at the Haiti earthquake.
So we need marine vehicles.
Now, let's look at a viewpoint from the SARbot of what they were seeing.
We were working on a fishing port.
We were able to reopen that fishing port, using her sonar, in four hours.
That fishing port was told it was going to be six months before they could get a manual team of divers in, and it was going to take the divers two weeks.
They were going to miss the fall fishing season, which was the major economy for that part, which is kind of like their Cape Cod.
UMVs, very important.
But you know, all the robots I've shown you have been small, and that's because robots don't do things that people do.
They go places people can't go.
And a great example of that is Bujold.
Unmanned ground vehicles are particularly small, so Bujold -- (Laughter) Say hello to Bujold.
(Laughter) Bujold was used extensively at the World Trade Center to go through Towers 1, 2 and 4.
You're climbing into the rubble, rappelling down, going deep in spaces.
And just to see the World Trade Center from Bujold's viewpoint, look at this.
You're talking about a disaster where you can't fit a person or a dog -- and it's on fire.
The only hope of getting to a survivor way in the basement, you have to go through things that are on fire.
It was so hot, on one of the robots, the tracks began to melt and come off.
Robots don't replace people or dogs, or hummingbirds or hawks or dolphins.
They do things new.
They assist the responders, the experts, in new and innovative ways.
The biggest problem is not making the robots smaller, though.
It's not making them more heat-resistant.
It's not making more sensors.
The biggest problem is the data, the informatics, because these people need to get the right data at the right time.
So wouldn't it be great if we could have experts immediately access the robots without having to waste any time of driving to the site, so whoever's there, use their robots over the Internet.
Well, let's think about that.
Let's think about a chemical train derailment in a rural county.
What are the odds that the experts, your chemical engineer, your railroad transportation engineers, have been trained on whatever UAV that particular county happens to have?
Probably, like, none.
So we're using these kinds of interfaces to allow people to use the robots without knowing what robot they're using, or even if they're using a robot or not.
What the robots give you, what they give the experts, is data.
The problem becomes: who gets what data when?
One thing to do is to ship all the information to everybody and let them sort it out.
Well, the problem with that is it overwhelms the networks, and worse yet, it overwhelms the cognitive abilities of each of the people trying to get that one nugget of information they need to make the decision that's going to make the difference.
So we need to think about those kinds of challenges.
So it's the data.
Going back to the World Trade Center, we tried to solve that problem by just recording the data from Bujold only when she was deep in the rubble, because that's what the USAR team said they wanted.
What we didn't know at the time was that the civil engineers would have loved, needed the data as we recorded the box beams, the serial numbers, the locations, as we went into the rubble.
We lost valuable data.
So the challenge is getting all the data and getting it to the right people.
Now, here's another reason.
We've learned that some buildings -- things like schools, hospitals, city halls -- get inspected four times by different agencies throughout the response phases.
Now, we're looking, if we can get the data from the robots to share, not only can we do things like compress that sequence of phases to shorten the response time, but now we can begin to do the response in parallel.
Everybody can see the data.
We can shorten it that way.
So really, "disaster robotics" is a misnomer.
It's not about the robots.
It's about the data.
(Applause) So my challenge to you: the next time you hear about a disaster, look for the robots.
They may be underground, they may be underwater, they may be in the sky, but they should be there.
Look for the robots, because robots are coming to the rescue.
(Applause)
I was raised by lesbians in the mountains, and I sort of came like a forest gnome to New York City a while back.
(Laughter) Really messed with my head, but I'll get into that later.
I'll start with when I was eight years old.
I took a wood box, and I buried a dollar bill, a pen and a fork inside this box in Colorado.
And I thought some strange humanoids or aliens in 500 years would find this box and learn about the way our species exchanged ideas, maybe how we ate our spaghetti.
I really didn't know.
Anyway, this is kind of funny, because here I am, 30 years later, and I'm still making boxes.
Now, at some point I was in Hawaii -- I like to hike and surf and do all that weird stuff, and I was making a collage for my ma.
And I took a dictionary and I ripped it up, and I made it into a sort of Agnes Martin grid, and I poured resin all over it and a bee got stuck.
Now, she's afraid of bees and she's allergic to them, so I poured more resin on the canvas, thinking I could hide it or something.
Instead, the opposite happened: It sort of created a magnification, like a magnifying glass, on the dictionary text.
So what did I do? I built more boxes.
This time, I started putting electronics, frogs, strange bottles I'd find in the street -- anything I could find -- because I was always finding things my whole life, and trying to make relationships and tell stories between these objects.
So I started drawing around the objects, and I realized: Holy moly, I can draw in space!
I can make free-floating lines, like the way you would draw around a dead body at a crime scene.
So I took the objects out, and I created my own taxonomy of invented specimens.
First, botanical -- which you can kind of get a sense of.
Then I made some weird insects and creatures.
It was really fun; I was just drawing on the layers of resin.
And it was cool, because I was actually starting to have shows and stuff, I was making some money, I could take my girlfriend for dinner, and like, go to Sizzler.
It was some good shit, man.
(Laughter) At some point, I got up to the human form, life-size resin sculptures with drawings of humans inside the layers.
This was great, except for one thing: I was going to die.
I didn't know what to do, because the resin was going to kill me.
And I went to bed every night thinking about it.
So I tried using glass.
I started drawing on the layers of glass, almost like if you drew on a window, then you put another window, and another window, and you had all these windows together that made a three-dimensional composition.
And this really worked, because I could stop using the resin.
So I did this for years, which culminated in a very large work, which I call "The Triptych."
"The Triptych" was largely inspired by Hieronymus Bosch's "[The] Garden of Earthly Delights," which is a painting in the [Museo del] Prado in Spain.
Do you guys know this painting?
Good, it's a cool painting.
It's kind of ahead of its time, they say.
So, "The Triptych." I'll walk you through this piece.
It weighs 24,000 pounds.
It's 18 feet long.
It's double-sided, so it's 36 feet of composition.
It's kind of weird.
Well, that's the blood fountain.
(Laughter) To the left, you have Jesus and the locusts.
There's a cave where all these animal-headed creatures travel between two worlds.
They go from the representational world, to this analog-mesh underworld, where they're hiding.
This is where the animal-headed creatures are by the lighthouse, and they're all about to commit mass suicide into the ocean.
The ocean is made up of thousands of elements.
This is a bird god tied up to a battleship.
(Laughter) Billy Graham is in the ocean; the Horizon from the oil spill; Waldo; Osama Bin Laden's shelter -- there's all kinds of weird stuff that you can find if you look really hard, in the ocean.
Anyway, this is a lady creature.
She's coming out of the ocean, and she's spitting oil into one hand and she has clouds coming out of her other hand.
Her hands are like scales, and she has the mythological reference of the Earth and cosmos in balance.
So that's one side of "The Triptych."
It's a little narrative thing.
That's her hand that she's spitting into.
And then, when you go to the other side, she has like a trunk, like a bird's beak, and she's spitting clouds out of her trunk.
Then she has an 18-foot-long serpent's tail that connects "The Triptych."
Anyway, her tail catches on fire from the back of the volcano.
(Laughter) I don't know why that happened.
(Laughter) That happens, you know.
Her tail terminates in a cycloptic eyeball, made out of 1986 terrorist cards.
Have you guys seen those?
They were made in the 1980's, they're like baseball cards of terrorists.
Way ahead of their time.
(Laughter) That will bring you to my latest project.
I'm in the middle of two projects: One's called "Psychogeographies."
It's about a six-year project to make 100 of these humans.
Each one is an archive of our culture, through our ripped-up media and matter, whether it's encyclopedias or dictionaries or magazines.
But each one acts as a sort of an archive in the shape of a human, and they travel in groups of 20, 4, or 12 at a time.
They're like cells -- they come together, they divide.
And you kind of walk through them. It's taking me years.
Each one is basically a 3,000-pound microscope slide with a human stuck inside.
This one has a little cave in his chest.
That's his head; there's the chest, you can kind of see the beginning.
I'm going to go down the body for you: There's a waterfall coming out of his chest, covering his penis -- or not-penis, or whatever it is, a kind of androgynous thing.
I'll take you quickly through these works, because I can't explain them for too long.
There are the layers, you can kind of see it.
That's a body getting split in half.
This one has two heads, and it's communicating between the two heads.
You can see the pills coming out, going into one head from this weird statue.
There's a little forest scene inside the chest cavity.
Can you see that?
Anyway, this talk's all about these boxes, like the boxes we're in.
This box we're in, the solar system is a box.
This brings you to my latest box.
It's a brick box. It's called Pioneer Works.
(Cheers) Inside of this box is a physicist, a neuroscientist, a painter, a musician, a writer, a radio station, a museum, a school, a publishing arm to disseminate all the content we make there into the world; a garden.
We shake this box up, and all these people kind of start hitting each other like particles.
And I think that's the way you change the world.
You redefine your insides and the box that you're living in.
And you come together to realize that we're all in this together, that this delusion of difference -- this idea of countries, of borders, of religion -- doesn't work.
We're all really made up of the same stuff, in the same box.
And if we don't start exchanging that stuff sweetly and nicely, we're all going to die real soon.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
It was an incredible surprise to me to find out that there was actually an organization that cared about both parts of my life.
Because, basically, I work as a theoretical physicist.
I develop and test models of the Big Bang, using observational data.
And I've been moonlighting for the last five years helping with a project in Africa.
And, I get a lot of flak for this at Cambridge.
People wonder, you know, "How do you have time to do this?" And so on.
And so it was simply astonishing to me to find an organization that actually appreciated both those sides.
So I thought I'd start off by just telling you a little bit about myself and why I lead this schizophrenic life.
Well, I was born in South Africa and my parents were imprisoned for resisting the racist regime.
When they were released, we left and we went as refugees to Kenya and Tanzania.
Both were very young countries then, and full of hope for the future.
We had an amazing childhood. We didn't have any money, but we were outdoors most of the time.
We had fantastic friends and we saw the wonders of the world, like Kilimanjaro, Serengeti and the Olduvai Gorge.
Well, then we moved to London for high school.
And after that -- there's nothing much to say about that.
It was rather dull. But I came back to Africa at the age of 17, as a volunteer teacher to Lesotho, which is a tiny country, surrounded at that time by apartheid South Africa.
Well, 80 percent of the men in Lesotho worked in the mines over the border, in brutal conditions.
Nevertheless, I -- as I'm sure -- as a rather irritating young, white man coming into their village, I was welcomed with incredible hospitality and warmth.
But the kids were the best part.
The kids were amazing: extremely eager and often very bright.
And I'm just going to tell you one story, which got through to me.
I used to try to take the kids outside as often as possible, to try to connect the academic stuff with the real world.
And they weren't used to that.
But I took them outside one day and I said, "I want you to estimate the height of the building."
And I expected them to put a ruler next to the wall, size it up with a finger, and make an estimate of the height.
But there was one little boy, very small for his age.
He was the son of one of the poorest families in the village.
And he wasn't doing that. He was scribbling with chalk on the pavement.
And so, I said -- I was annoyed -- I said, "What are you doing?
I want you to estimate the height of the building."
He said, "OK. I measured the height of a brick.
I counted the number of bricks and now I'm multiplying."
Well -- (Laughter) -- I hadn't thought of that one.
And many experiences like this happened to me.
Another one is that I met a miner. He was home on his three-month leave from the mines.
Sitting next to him one day, he said, "There's only one thing that I really loved at school.
And you know what it was? Shakespeare." And he recited some to me.
And these and many similar experiences convinced me that there are just tons of bright kids in Africa -- inventive kids, intellectual kids -- and starved of opportunity.
And if Africa is going to get fixed, it's by them, not by us.
Well, after -- (Applause) -- that's the truth.
Well, after Lesotho, I traveled across Africa before returning to England -- so gray and depressing, in comparison.
And I went to Cambridge. And there, I fell for theoretical physics.
Well, I'm not going to explain this equation, but theoretical physics is really an amazing subject.
We can write down all the laws of physics we know in one line.
And, admittedly, it's in a very shorthand notation.
And it contains 18 free parameters, OK, which we have to fit to the data.
So it's not the final story, but it's an incredibly powerful summary of everything we know about nature at the most basic level.
And apart from a few very important loose ends, which you've heard about here -- like dark energy and dark matter -- this equation describes, seems to describe everything about the universe and what's in it.
But there's one big puzzle remaining, and this was most succinctly put to me by my primary school math teacher in Tanzania, who's a wonderful Scottish lady who I still stay in touch with.
And she's now in her 80s.
And when I try to explain my work to her, she waved away all the details, and she said, "Neil, there's only one question that really matters.
What banged?" (Laughter) "Everyone talks about the Big Bang. What banged?"
And she's right. It's a question we've all been avoiding.
The standard explanation is that the universe somehow sprang into existence, full of a strange kind of energy -- inflationary energy -- which blew it up.
But the puzzle of why the universe emerged in that peculiar state is completely unsolved.
Now, I worked on that theory for a while, with Stephen Hawking and others.
But then I began to explore another alternative.
The alternative is that the Big Bang wasn't the beginning.
Perhaps the universe existed before the bang, and the bang was just a violent event in a pre-existing universe.
Well, this possibility is actually suggested by the latest theories, the unified theories, which try to explain all those 18 free parameters in a single framework, which will hopefully predict all of them.
And I'll just share a cartoon of this idea here.
It's all I can convey. According to these theories, there are extra dimensions of space, not just the three we're familiar with, but at every point in the room there are more dimensions.
And in particular, there's one rather strange one, in the most elegant unified theories we have.
The strange one looks likes this: that we live in a three-dimensional world.
We live in one of these worlds, and I can only show it as a sheet, but it's really three-dimensional.
And a tiny distance away, there's another sheet, also three-dimensional, and they're separated by a gap.
The gap is very tiny, and I've blown it up so you can see it.
But it's really a tiny fraction of the size of an atomic nucleus.
I won't go into the details of why we think the universe is like this, but it comes out of the math and trying to explain the physics that we know.
Well, I got interested in this because it seemed to me that it was an obvious question.
Which is, what happens if these two, three-dimensional worlds should actually collide?
And if they collide, it would look a lot like the Big Bang.
But it's slightly different than in the conventional picture.
The conventional picture of the Big Bang is a point.
Everything comes out of a point; you have infinite density. And all the equations break down.
No hope of describing that.
In this picture, you'll notice, the bang is extended. It's not a point.
The density of matter is finite, and we have a chance of a consistent set of equations that can describe the whole process.
So, to cut a long story short, we've explored this alternative.
We've shown that it can fit all of the data that we have about the formation of galaxies, the fluctuations in the microwave background.
Furthermore, there's an experimental way to tell this theory, apart from the inflationary explanation that I told you before.
It involves gravitational waves.
And in this scenario, not only was the Big Bang not the beginning, as you can see from the picture, it can happen over and over again.
It may be that we live in an endless universe, both in space and in time.
And there've been bangs in the past, and there will be bangs in the future.
And maybe we live in an endless universe.
Well, making and testing models of the universe is, for me, the best way I have of enjoying and appreciating the universe.
We need to make the best mathematical models we can, the most consistent ones.
And then we scrutinize them, logically and with data.
And we try to convince ourselves -- we really try to convince ourselves they're wrong.
That's progress: when we prove things wrong.
And gradually, we hopefully move closer and closer to understanding the world.
As I pursued my career, something was always gnawing away inside me.
What about Africa?
What about those kids I'd left behind?
Instead of developing, as we'd all hoped in the '60s, things had gotten worse.
Africa was gripped by poverty, disease and war.
This is very graphically shown by the Worldmapper website and project.
And so the idea is to represent each country on a map, but scale the area according to some quantity.
So here's just the standard area map of the world.
By the way, Africa is very large.
And the next map now shows Africa's GDP in 1960, around the time of independence for many African states.
Now, this is 1990, and then 2002. And here's a projection for 2015.
Big changes are happening in the world, but they're not helping Africa.
What about Africa's population? The population isn't out of proportion to its area, but Africa leads the world in deaths from often preventable causes: malnutrition, simple infections and birth complications.
Then there's HIV/AIDS. And then there are deaths from war.
OK, currently there are 45,000 people a month dying in the Congo, as a consequence of the war there over coltan and diamonds and other things.
It's still going on.
What about Africa's capacity to do something about these problems?
Well, here's the number of physicians in Africa.
Here's the number of people in higher education.
And here -- most shocking to me -- the number of scientific research papers coming out of Africa.
It just doesn't exist scientifically.
And this was very eloquently argued at TED Africa: that all of the aid that's been given has completely failed to put Africa onto its own two feet.
Well, the transition to democracy in South Africa in 1994 was literally a dream come true for many of us.
My parents were both elected to the first parliament, alongside Nelson and Winnie Mandela. They were the only other couple.
And in 2001, I took a research leave to visit them.
And while I was busy working -- I was working on these colliding worlds, in the day.
But I learned that there was a desperate shortage of skills, especially mathematical skills, in industry, in government, in education.
The ability to make and test models has become essential, not only to every single area of science today, but also to modern society itself.
And if you don't have math, you're not going to enter the modern age.
So I had an idea. And the idea was very simple.
The idea was to set up an African Institute for Mathematical Sciences, or AIMS.
And let's recruit students from the whole of Africa, bring them together with lecturers from all over the world, and we'll try to give them a fantastic education.
Well, as a Cambridge professor, I had many contacts.
And to my astonishment, they backed me 100 percent.
They said, "Go and do it, and we'll come and lecture."
And I knew it would be amazing fun to bring brilliant students from these countries -- where they don't have any opportunities -- together with the best lecturers in the world -- who I knew would come, because of the interest in Africa -- and put them together and just let the sparks fly.
So we bought a derelict hotel near Cape Town.
It's an 80-room Art Deco hotel from the 1920s.
The area was kind of seedy, so we got an 80-room hotel for 100,000 dollars.
It's a beautiful building. We decided we would refurbish it and then put out the word: we're going to start the best math institute in Africa in this hotel.
Well, the new South Africa is a very exciting country.
And those of you who haven't been there, you should go.
It's very, very interesting what's happening.
And we recruited wonderful staff, highly motivated staff.
The other thing that's happened, which was good for us, is the Internet.
Even though the Internet is very expensive all over Africa, there are Internet cafes everywhere.
And bright young Africans are desperate to join the global community, to be successful -- and they're very ambitious.
They want to be the next Einstein.
And so when word came out that AIMS was opening, it spread very quickly via e-mail and our website.
And we got lots of applicants.
Well, we designed AIMS as a 24-hour learning environment, and it was fantastic to start a university from the beginning.
You have to rethink, what is the university for?
And that's really exciting.
So we designed it to have interactive teaching.
No droning on at the chalkboard.
We emphasize problem-solving, working in groups, every student discovering and maximizing their own potential and not chasing grades.
Everyone lives together in this hotel -- lecturers and students -- and it's not surprising at all to find an impromptu tutorial at 1 a.m.
The students don't usually leave the computer lab till 2 or 3 a.m.
And then they're up again at eight in the morning.
Lectures, problem-solving and so on. It's an extraordinary place.
We especially emphasize areas of great relevance to Africa's development, because, in those areas, scientists working in Africa will have a competitive advantage.
They'll publish, be invited to conferences.
They'll do well. They'll have successful careers.
And AIMS has done extremely well.
Here is a list of last year's graduates, graduated in June, and what they're currently doing -- 48 of them.
And where they are is indicated over here.
And where they've gone. So these are all postgraduate students.
And they've all gone on to master's and Ph.D. degrees in excellent places.
Five students can be educated at AIMS for the cost of educating one in the U.S. or Europe.
But more important, the pan-African student body is a continual source of strength, pride and commitment to Africa.
We illustrate AIMS' progress by coloring in the countries of Africa.
So here you can see behind this list.
When a county is colored yellow, we've received an application; orange, we've accepted an application; and green, a student has graduated.
So here is where we were after the first graduation in 2004.
And we set ourselves a goal of turning the continent green.
So there's 2005, -6, -7, -8.
(Applause) We're well on the way to achieving our initial goal.
We had some of the students filmed at home before they came to AIMS.
And I'll just show you one.
Tendai Mugwagwa: My name is Tendai Mugwagwa.
I have a Bachelor of Science with an education degree.
I will be attending AIMS.
My understanding of the course is that it covers quite a lot.
You know, from physics to medicine, in particular, epidemiology and also mathematical modeling.
Neil Turok: So Tendai came to AIMS and did very well.
And I'll let her take it from there.
TM: My name is Tendai Mugwagwa and I was a student at AIMS in 2003 and 2004.
After leaving AIMS, I went on to do a master's in applied mathematics at the University of Cape Town in South Africa.
After that, I came to the Netherlands where I'm now doing a Ph.D. in theoretical immunology.
Professor: Tendai is working very independently.
She communicates well with the immunologists at the hospital.
So all in all I have a very good Ph.D. student from South Africa.
So I'm happy she's here.
NT: Another student in the first year of AIMS was Shehu.
And he's shown here with his favorite high school teacher.
And then entering university in northern Nigeria.
And after AIMS, Shehu wanted to do high-energy physics, and he came to Cambridge.
He's about to finish his Ph.D., and he was filmed recently with someone you all know.
Shehu: And from there we will be able to, hopefully, make better predictions and then we compare it to the graph and also make some predictions.
Stephen Hawking: That is nice.
NT: Here are the current students at AIMS. There are 53 of them from 20 different countries, including 20 women.
So now I'm going to get to my TED business.
Well, we had a party. This is Africa -- we have good parties in Africa. And last month, they threw a surprise party for me.
Here's somebody you've seen already.
(Applause) I want to point out a few other exceptional people in this picture.
So, we were having a party, as you can see they're completely eclipsing me at this point.
This is Ezra. She's from Darfur.
She's a physicist, and somehow stays smiling, in spite of everything going on back home.
But she wants to continue in physics, and she's doing extremely well.
This is Lydia. Lydia is the first ever woman to graduate in mathematics in the Central African Republic.
And she's now at AIMS. (Applause) So now let me get to our TED wish.
Well, it's not my TED wish; it's our wish, as you've already gathered.
And our wish has two parts: one is a dream and the other's a plan. OK.
Our TED dream is that the next Einstein will be African. (Applause) In striving for the heights of creative genius, we want to give thousands of people the motivation, the encouragement and the courage to obtain the high-level skills they need to help Africa.
Among them will be not only brilliant scientists -- I'm sure of that from what we've seen at AIMS -- they'll also be the African Gates, Brins and Pages of the future.
Well, I said we also have a plan. And our plan is quite simple.
AIMS is now a proven model.
And what we need to do is to replicate it.
We want to roll out 15 AIMS centers in the next five years, all over Africa.
Each will have a pan-African student body, but specialize in a different area of science.
We want to use science to overcome the national and cultural barriers, as it does at AIMS.
And we want to add elements to the curriculum.
We want to add entrepreneurship and policy skills.
The expanded AIMS will be a coherent pan-African institution, and its graduates will form a powerful network, working together for peace and progress across the continent.
Over the last year, we've been visiting sites in Africa, looking at potential sites for new AIMS centers.
And here are the ones we've selected.
And each of these centers has a strong local team, each is in a beautiful place, an interesting place, which international lecturers will be happy to visit.
And our partners across Africa are extremely enthusiastic about this.
Everyone wants an AIMS center in their country.
And last November, the conference of all the African ministers of science and technology, held in Mombasa, called for a comprehensive plan to roll out AIMS.
So we have political support right across the continent.
It won't be easy.
At every site there will be huge challenges.
Local scientists must play leading roles and governments must be persuaded to buy in.
Conditions are very difficult, but we cannot afford to compromise on those principles which made AIMS work.
And we summarize them this way: the institutes have got to be relevant, innovative, cost-effective and high quality. Why?
Because we want Africa to be rich.
Easy to remember the basic rules we need.
So, just in ending, let me say the only people who can fix Africa are talented young Africans.
By unlocking and nurturing their creative potential, we can create a step change in Africa's future.
Over time, they will contribute to African development and to science in ways we can only imagine.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was 14 years old, I was interested in science -- fascinated by it, excited to learn about it.
And I had a high school science teacher who would say to the class, "The girls don't have to listen to this."
Encouraging, yes.
(Laughter) I chose not to listen -- but to that statement alone.
So let me take you to the Andes mountains in Chile, 500 kilometers, 300 miles northeast of Santiago.
It's very remote, it's very dry and it's very beautiful.
And there's not much there.
There are condors, there are tarantulas, and at night, when the light dims, it reveals one of the darkest skies on Earth.
It's kind of a magic place, the mountain.
It's a wonderful combination of very remote mountaintop with exquisitely sophisticated technology.
And our ancestors, for as long as there's been recorded history, have looked at the night sky and pondered the nature of our existence.
And we're no exception, our generation.
The only difficulty is that the night sky now is blocked by the glare of city lights.
And so astronomers go to these very remote mountaintops to view and to study the cosmos.
So telescopes are our window to the cosmos.
It's no exaggeration to say that the Southern Hemisphere is going to be the future of astronomy for the 21st century.
We have an array of existing telescopes already, in the Andes mountains in Chile, and that's soon to be joined by a really sensational array of new capability.
There will be two international groups that are going to be building giant telescopes, sensitive to optical radiation, as our eyes are.
There will be a survey telescope that will be scanning the sky every few nights.
There will be radio telescopes, sensitive to long-wavelength radio radiation.
And then there will be telescopes in space.
There'll be a successor to the Hubble Space Telescope; it's called the James Webb Telescope, and it will be launched in 2018.
There'll be a satellite called TESS that will discover planets outside of our solar system.
For the last decade, I've been leading a group -- a consortium -- international group, to build what will be, when it's finished, the largest optical telescope in existence.
It's called the Giant Magellan Telescope, or GMT.
This telescope is going to have mirrors that are 8.4 meters in diameter -- each of the mirrors.
That's almost 27 feet.
So it dwarfs this stage -- maybe out to the fourth row in this audience.
Each of the seven mirrors in this telescope will be almost 27 feet in diameter.
Together, the seven mirrors in this telescope will comprise 80 feet in diameter.
So, essentially the size of this entire auditorium.
The whole telescope will stand about 43 meters high, and again, being in Rio, some of you have been to see the statue of the giant Christ.
The scale is comparable in height; in fact, it's smaller than this telescope will be.
It's comparable to the size of the Statue of Liberty.
And it's going to be housed in an enclosure that's 22 stories -- 60 meters high.
But it's an unusual building to protect this telescope.
It will have open windows to the sky, be able to point and look at the sky, and it will actually rotate on a base -- 2,000 tons of rotating building.
The Giant Magellan Telescope will have 10 times the resolution of the Hubble Space Telescope.
It will be 20 million times more sensitive than the human eye.
And it may, for the first time ever, be capable of finding life on planets outside of our solar system.
It's going to allow us to look back at the first light in the universe -- literally, the dawn of the cosmos.
The cosmic dawn.
It's a telescope that's going to allow us to peer back, witness galaxies as they were when they were actually assembling, the first black holes in the universe, the first galaxies.
Now, for thousands of years, we have been studying the cosmos, we've been wondering about our place in the universe.
The ancient Greeks told us that the Earth was the center of the universe.
Five hundred years ago, Copernicus displaced the Earth, and put the Sun at the heart of the cosmos.
And as we've learned over the centuries, since Galileo Galilei, the Italian scientist, first turned, in that time, a two-inch, very small telescope, to the sky, every time we have built larger telescopes, we have learned something about the universe; we've made discoveries, without exception.
We've learned in the 20th century that the universe is expanding and that our own solar system is not at the center of that expansion.
We know now that the universe is made of about 100 billion galaxies that are visible to us, and each one of those galaxies has 100 billion stars within it.
So we're looking now at the deepest image of the cosmos that's ever been taken.
It was taken using the Hubble Space Telescope, and by pointing the telescope at what was previously a blank region of sky, before the launch of Hubble.
And if you can imagine this tiny area, it's only one-fiftieth of the size of the full moon.
So, if you can imagine the full moon.
And there are now 10,000 galaxies visible within that image.
And the faintness of those images and the tiny size is only a result of the fact that those galaxies are so far away, the vast distances.
And each of those galaxies may contain within it a few billion or even hundreds of billions of individual stars.
Telescopes are like time machines.
So the farther back we look in space, the further back we see in time.
And they're like light buckets -- literally, they collect light.
So larger the bucket, the larger the mirror we have, the more light we can see, and the farther back we can view.
So, we've learned in the last century that there are exotic objects in the universe -- black holes.
We've even learned that there's dark matter and dark energy that we can't see.
So you're looking now at an actual image of dark matter.
(Laughter) You got it. Not all audiences get that.
(Laughter) So the way we infer the presence of dark matter -- we can't see it -- but there's an unmistakable tug, due to gravity.
We now can look out, we see this sea of galaxies in a universe that's expanding.
What I do myself is to measure the expansion of the universe, and one of the projects that I carried out in the 1990s used the Hubble Space Telescope to measure how fast the universe is expanding.
We can now trace back to 14 billion years.
We've learned over time that stars have individual histories; that is, they have birth, they have middle ages and some of them even have dramatic deaths.
So the embers from those stars actually then form the new stars that we see, most of which turn out to have planets going around them.
And one of the really surprising results in the last 20 years has been the discovery of other planets going around other stars.
These are called exoplanets.
And until 1995, we didn't even know the existence of any other planets, other than going around our own sun.
But now, there are almost 2,000 other planets orbiting other stars that we can now detect, measure masses for.
There are 500 of those that are multiple-planet systems.
And there are 4,000 -- and still counting -- other candidates for planets orbiting other stars.
They come in a bewildering variety of different kinds.
There are Jupiter-like planets that are hot, there are other planets that are icy, there are water worlds and there are rocky planets like the Earth, so-called "super-Earths," and there have even been planets that have been speculated diamond worlds.
So we know there's at least one planet, our own Earth, in which there is life.
We've even found planets that are orbiting two stars.
That's no longer the province of science fiction.
So around our own planet, we know there's life, we've developed a complex life, we now can question our own origins.
And given all that we've discovered, the overwhelming numbers now suggest that there may be millions, perhaps -- maybe even hundreds of millions -- of other [planets] that are close enough -- just the right distance from their stars that they're orbiting -- to have the existence of liquid water and maybe could potentially support life.
So we marvel now at those odds, the overwhelming odds, and the amazing thing is that within the next decade, the GMT may be able to take spectra of the atmospheres of those planets, and determine whether or not they have the potential for life.
So, what is the GMT project?
It's an international project.
It includes Australia, South Korea, and I'm happy to say, being here in Rio, that the newest partner in our telescope is Brazil.
(Applause) It also includes a number of institutions across the United States, including Harvard University, the Smithsonian and the Carnegie Institutions, and the Universities of Arizona, Chicago, Texas-Austin and Texas A&amp;M University.
It also involves Chile.
So, the making of the mirrors in this telescope is also fascinating in its own right.
Take chunks of glass, melt them in a furnace that is itself rotating.
This happens underneath the football stadium at the University of Arizona.
It's tucked away under 52,000 seats.
Nobody know it's happening.
And there's essentially a rotating cauldron.
The mirrors are cast and they're cooled very slowly, and then they're polished to an exquisite precision.
And so, if you think about the precision of these mirrors, the bumps on the mirror, over the entire 27 feet, amount to less than one-millionth of an inch.
So, can you visualize that?
Ow!
(Laughter) That's one five-thousandths of the width of one of my hairs, over this entire 27 feet.
It's a spectacular achievement.
It's what allows us to have the precision that we will have.
So, what does that precision buy us?
So the GMT, if you can imagine -- if I were to hold up a coin, which I just happen to have, and I look at the face of that coin, I can see from here the writing on the coin; I can see the face on that coin.
My guess that even in the front row, you can't see that.
But if we were to turn the Giant Magellan Telescope, all 80-feet diameter that we see in this auditorium, and point it 200 miles away, if I were standing in So Paulo, we could resolve the face of this coin.
That's the extraordinary resolution and power of this telescope.
And if we were -- (Applause) If an astronaut went up to the Moon, a quarter of a million miles away, and lit a candle -- a single candle -- then we would be able to detect it, using the GMT.
Quite extraordinary.
This is a simulated image of a cluster in a nearby galaxy.
"Nearby" is astronomical, it's all relative.
It's tens of millions of light-years away.
This is what this cluster would look like.
So look at those four bright objects, and now lets compare it with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope.
You can see faint detail that starts to come through.
And now finally -- and look how dramatic this is -- this is what the GMT will see.
So, keep your eyes on those bright images again.
This is what we see on one of the most powerful existing telescopes on the Earth, and this, again, what the GMT will see.
Extraordinary precision.
So, where are we?
We have now leveled the top of the mountaintop in Chile.
We blasted that off.
We've tested and polished the first mirror.
We've cast the second and the third mirrors.
And we're about to cast the fourth mirror.
We had a series of reviews this year, international panels that came in and reviewed us, and said, "You're ready to go to construction."
And so we plan on building this telescope with the first four mirrors.
We want to get on the air quickly, and be taking science data -- what we astronomers call "first light," in 2021.
And the full telescope will be finished in the middle of the next decade, with all seven mirrors.
So we're now poised to look back at the distant universe, the cosmic dawn.
We'll be able to study other planets in exquisite detail.
But for me, one of the most exciting things about building the GMT is the opportunity to actually discover something that we don't know about -- that we can't even imagine at this point, something completely new.
And my hope is that with the construction of this and other facilities, that many young women and men will be inspired to reach for the stars.
Thank you very much.
Obrigado.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Wendy.
Stay with me, because I have a question for you.
You mentioned different facilities.
So the Magellan Telescope is going up, but also ALMA and others in Chile and elsewhere, including in Hawaii.
Is it about cooperation and complementarity, or about competition?
I know there's competition in terms of funding, but what about the science?
Wendy Freedman: In terms of the science, they're very complementary.
The telescopes that are in space, the telescopes on the ground, telescopes with different wavelength capability, telescopes even that are similar, but different instruments -- they will all look at different parts of the questions that we're asking.
So when we discover other planets, we'll be able to test those observations, we'll be able to measure the atmospheres, be able to look in space with very high resolution.
So, they're very complementary.
You're right about the funding, we compete; but scientifically, it's very complementary.
BG: Wendy, thank you very much for coming to TEDGlobal.
WF: Thank you.
(Applause)
Paul Krugman, the Nobel Prize [winner] in economics, once wrote: "Productivity is not everything, but in the long run, it is almost everything."
So this is serious.
There are not that many things on earth that are "almost everything."
Productivity is the principal driver of the prosperity of a society.
So we have a problem.
In the largest European economies, productivity used to grow five percent per annum in the '50s, '60s, early '70s.
From '73 to '83: three percent per annum.
From '83 to '95: two percent per annum.
Since 1995: less than one percent per annum.
The same profile in Japan.
The same profile in the US, despite a momentary rebound 15 years ago, and despite all the technological innovations around us: the Internet, the information, the new information and communication technologies.
When productivity grows three percent per annum, you double the standard of living every generation.
Every generation is twice as well-off as its parents'.
When it grows one percent per annum, it takes three generations to double the standard of living.
And in this process, many people will be less well-off than their parents.
They will have less of everything: smaller roofs, or perhaps no roof at all, less access to education, to vitamins, to antibiotics, to vaccination -- to everything.
Think of all the problems that we're facing at the moment.
All.
Chances are that they are rooted in the productivity crisis.
Why this crisis?
Because the basic tenets about efficiency -- effectiveness in organizations, in management -- have become counterproductive for human efforts.
Everywhere in public services -- in companies, in the way we work, the way we innovate, invest -- try to learn to work better.
Take the holy trinity of efficiency: clarity, measurement, accountability.
They make human efforts derail.
There are two ways to look at it, to prove it.
One, the one I prefer, is rigorous, elegant, nice -- math.
But the full math version takes a little while, so there is another one.
It is to look at a relay race.
This is what we will do today.
It's a bit more animated, more visual and also faster -- it's a race.
Hopefully, it's faster.
(Laughter) World championship final -- women.
Eight teams in the final.
The fastest team is the US team.
They have the fastest women on earth.
They are the favorite team to win.
Notably, if you compare them to an average team, say, the French team, (Laughter) based on their best performances in the 100-meter race, if you add the individual times of the US runners, they arrive at the finish line 3.2 meters ahead of the French team.
And this year, the US team is in great shape.
Based on their best performance this year, they arrive 6.4 meters ahead of the French team, based on the data.
We are going to look at the race.
At some point you will see, towards the end, that Torri Edwards, the fourth US runner, is ahead.
Not surprising -- this year she got the gold medal in the 100-meter race.
And by the way, Chryste Gaines, the second runner in the US team, is the fastest woman on earth.
So, there are 3.5 billion women on earth.
Where are the two fastest? On the US team.
And the two other runners on the US team are not bad, either.
(Laughter) So clearly, the US team has won the war for talent.
But behind, the average team is trying to catch up.
Let's watch the race.
(Video: French sportscasters narrate race) (Video: Race narration ends) Yves Morieux: So what happened?
The fastest team did not win; the slower one did.
By the way, I hope you appreciate the deep historical research I did to make the French look good.
(Laughter) But let's not exaggerate -- it's not archeology, either.
(Laughter) But why?
Because of cooperation.
When you hear this sentence: "Thanks to cooperation, the whole is worth more than the sum of the parts."
This is not poetry; this is not philosophy.
This is math.
Those who carry the baton are slower, but their baton is faster.
Miracle of cooperation: it multiplies energy, intelligence in human efforts.
It is the essence of human efforts: how we work together, how each effort contributes to the efforts of others.
With cooperation, we can do more with less.
Now, what happens to cooperation when the holy grail -- the holy trinity, even -- of clarity, measurement, accountability -- appears?
Clarity.
Management reports are full of complaints about the lack of clarity.
Compliance audits, consultants' diagnostics.
We need more clarity, we need to clarify the roles, the processes.
It is as though the runners on the team were saying, "Let's be clear -- where does my role really start and end?
Am I supposed to run for 95 meters, 96, 97...?"
It's important, let's be clear.
If you say 97, after 97 meters, people will drop the baton, whether there is someone to take it or not.
Accountability.
We are constantly trying to put accountability in someone's hands.
Who is accountable for this process?
We need somebody accountable for this process.
So in the relay race, since passing the baton is so important, then we need somebody clearly accountable for passing the baton.
So between each runner, now we will have a new dedicated athlete, clearly dedicated to taking the baton from one runner, and passing it to the next runner.
And we will have at least two like that.
Well, will we, in that case, win the race?
That I don't know, but for sure, we would have a clear interface, a clear line of accountability.
We will know who to blame.
But we'll never win the race.
If you think about it, we pay more attention to knowing who to blame in case we fail, than to creating the conditions to succeed.
All the human intelligence put in organization design -- urban structures, processing systems -- what is the real goal?
To have somebody guilty in case they fail.
We are creating organizations able to fail, but in a compliant way, with somebody clearly accountable when we fail.
And we are quite effective at that -- failing.
Measurement.
What gets measured gets done.
Look, to pass the baton, you have to do it at the right time, in the right hand, at the right speed.
But to do that, you have to put energy in your arm.
This energy that is in your arm will not be in your legs.
It will come at the expense of your measurable speed.
You have to shout early enough to the next runner when you will pass the baton, to signal that you are arriving, so that the next runner can prepare, can anticipate.
And you have to shout loud.
But the blood, the energy that will be in your throat will not be in your legs.
Because you know, there are eight people shouting at the same time.
So you have to recognize the voice of your colleague.
You cannot say, "Is it you?"
Too late!
(Laughter) Now, let's look at the race in slow motion, and concentrate on the third runner.
Look at where she allocates her efforts, her energy, her attention.
Not all in her legs -- that would be great for her own speed -- but in also in her throat, arm, eye, brain.
That makes a difference in whose legs?
In the legs of the next runner.
But when the next runner runs super-fast, is it because she made a super effort, or because of the way the third runner passed the baton?
There is no metric on earth that will give us the answer.
And if we reward people on the basis of their measurable performance, they will put their energy, their attention, their blood in what can get measured -- in their legs.
And the baton will fall and slow down.
To cooperate is not a super effort, it is how you allocate your effort.
It is to take a risk, because you sacrifice the ultimate protection granted by objectively measurable individual performance.
It is to make a super difference in the performance of others, with whom we are compared.
It takes being stupid to cooperate, then.
And people are not stupid; they don't cooperate.
You know, clarity, accountability, measurement were OK when the world was simpler.
But business has become much more complex.
With my teams, we have measured the evolution of complexity in business.
It is much more demanding today to attract and retain customers, to build advantage on a global scale, to create value.
And the more business gets complex, the more, in the name of clarity, accountability, measurement we multiply structures, processes, systems.
You know, this drive for clarity and accountability triggers a counterproductive multiplication of interfaces, middle offices, coordinators that do not only mobilize people and resources, but that also add obstacles.
And the more complicated the organization, the more difficult it is to understand what is really happening.
So we need summaries, proxies, reports, key performance indicators, metrics.
So people put their energy in what can get measured, at the expense of cooperation.
And as performance deteriorates, we add even more structure, process, systems.
People spend their time in meetings, writing reports they have to do, undo and redo.
Based on our analysis, teams in these organizations spend between 40 and 80 percent of their time wasting their time, but working harder and harder, longer and longer, on less and less value-adding activities.
This is what is killing productivity, what makes people suffer at work.
Our organizations are wasting human intelligence.
They have turned against human efforts.
When people don't cooperate, don't blame their mindsets, their mentalities, their personality -- look at the work situations.
Is it really in their personal interest to cooperate or not, if, when they cooperate, they are individually worse off?
Why would they cooperate?
When we blame personalities instead of the clarity, the accountability, the measurement, we add injustice to ineffectiveness.
We need to create organizations in which it becomes individually useful for people to cooperate.
Remove the interfaces, the middle offices -- all these complicated coordination structures.
Don't look for clarity; go for fuzziness.
Fuzziness overlaps.
Remove most of the quantitative metrics to assess performance.
Speed the "what."
Look at cooperation, the "how."
How did you pass the baton?
Did you throw it, or did you pass it effectively?
Am I putting my energy in what can get measured -- my legs, my speed -- or in passing the baton?
You, as leaders, as managers, are you making it individually useful for people to cooperate?
The future of our organizations, our companies, our societies hinges on your answer to these questions.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If you want to buy high-quality, low-price cocaine, there really is only one place to go, and that is the dark net anonymous markets.
Now, you can't get to these sites with a normal browser -- Chrome or Firefox -- because they're on this hidden part of the Internet, known as Tor hidden services, where URLs are a string of meaningless numbers and letters that end in .onion, and which you access with a special browser called the Tor browser.
Now, the Tor browser was originally a U.S. Naval intelligence project.
It then became open source, and it allows anybody to browse the net without giving away their location.
And it does this by encrypting your IP address and then routing it via several other computers around the world that use the same software.
You can use it on the normal Internet, but it's also your key to the dark net.
And because of this fiendishly clever encryption system, the 20 or 30 -- we don't know exactly -- thousand sites that operate there are incredibly difficult to shut down.
It is a censorship-free world visited by anonymous users.
Little wonder, then, that it's a natural place to go for anybody with something to hide, and that something, of course, need not be illegal.
On the dark net, you will find whistle-blower sites, The New Yorker.
You will find political activism blogs.
You will find libraries of pirated books.
But you'll also find the drugs markets, illegal pornography, commercial hacking services, and much more besides.
Now, the dark net is one of the most interesting, exciting places anywhere on the net.
And the reason is, because although innovation, of course, takes place in big businesses, takes place in world-class universities, it also takes place in the fringes, because those on the fringes -- the pariahs, the outcasts -- they're often the most creative, because they have to be.
In this part of the Internet, you will not find a single lolcat, a single pop-up advert anywhere.
And that's one of the reasons why I think many of you here will be on the dark net fairly soon.
(Laughter) Not that I'm suggesting anyone in this audience would use it to go and procure high-quality narcotics.
But let's say for a moment that you were.
(Laughter) Bear with me.
The first thing you will notice on signing up to one of these sites is how familiar it looks.
Every single product -- thousands of products -- has a glossy, high-res image, a detailed product description, a price.
There's a "Proceed to checkout" icon.
There is even, most beautifully of all, a "Report this item" button.
(Laughter) Incredible.
You browse through the site, you make your choice, you pay with the crypto-currency bitcoin, you enter an address -- preferably not your home address -- and you wait for your product to arrive in the post, which it nearly always does.
And the reason it does is not because of the clever encryption.
That's important.
Something far simpler than that.
It's the user reviews.
(Laughter) You see, every single vendor on these sites uses a pseudonym, naturally enough, but they keep the same pseudonym to build up a reputation.
And because it's easy for the buyer to change allegiance whenever they want, the only way of trusting a vendor is if they have a good history of positive feedback from other users of the site.
And this introduction of competition and choice does exactly what the economists would predict.
Prices tend to go down, product quality tends to go up, and the vendors are attentive, they're polite, they're consumer-centric, offering you all manner of special deals, one-offs, buy-one-get-one-frees, free delivery, to keep you happy.
I spoke to Drugsheaven.
Drugsheaven was offering excellent and consistent marijuana at a reasonable price.
He had a very generous refund policy, detailed T's and C's, and good shipping times.
"Dear Drugsheaven," I wrote, via the internal emailing system that's also encrypted, of course.
"I'm new here. Do you mind if I buy just one gram of marijuana?"
A couple of hours later, I get a reply.
They always reply.
"Hi there, thanks for your email.
Starting small is a wise thing to do. I would, too, if I were you."
(Laughter) "So no problem if you'd like to start with just one gram.
I do hope we can do business together.
Best wishes, Drugsheaven."
(Laughter) I don't know why he had a posh English accent, but I assume he did.
Now, this kind of consumer-centric attitude is the reason why, when I reviewed 120,000 pieces of feedback that had been left on one of these sites over a three-month period, 95 percent of them were five out of five.
The customer, you see, is king.
But what does that mean?
Well, on the one hand, that means there are more drugs, more available, more easily, to more people.
And by my reckoning, that is not a good thing.
But, on the other hand, if you are going to take drugs, you have a reasonably good way of guaranteeing a certain level of purity and quality, which is incredibly important if you're taking drugs.
And you can do so from the comfort of your own home, without the risks associated with buying on the streets.
Now, as I said, you've got to be creative and innovative to survive in this marketplace.
And the 20 or so sites that are currently in operation -- by the way, they don't always work, they're not always perfect; the site that I showed you was shut down 18 months ago, but not before it had turned over a billion dollars' worth of trade.
But these markets, because of the difficult conditions in which they are operating, the inhospitable conditions, are always innovating, always thinking of ways of getting smarter, more decentralized, harder to censor, and more customer-friendly.
Let's take the payment system.
You don't pay with your credit card, of course -- that would lead directly back to you.
So you use the crypto-currency bitcoin, which is easily exchanged for real-world currencies and gives quite a high degree of anonymity to its users.
But at the beginning of these sites, people noticed a flaw.
Some of the unscrupulous dealers were running away with peoples' bitcoin before they'd mailed the drugs out.
The community came up with a solution, called multi-signature escrow payments.
So on purchasing my item, I would send my bitcoin to a neutral, secure third digital wallet.
The vendor, who would see that I'd sent it, would be confident that they could then send the product to me, and then when I received it, at least two of the three people engaged in the transaction -- vendor, buyer, site administrator -- would have to sign the transaction off with a unique digital signature, and then the money would be transferred.
Brilliant!
Elegant.
It works.
But then they realized there was a problem with bitcoin, because every bitcoin transaction is actually recorded publicly in a public ledger.
So if you're clever, you can try and work out who's behind them.
So they came up with a tumbling service.
Hundreds of people send their bitcoin into one address, they're tumbled and jumbled up, and then the right amount is sent on to the right recipients, but they're different bitcoins: micro-laundering systems.
(Laughter) It's incredible.
Interested in what drugs are trending right now on the dark net markets?
Check Grams, the search engine.
You can even buy some advertising space.
(Laughter) Are you an ethical consumer worried about what the drugs industry is doing?
Yeah.
One vendor will offer you fair trade organic cocaine.
(Laughter) That's not being sourced from Colombian druglords, but Guatemalan farmers.
They even promised to reinvest 20 percent of any profits into local education programs.
(Laughter) There's even a mystery shopper.
Now, whatever you think about the morality of these sites -- and I submit that it's not actually an easy question -- the creation of functioning, competitive, anonymous markets, where nobody knows who anybody else is, constantly at risk of being shut down by the authorities, is a staggering achievement, a phenomenal achievement.
And it's that kind of innovation that's why those on the fringes are often the harbingers of what is to come.
It's easy to forget that because of its short life, the Internet has actually changed many times over the last 30 years or so.
It started in the '70s as a military project, morphed in the 1980s to an academic network, co-opted by commercial companies in the '90s, and then invaded by all of us via social media in the noughties, but I think it's going to change again.
And I think things like the dark net markets -- creative, secure, difficult to censor -- I think that's the future.
And the reason it's the future is because we're all worried about our privacy.
Surveys consistently show concerns about privacy.
The more time we spend online, the more we worry about them, and those surveys show our worries are growing.
We're worried about what happens to our data.
We're worried about who might be watching us.
Since the revelations from Edward Snowden, there's been a huge increase in the number of people using various privacy-enhancing tools.
There are now between two and three million daily users of the Tor browser, the majority of which use is perfectly legitimate, sometimes even mundane.
And there are hundreds of activists around the world working on techniques and tools to keep you private online -- default encrypted messaging services.
Ethereum, which is a project which tries to link up the connected but unused hard drives of millions of computers around the world, to create a sort of distributed Internet that no one really controls.
Now, we've had distributed computing before, of course.
We use it for everything from Skype to the search for extraterrestrial life.
But you add distributed computing and powerful encryption -- that's very, very hard to censor and control.
Another called MaidSafe works on similar principles.
Another called Twister, and so on and so on.
And here's the thing -- the more of us join, the more interesting those sites become, and then the more of us join, and so on.
And I think that's what's going to happen.
In fact, it's already happening.
The dark net is no longer a den for dealers and a hideout for whistle-blowers.
It's already going mainstream.
Just recently, the musician Aphex Twin released his album as a dark net site.
Facebook has started a dark net site.
A group of London architects have opened a dark net site for people worried about regeneration projects.
Yes, the dark net is going mainstream, and I predict that fairly soon, every social media company, every major news outlet, and therefore most of you in this audience, will be using the dark net, too.
So the Internet is about to get more interesting, more exciting, more innovative, more terrible, more destructive.
That's good news if you care about liberty.
It's good news if you care about freedom.
It's good news if you care about democracy.
It's also good news if you want to browse for illegal pornography and if you want to buy and sell drugs with impunity.
Neither entirely dark, nor entirely light.
It's not one side or the other that's going to win out, but both.
Thank you very much, indeed.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: You were something of a mathematical phenom.
You had already taught at Harvard and MIT at a young age.
And then the NSA came calling.
What was that about?
Jim Simons: Well the NSA -- that's the National Security Agency -- they didn't exactly come calling.
They had an operation at Princeton, where they hired mathematicians to attack secret codes and stuff like that.
And I knew that existed.
And they had a very good policy, because you could do half your time at your own mathematics, and at least half your time working on their stuff.
And they paid a lot.
So that was an irresistible pull.
So, I went there.
CA: You were a code-cracker.
JS: I was.
CA: Until you got fired.
JS: Well, I did get fired. Yes.
CA: How come?
JS: Well, how come?
I got fired because, well, the Vietnam War was on, and the boss of bosses in my organization was a big fan of the war and wrote a New York Times article, a magazine section cover story, about how we would win in Vietnam.
And I didn't like that war, I thought it was stupid.
And I wrote a letter to the Times, which they published, saying not everyone who works for Maxwell Taylor, if anyone remembers that name, agrees with his views.
And I gave my own views ...
CA: Oh, OK. I can see that would -- JS: ... which were different from General Taylor's.
But in the end, nobody said anything.
But then, I was 29 years old at this time, and some kid came around and said he was a stringer from Newsweek magazine and he wanted to interview me and ask what I was doing about my views.
And I told him, "I'm doing mostly mathematics now, and when the war is over, then I'll do mostly their stuff."
Then I did the only intelligent thing I'd done that day -- I told my local boss that I gave that interview.
And he said, "What'd you say?"
And I told him what I said.
And then he said, "I've got to call Taylor."
He called Taylor; that took 10 minutes.
I was fired five minutes after that.
CA: OK.
JS: But it wasn't bad.
CA: It wasn't bad, because you went on to Stony Brook and stepped up your mathematical career.
You started working with this man here.
Who is this?
JS: Oh, [Shiing-Shen] Chern.
Chern was one of the great mathematicians of the century.
I had known him when I was a graduate student at Berkeley.
And I had some ideas, and I brought them to him and he liked them.
Together, we did this work which you can easily see up there.
There it is.
CA: It led to you publishing a famous paper together.
Can you explain at all what that work was?
JS: No.
(Laughter) JS: I mean, I could explain it to somebody.
(Laughter) CA: How about explaining this?
JS: But not many. Not many people.
CA: I think you told me it had something to do with spheres, so let's start here.
JS: Well, it did, but I'll say about that work -- it did have something to do with that, but before we get to that -- that work was good mathematics.
I was very happy with it; so was Chern.
It even started a little sub-field that's now flourishing.
But, more interestingly, it happened to apply to physics, something we knew nothing about -- at least I knew nothing about physics, and I don't think Chern knew a heck of a lot.
And about 10 years after the paper came out, a guy named Ed Witten in Princeton started applying it to string theory and people in Russia started applying it to what's called "condensed matter."
Today, those things in there called Chern-Simons invariants have spread through a lot of physics.
And it was amazing.
We didn't know any physics.
It never occurred to me that it would be applied to physics.
But that's the thing about mathematics -- you never know where it's going to go.
CA: This is so incredible.
So, we've been talking about how evolution shapes human minds that may or may not perceive the truth.
Somehow, you come up with a mathematical theory, not knowing any physics, discover two decades later that it's being applied to profoundly describe the actual physical world.
How can that happen?
JS: God knows.
(Laughter) But there's a famous physicist named [Eugene] Wigner, and he wrote an essay on the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics.
Somehow, this mathematics, which is rooted in the real world in some sense -- we learn to count, measure, everyone would do that -- and then it flourishes on its own.
But so often it comes back to save the day.
General relativity is an example.
[Hermann] Minkowski had this geometry, and Einstein realized, "Hey! It's the very thing in which I can cast general relativity."
So, you never know. It is a mystery.
It is a mystery.
CA: So, here's a mathematical piece of ingenuity.
Tell us about this.
JS: Well, that's a ball -- it's a sphere, and it has a lattice around it -- you know, those squares.
What I'm going to show here was originally observed by [Leonhard] Euler, the great mathematician, in the 1700s.
And it gradually grew to be a very important field in mathematics: algebraic topology, geometry.
That paper up there had its roots in this.
So, here's this thing: it has eight vertices, 12 edges, six faces.
And if you look at the difference -- vertices minus edges plus faces -- you get two.
OK, well, two. That's a good number.
Here's a different way of doing it -- these are triangles covering -- this has 12 vertices and 30 edges and 20 faces, 20 tiles.
And vertices minus edges plus faces still equals two.
And in fact, you could do this any which way -- cover this thing with all kinds of polygons and triangles and mix them up.
And you take vertices minus edges plus faces -- you'll get two.
Here's a different shape.
This is a torus, or the surface of a doughnut: 16 vertices covered by these rectangles, 32 edges, 16 faces.
Vertices minus edges comes out to be zero.
It'll always come out to zero.
Every time you cover a torus with squares or triangles or anything like that, you're going to get zero.
So, this is called the Euler characteristic.
And it's what's called a topological invariant.
It's pretty amazing.
No matter how you do it, you're always get the same answer.
So that was the first sort of thrust, from the mid-1700s, into a subject which is now called algebraic topology.
CA: And your own work took an idea like this and moved it into higher-dimensional theory, higher-dimensional objects, and found new invariances?
JS: Yes. Well, there were already higher-dimensional invariants: Pontryagin classes -- actually, there were Chern classes.
There were a bunch of these types of invariants.
I was struggling to work on one of them and model it sort of combinatorially, instead of the way it was typically done, and that led to this work and we uncovered some new things.
But if it wasn't for Mr. Euler -- who wrote almost 70 volumes of mathematics and had 13 children, who he apparently would dandle on his knee while he was writing -- if it wasn't for Mr. Euler, there wouldn't perhaps be these invariants.
CA: OK, so that's at least given us a flavor of that amazing mind in there.
Let's talk about Renaissance.
Because you took that amazing mind and having been a code-cracker at the NSA, you started to become a code-cracker in the financial industry.
I think you probably didn't buy efficient market theory.
Somehow you found a way of creating astonishing returns over two decades.
The way it's been explained to me, what's remarkable about what you did wasn't just the size of the returns, it's that you took them with surprisingly low volatility and risk, compared with other hedge funds.
So how on earth did you do this, Jim?
JS: I did it by assembling a wonderful group of people.
When I started doing trading, I had gotten a little tired of mathematics.
I was in my late 30s, I had a little money.
I started trading and it went very well.
I made quite a lot of money with pure luck.
I mean, I think it was pure luck.
It certainly wasn't mathematical modeling.
But in looking at the data, after a while I realized: it looks like there's some structure here.
And I hired a few mathematicians, and we started making some models -- just the kind of thing we did back at IDA [Institute for Defense Analyses].
You design an algorithm, you test it out on a computer.
Does it work? Doesn't it work? And so on.
CA: Can we take a look at this?
Because here's a typical graph of some commodity.
I look at that, and I say, "That's just a random, up-and-down walk -- maybe a slight upward trend over that whole period of time."
How on earth could you trade looking at that, and see something that wasn't just random?
JS: In the old days -- this is kind of a graph from the old days, commodities or currencies had a tendency to trend.
Not necessarily the very light trend you see here, but trending in periods.
And if you decided, OK, I'm going to predict today, by the average move in the past 20 days -- maybe that would be a good prediction, and I'd make some money.
And in fact, years ago, such a system would work -- not beautifully, but it would work.
You'd make money, you'd lose money, you'd make money.
But this is a year's worth of days, and you'd make a little money during that period.
It's a very vestigial system.
CA: So you would test a bunch of lengths of trends in time and see whether, for example, a 10-day trend or a 15-day trend was predictive of what happened next.
JS: Sure, you would try all those things and see what worked best.
Trend-following would have been great in the '60s, and it was sort of OK in the '70s.
By the '80s, it wasn't.
CA: Because everyone could see that.
So, how did you stay ahead of the pack?
JS: We stayed ahead of the pack by finding other approaches -- shorter-term approaches to some extent.
The real thing was to gather a tremendous amount of data -- and we had to get it by hand in the early days.
We went down to the Federal Reserve and copied interest rate histories and stuff like that, because it didn't exist on computers.
We got a lot of data.
And very smart people -- that was the key.
I didn't really know how to hire people to do fundamental trading.
I had hired a few -- some made money, some didn't make money.
I couldn't make a business out of that.
But I did know how to hire scientists, because I have some taste in that department.
So, that's what we did.
And gradually these models got better and better, and better and better.
CA: You're credited with doing something remarkable at Renaissance, which is building this culture, this group of people, who weren't just hired guns who could be lured away by money.
Their motivation was doing exciting mathematics and science.
JS: Well, I'd hoped that might be true.
But some of it was money.
CA: They made a lot of money.
JS: I can't say that no one came because of the money.
I think a lot of them came because of the money.
But they also came because it would be fun.
CA: What role did machine learning play in all this?
JS: In a certain sense, what we did was machine learning.
You look at a lot of data, and you try to simulate different predictive schemes, until you get better and better at it.
It doesn't necessarily feed back on itself the way we did things.
But it worked.
CA: So these different predictive schemes can be really quite wild and unexpected.
I mean, you looked at everything, right?
You looked at the weather, length of dresses, political opinion.
JS: Yes, length of dresses we didn't try.
CA: What sort of things?
JS: Well, everything.
Everything is grist for the mill -- except hem lengths.
Weather, annual reports, quarterly reports, historic data itself, volumes, you name it.
Whatever there is.
We take in terabytes of data a day.
And store it away and massage it and get it ready for analysis.
You're looking for anomalies.
You're looking for -- like you said, the efficient market hypothesis is not correct.
CA: But any one anomaly might be just a random thing.
So, is the secret here to just look at multiple strange anomalies, and see when they align?
JS: Any one anomaly might be a random thing; however, if you have enough data you can tell that it's not.
You can see an anomaly that's persistent for a sufficiently long time -- the probability of it being random is not high.
But these things fade after a while; anomalies can get washed out.
So you have to keep on top of the business.
CA: A lot of people look at the hedge fund industry now and are sort of ... shocked by it, by how much wealth is created there, and how much talent is going into it.
Do you have any worries about that industry, and perhaps the financial industry in general?
Kind of being on a runaway train that's -- I don't know -- helping increase inequality?
How would you champion what's happening in the hedge fund industry?
JS: I think in the last three or four years, hedge funds have not done especially well.
We've done dandy, but the hedge fund industry as a whole has not done so wonderfully.
The stock market has been on a roll, going up as everybody knows, and price-earnings ratios have grown.
So an awful lot of the wealth that's been created in the last -- let's say, five or six years -- has not been created by hedge funds.
People would ask me, "What's a hedge fund?"
And I'd say, "One and 20."
Which means -- now it's two and 20 -- it's two percent fixed fee and 20 percent of profits.
Hedge funds are all different kinds of creatures.
CA: Rumor has it you charge slightly higher fees than that.
JS: We charged the highest fees in the world at one time.
Five and 44, that's what we charge.
CA: Five and 44.
So five percent flat, 44 percent of upside.
You still made your investors spectacular amounts of money.
JS: We made good returns, yes.
People got very mad: "How can you charge such high fees?"
I said, "OK, you can withdraw."
But "How can I get more?" was what people were -- (Laughter) But at a certain point, as I think I told you, we bought out all the investors because there's a capacity to the fund.
CA: But should we worry about the hedge fund industry attracting too much of the world's great mathematical and other talent to work on that, as opposed to the many other problems in the world?
JS: Well, it's not just mathematical.
We hire astronomers and physicists and things like that.
I don't think we should worry about it too much.
It's still a pretty small industry.
And in fact, bringing science into the investing world has improved that world.
It's reduced volatility. It's increased liquidity.
Spreads are narrower because people are trading that kind of stuff.
So I'm not too worried about Einstein going off and starting a hedge fund.
CA: You're at a phase in your life now where you're actually investing, though, at the other end of the supply chain -- you're actually boosting mathematics across America.
This is your wife, Marilyn.
You're working on philanthropic issues together.
Tell me about that.
JS: Well, Marilyn started -- there she is up there, my beautiful wife -- she started the foundation about 20 years ago.
I think '94.
I claim it was '93, she says it was '94, but it was one of those two years.
(Laughter) We started the foundation, just as a convenient way to give charity.
She kept the books, and so on.
We did not have a vision at that time, but gradually a vision emerged -- which was to focus on math and science, to focus on basic research.
And that's what we've done.
Six years ago or so, I left Renaissance and went to work at the foundation.
So that's what we do.
CA: And so Math for America is basically investing in math teachers around the country, giving them some extra income, giving them support and coaching.
And really trying to make that more effective and make that a calling to which teachers can aspire.
JS: Yeah -- instead of beating up the bad teachers, which has created morale problems all through the educational community, in particular in math and science, we focus on celebrating the good ones and giving them status.
Yeah, we give them extra money, 15,000 dollars a year.
We have 800 math and science teachers in New York City in public schools today, as part of a core.
There's a great morale among them.
They're staying in the field.
Next year, it'll be 1,000 and that'll be 10 percent of the math and science teachers in New York [City] public schools.
(Applause) CA: Jim, here's another project that you've supported philanthropically: Research into origins of life, I guess.
What are we looking at here?
JS: Well, I'll save that for a second.
And then I'll tell you what you're looking at.
Origins of life is a fascinating question.
How did we get here?
Well, there are two questions: One is, what is the route from geology to biology -- how did we get here?
And the other question is, what did we start with?
What material, if any, did we have to work with on this route?
Those are two very, very interesting questions.
The first question is a tortuous path from geology up to RNA or something like that -- how did that all work?
And the other, what do we have to work with?
Well, more than we think.
So what's pictured there is a star in formation.
Now, every year in our Milky Way, which has 100 billion stars, about two new stars are created.
Don't ask me how, but they're created.
And it takes them about a million years to settle out.
So, in steady state, there are about two million stars in formation at any time.
That one is somewhere along this settling-down period.
And there's all this crap sort of circling around it, dust and stuff.
And it'll form probably a solar system, or whatever it forms.
But here's the thing -- in this dust that surrounds a forming star have been found, now, significant organic molecules.
Molecules not just like methane, but formaldehyde and cyanide -- things that are the building blocks -- the seeds, if you will -- of life.
So, that may be typical.
And it may be typical that planets around the universe start off with some of these basic building blocks.
Now does that mean there's going to be life all around?
Maybe.
But it's a question of how tortuous this path is from those frail beginnings, those seeds, all the way to life.
And most of those seeds will fall on fallow planets.
CA: So for you, personally, finding an answer to this question of where we came from, of how did this thing happen, that is something you would love to see.
JS: Would love to see.
And like to know -- if that path is tortuous enough, and so improbable, that no matter what you start with, we could be a singularity.
But on the other hand, given all this organic dust that's floating around, we could have lots of friends out there.
It'd be great to know.
CA: Jim, a couple of years ago, I got the chance to speak with Elon Musk, and I asked him the secret of his success, and he said taking physics seriously was it.
Listening to you, what I hear you saying is taking math seriously, that has infused your whole life.
It's made you an absolute fortune, and now it's allowing you to invest in the futures of thousands and thousands of kids across America and elsewhere.
Could it be that science actually works?
That math actually works?
JS: Well, math certainly works. Math certainly works.
But this has been fun.
Working with Marilyn and giving it away has been very enjoyable.
CA: I just find it -- it's an inspirational thought to me, that by taking knowledge seriously, so much more can come from it.
So thank you for your amazing life, and for coming here to TED.
Thank you.
Jim Simons!
(Applause)
Today I'm going to talk about work.
And the question I want to ask and answer is this: "Why do we work?"
Why do we drag ourselves out of bed every morning instead of living our lives just filled with bouncing from one TED-like adventure to another?
(Laughter) You may be asking yourselves that very question.
Now, I know of course, we have to make a living, but nobody in this room thinks that that's the answer to the question, "Why do we work?"
For folks in this room, the work we do is challenging, it's engaging, it's stimulating, it's meaningful.
And if we're lucky, it might even be important.
So, we wouldn't work if we didn't get paid, but that's not why we do what we do.
And in general, I think we think that material rewards are a pretty bad reason for doing the work that we do.
When we say of somebody that he's "in it for the money," we are not just being descriptive.
(Laughter) Now, I think this is totally obvious, but the very obviousness of it raises what is for me an incredibly profound question.
Why, if this is so obvious, why is it that for the overwhelming majority of people on the planet, the work they do has none of the characteristics that get us up and out of bed and off to the office every morning?
How is it that we allow the majority of people on the planet to do work that is monotonous, meaningless and soul-deadening?
Why is it that as capitalism developed, it created a mode of production, of goods and services, in which all the nonmaterial satisfactions that might come from work were eliminated?
Workers who do this kind of work, whether they do it in factories, in call centers, or in fulfillment warehouses, do it for pay.
There is certainly no other earthly reason to do what they do except for pay.
So the question is, "Why?"
And here's the answer: the answer is technology.
Now, I know, I know -- yeah, yeah, yeah, technology, automation screws people, blah blah -- that's not what I mean.
I'm not talking about the kind of technology that has enveloped our lives, and that people come to TED to hear about.
I'm not talking about the technology of things, profound though that is.
I'm talking about another technology.
I'm talking about the technology of ideas.
I call it, "idea technology" -- how clever of me.
(Laughter) In addition to creating things, science creates ideas.
Science creates ways of understanding.
And in the social sciences, the ways of understanding that get created are ways of understanding ourselves.
And they have an enormous influence on how we think, what we aspire to, and how we act.
If you think your poverty is God's will, you pray.
If you think your poverty is the result of your own inadequacy, you shrink into despair.
And if you think your poverty is the result of oppression and domination, then you rise up in revolt.
Whether your response to poverty is resignation or revolution, depends on how you understand the sources of your poverty.
This is the role that ideas play in shaping us as human beings, and this is why idea technology may be the most profoundly important technology that science gives us.
And there's something special about idea technology, that makes it different from the technology of things.
With things, if the technology sucks, it just vanishes, right?
Bad technology disappears.
With ideas -- false ideas about human beings will not go away if people believe that they're true.
Because if people believe that they're true, they create ways of living and institutions that are consistent with these very false ideas.
And that's how the industrial revolution created a factory system in which there was really nothing you could possibly get out of your day's work, except for the pay at the end of the day.
Because the father -- one of the fathers of the Industrial Revolution, Adam Smith -- was convinced that human beings were by their very natures lazy, and wouldn't do anything unless you made it worth their while, and the way you made it worth their while was by incentivizing, by giving them rewards.
That was the only reason anyone ever did anything.
So we created a factory system consistent with that false view of human nature.
But once that system of production was in place, there was really no other way for people to operate, except in a way that was consistent with Adam Smith's vision.
So the work example is merely an example of how false ideas can create a circumstance that ends up making them true.
It is not true that you "just can't get good help anymore."
It is true that you "can't get good help anymore" when you give people work to do that is demeaning and soulless.
And interestingly enough, Adam Smith -- the same guy who gave us this incredible invention of mass production, and division of labor -- understood this.
He said, of people who worked in assembly lines, of men who worked in assembly lines, he says: "He generally becomes as stupid as it is possible for a human being to become."
Now, notice the word here is "become."
"He generally becomes as stupid as it is possible for a human being to become."
Whether he intended it or not, what Adam Smith was telling us there, is that the very shape of the institution within which people work creates people who are fitted to the demands of that institution and deprives people of the opportunity to derive the kinds of satisfactions from their work that we take for granted.
The thing about science -- natural science -- is that we can spin fantastic theories about the cosmos, and have complete confidence that the cosmos is completely indifferent to our theories.
It's going to work the same damn way no matter what theories we have about the cosmos.
But we do have to worry about the theories we have of human nature, because human nature will be changed by the theories we have that are designed to explain and help us understand human beings.
The distinguished anthropologist, Clifford Geertz, said, years ago, that human beings are the "unfinished animals."
And what he meant by that was that it is only human nature to have a human nature that is very much the product of the society in which people live.
That human nature, that is to say our human nature, is much more created than it is discovered.
We design human nature by designing the institutions within which people live and work.
And so you people -- pretty much the closest I ever get to being with masters of the universe -- you people should be asking yourself a question, as you go back home to run your organizations.
Just what kind of human nature do you want to help design?
Thank you.
(Applause) Thanks.
Youre overseeing the delivery of crucial supplies to a rebel base deep in the heart of enemy territory.
To get past Imperial customs, all packages must follow a strict protocol: if a box is marked with an even number on the bottom, it must be sealed with a red top.
The boxes are already being loaded onto the transport when you receive an urgent message.
One of the four boxes was sealed incorrectly, but they lost track of which one.
All the boxes are still on the conveyor belt.
Two are facing down: one marked with a four, and one with a seven.
The other two are facing up: one with a black top, another with a red one.
You know that any violation of the protocol will get the entire shipment confiscated and put your allies in grave danger.
But any boxes you pull off for inspection wont make it onto this delivery run, depriving the rebels of critically needed supplies.
The transport leaves in a few moments, with or without its cargo.
Which box or boxes should you grab off the conveyor belt?
Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself!
Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 It may seem like you need to inspect all four boxes to see whats on the other side of each.
But in fact, only two of them matter.
Lets look at the protocol again.
All it says is that even-numbered boxes must have a red top.
It doesnt say anything about odd-numbered boxes, so we can just ignore the box marked with a seven.
What about the box with a red top?
Dont we need to check that the number on the bottom is even?
As it turns out, we dont.
The protocol says that if a box has an even number, then it should have a red top.
It doesnt say that only boxes with even numbers can have red tops, or that a box with a red top must have an even number.
The requirement only goes in one direction.
So we dont need to check the box with the red lid.
We do, however, need to check the one with the black lid, to make sure it wasnt incorrectly placed on an even-numbered box.
If you initially assumed the rules imply a symmetrical match between the number on the box and the type of lid, youre not alone.
That error is so common, we even have a name for it: affirming the consequent, or the fallacy of the converse.
This fallacy wrongly assumes that just because a certain condition is necessary for a given result, it must also be sufficient for it.
For instance, having an atmosphere is a necessary condition for being a habitable planet.
But this doesnt mean that its a sufficient condition  planets like Venus have atmospheres but lack other criteria for habitability.
If that still seems hard to wrap your head around, lets look at a slightly different problem.
Imagine the boxes contain groceries.
You see one marked for shipment to a steakhouse and one to a vegetarian restaurant.
Then you see two more boxes turned upside down: one labeled as containing meat, and another as containing onions.
Which ones do you need to check?
Well, its easy  make sure the meat isnt being shipped to the vegetarian restaurant, and that the box going there doesnt contain meat.
The onions can go to either place, and the box bound for the steakhouse can contain either product.
Why does this scenario seem easier?
Formally, its the same problem  two possible conditions for the top of the box, and two for the bottom.
But in this case, theyre based on familiar real-world needs, and we easily understand that while vegetarians only eat vegetables, theyre not the only ones who do so.
In the original problem, the rules seemed more arbitrary, and when theyre abstracted that way, the logical connections become harder to see.
In your case, youve managed to get enough supplies through to enable the resistance to fight another day.
And you did it by thinking outside the box  both sides of it.
Well, we all need a reason to wake up.
For me, it just took 11,000 volts.
I know you're too polite to ask, so I will tell you.
One night, sophomore year of college, just back from Thanksgiving holiday, a few of my friends and I were horsing around, and we decided to climb atop a parked commuter train.
It was just sitting there, with the wires that run overhead.
Somehow, that seemed like a great idea at the time.
We'd certainly done stupider things.
I scurried up the ladder on the back, and when I stood up, the electrical current entered my arm, blew down and out my feet, and that was that.
Would you believe that watch still works?
Takes a licking!
(Laughter) My father wears it now in solidarity.
That night began my formal relationship with death -- my death -- and it also began my long run as a patient.
It's a good word.
It means one who suffers.
So I guess we're all patients.
Now, the American health care system has more than its fair share of dysfunction -- to match its brilliance, to be sure.
I'm a physician now, a hospice and palliative medicine doc, so I've seen care from both sides.
And believe me: almost everyone who goes into healthcare really means well -- I mean, truly.
But we who work in it are also unwitting agents for a system that too often does not serve.
Why?
Well, there's actually a pretty easy answer to that question, and it explains a lot: because healthcare was designed with diseases, not people, at its center.
Which is to say, of course, it was badly designed.
And nowhere are the effects of bad design more heartbreaking or the opportunity for good design more compelling than at the end of life, where things are so distilled and concentrated.
There are no do-overs.
My purpose today is to reach out across disciplines and invite design thinking into this big conversation.
That is, to bring intention and creativity to the experience of dying.
We have a monumental opportunity in front of us, before one of the few universal issues as individuals as well as a civil society: to rethink and redesign how it is we die.
So let's begin at the end.
For most people, the scariest thing about death isn't being dead, it's dying, suffering.
It's a key distinction.
To get underneath this, it can be very helpful to tease out suffering which is necessary as it is, from suffering we can change.
The former is a natural, essential part of life, part of the deal, and to this we are called to make space, adjust, grow.
It can be really good to realize forces larger than ourselves.
They bring proportionality, like a cosmic right-sizing.
After my limbs were gone, that loss, for example, became fact, fixed -- necessarily part of my life, and I learned that I could no more reject this fact than reject myself.
It took me a while, but I learned it eventually.
Now, another great thing about necessary suffering is that it is the very thing that unites caregiver and care receiver -- human beings.
This, we are finally realizing, is where healing happens.
Yes, compassion -- literally, as we learned yesterday -- suffering together.
Now, on the systems side, on the other hand, so much of the suffering is unnecessary, invented.
It serves no good purpose.
But the good news is, since this brand of suffering is made up, well, we can change it.
How we die is indeed something we can affect.
Making the system sensitive to this fundamental distinction between necessary and unnecessary suffering gives us our first of three design cues for the day.
After all, our role as caregivers, as people who care, is to relieve suffering -- not add to the pile.
True to the tenets of palliative care, I function as something of a reflective advocate, as much as prescribing physician.
Quick aside: palliative care -- a very important field but poorly understood -- while it includes, it is not limited to end of life care.
It is not limited to hospice.
It's simply about comfort and living well at any stage.
So please know that you don't have to be dying anytime soon to benefit from palliative care.
Now, let me introduce you to Frank.
Sort of makes this point.
I've been seeing Frank now for years.
He's living with advancing prostate cancer on top of long-standing HIV.
We work on his bone pain and his fatigue, but most of the time we spend thinking out loud together about his life -- really, about our lives.
In this way, Frank grieves.
In this way, he keeps up with his losses as they roll in, so that he's ready to take in the next moment.
Loss is one thing, but regret, quite another.
Frank has always been an adventurer -- he looks like something out of a Norman Rockwell painting -- and no fan of regret.
So it wasn't surprising when he came into clinic one day, saying he wanted to raft down the Colorado River.
Was this a good idea?
With all the risks to his safety and his health, some would say no.
Many did, but he went for it, while he still could.
It was a glorious, marvelous trip: freezing water, blistering dry heat, scorpions, snakes, wildlife howling off the flaming walls of the Grand Canyon -- all the glorious side of the world beyond our control.
Frank's decision, while maybe dramatic, is exactly the kind so many of us would make, if we only had the support to figure out what is best for ourselves over time.
So much of what we're talking about today is a shift in perspective.
After my accident, when I went back to college, I changed my major to art history.
Studying visual art, I figured I'd learn something about how to see -- a really potent lesson for a kid who couldn't change so much of what he was seeing.
Perspective, that kind of alchemy we humans get to play with, turning anguish into a flower.
Flash forward: now I work at an amazing place in San Francisco called the Zen Hospice Project, where we have a little ritual that helps with this shift in perspective.
When one of our residents dies, the mortuary men come, and as we're wheeling the body out through the garden, heading for the gate, we pause.
Anyone who wants -- fellow residents, family, nurses, volunteers, the hearse drivers too, now -- shares a story or a song or silence, as we sprinkle the body with flower petals.
It takes a few minutes; it's a sweet, simple parting image to usher in grief with warmth, rather than repugnance.
Contrast that with the typical experience in the hospital setting, much like this -- floodlit room lined with tubes and beeping machines and blinking lights that don't stop even when the patient's life has.
Cleaning crew swoops in, the body's whisked away, and it all feels as though that person had never really existed.
Well-intended, of course, in the name of sterility, but hospitals tend to assault our senses, and the most we might hope for within those walls is numbness -- anesthetic, literally the opposite of aesthetic.
I revere hospitals for what they can do; I am alive because of them.
But we ask too much of our hospitals.
They are places for acute trauma and treatable illness.
They are no place to live and die; that's not what they were designed for.
Now mind you -- I am not giving up on the notion that our institutions can become more humane.
Beauty can be found anywhere.
I spent a few months in a burn unit at St. Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, New Jersey, where I got really great care at every turn, including good palliative care for my pain.
And one night, it began to snow outside.
I remember my nurses complaining about driving through it.
And there was no window in my room, but it was great to just imagine it coming down all sticky.
Next day, one of my nurses smuggled in a snowball for me.
She brought it in to the unit.
I cannot tell you the rapture I felt holding that in my hand, and the coldness dripping onto my burning skin; the miracle of it all, the fascination as I watched it melt and turn into water.
In that moment, just being any part of this planet in this universe mattered more to me than whether I lived or died.
That little snowball packed all the inspiration I needed to both try to live and be OK if I did not.
In a hospital, that's a stolen moment.
In my work over the years, I've known many people who were ready to go, ready to die.
Not because they had found some final peace or transcendence, but because they were so repulsed by what their lives had become -- in a word, cut off, or ugly.
There are already record numbers of us living with chronic and terminal illness, and into ever older age.
And we are nowhere near ready or prepared for this silver tsunami.
We need an infrastructure dynamic enough to handle these seismic shifts in our population.
Now is the time to create something new, something vital.
I know we can because we have to.
The alternative is just unacceptable.
And the key ingredients are known: policy, education and training, systems, bricks and mortar.
We have tons of input for designers of all stripes to work with.
We know, for example, from research what's most important to people who are closer to death: comfort; feeling unburdened and unburdening to those they love; existential peace; and a sense of wonderment and spirituality.
Over Zen Hospice's nearly 30 years, we've learned much more from our residents in subtle detail.
Little things aren't so little.
Take Janette.
She finds it harder to breathe one day to the next due to ALS.
Well, guess what?
She wants to start smoking again -- and French cigarettes, if you please.
Not out of some self-destructive bent, but to feel her lungs filled while she has them.
Priorities change.
Or Kate -- she just wants to know her dog Austin is lying at the foot of her bed, his cold muzzle against her dry skin, instead of more chemotherapy coursing through her veins -- she's done that.
Sensuous, aesthetic gratification, where in a moment, in an instant, we are rewarded for just being.
So much of it comes down to loving our time by way of the senses, by way of the body -- the very thing doing the living and the dying.
Probably the most poignant room in the Zen Hospice guest house is our kitchen, which is a little strange when you realize that so many of our residents can eat very little, if anything at all.
But we realize we are providing sustenance on several levels: smell, a symbolic plane.
Seriously, with all the heavy-duty stuff happening under our roof, one of the most tried and true interventions we know of, is to bake cookies.
As long as we have our senses -- even just one -- we have at least the possibility of accessing what makes us feel human, connected.
Imagine the ripples of this notion for the millions of people living and dying with dementia.
Primal sensorial delights that say the things we don't have words for, impulses that make us stay present -- no need for a past or a future.
So, if teasing unnecessary suffering out of the system was our first design cue, then tending to dignity by way of the senses, by way of the body -- the aesthetic realm -- is design cue number two.
Now this gets us quickly to the third and final bit for today; namely, we need to lift our sights, to set our sights on well-being, so that life and health and healthcare can become about making life more wonderful, rather than just less horrible.
Beneficence.
Here, this gets right at the distinction between a disease-centered and a patient- or human-centered model of care, and here is where caring becomes a creative, generative, even playful act.
"Play" may sound like a funny word here.
But it is also one of our highest forms of adaptation.
Consider every major compulsory effort it takes to be human.
The need for food has birthed cuisine.
The need for shelter has given rise to architecture.
The need for cover, fashion.
And for being subjected to the clock, well, we invented music.
So, since dying is a necessary part of life, what might we create with this fact?
By "play" I am in no way suggesting we take a light approach to dying or that we mandate any particular way of dying.
There are mountains of sorrow that cannot move, and one way or another, we will all kneel there.
Rather, I am asking that we make space -- physical, psychic room, to allow life to play itself all the way out -- so that rather than just getting out of the way, aging and dying can become a process of crescendo through to the end.
We can't solve for death.
I know some of you are working on this.
(Laughter) Meanwhile, we can -- (Laughter) We can design towards it.
Parts of me died early on, and that's something we can all say one way or another.
I got to redesign my life around this fact, and I tell you it has been a liberation to realize you can always find a shock of beauty or meaning in what life you have left, like that snowball lasting for a perfect moment, all the while melting away.
If we love such moments ferociously, then maybe we can learn to live well -- not in spite of death, but because of it.
Let death be what takes us, not lack of imagination.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What I'd like to do is talk to you a little bit about fear and the cost of fear and the age of fear from which we are now emerging.
I would like you to feel comfortable with my doing that by letting you know that I know something about fear and anxiety.
I'm a Jewish guy from New Jersey.
(Laughter) I could worry before I could walk.
(Laughter) Please, applaud that.
(Applause) Thank you.
But I also grew up in a time where there was something to fear.
We were brought out in the hall when I was a little kid and taught how to put our coats over our heads to protect us from global thermonuclear war.
Now even my seven-year-old brain knew that wasn't going to work.
But I also knew that global thermonuclear war was something to be concerned with.
And yet, despite the fact that we lived for 50 years with the threat of such a war, the response of our government and of our society was to do wonderful things.
We created the space program in response to that.
We built our highway system in response to that.
We created the Internet in response to that.
So sometimes fear can produce a constructive response.
But sometimes it can produce an un-constructive response.
On September 11, 2001, 19 guys took over four airplanes and flew them into a couple of buildings.
They exacted a horrible toll.
It is not for us to minimize what that toll was.
But the response that we had was clearly disproportionate -- disproportionate to the point of verging on the unhinged.
We rearranged the national security apparatus of the United States and of many governments to address a threat that, at the time that those attacks took place, was quite limited.
In fact, according to our intelligence services, on September 11, 2001, there were 100 members of core Al-Qaeda.
There were just a few thousand terrorists.
They posed an existential threat to no one.
But we rearranged our entire national security apparatus in the most sweeping way since the end of the Second World War.
We launched two wars.
We spent trillions of dollars.
We suspended our values.
We violated international law.
We embraced torture.
We embraced the idea that if these 19 guys could do this, anybody could do it.
And therefore, for the first time in history, we were seeing everybody as a threat.
And what was the result of that?
Surveillance programs that listened in on the emails and phone calls of entire countries -- hundreds of millions of people -- setting aside whether those countries were our allies, setting aside what our interests were.
I would argue that 15 years later, since today there are more terrorists, more terrorist attacks, more terrorist casualties -- this by the count of the U.S. State Department -- since today the region from which those attacks emanate is more unstable than at any time in its history, since the Flood, perhaps, we have not succeeded in our response.
Now you have to ask, where did we go wrong?
What did we do? What was the mistake that was made?
And you might say, well look, Washington is a dysfunctional place.
There are political food fights.
We've turned our discourse into a cage match.
And that's true.
But there are bigger problems, believe it or not, than that dysfunction, even though I would argue that dysfunction that makes it impossible to get anything done in the richest and most powerful country in the world is far more dangerous than anything that a group like ISIS could do, because it stops us in our tracks and it keeps us from progress.
But there are other problems.
And the other problems came from the fact that in Washington and in many capitals right now, we're in a creativity crisis.
In Washington, in think tanks, where people are supposed to be thinking of new ideas, you don't get bold new ideas, because if you offer up a bold new idea, not only are you attacked on Twitter, but you will not get confirmed in a government job.
Because we are reactive to the heightened venom of the political debate, you get governments that have an us-versus-them mentality, tiny groups of people making decisions.
When you sit in a room with a small group of people making decisions, what do you get?
You get groupthink.
Everybody has the same worldview, and any view from outside of the group is seen as a threat.
That's a danger.
You also have processes that become reactive to news cycles.
And so the parts of the U.S. government that do foresight, that look forward, that do strategy -- the parts in other governments that do this -- can't do it, because they're reacting to the news cycle.
And so we're not looking ahead.
On 9/11, we had a crisis because we were looking the wrong way.
Today we have a crisis because, because of 9/11, we are still looking in the wrong direction, and we know because we see transformational trends on the horizon that are far more important than what we saw on 9/11; far more important than the threat posed by these terrorists; far more important even than the instability that we've got in some areas of the world that are racked by instability today.
In fact, the things that we are seeing in those parts of the world may be symptoms.
They may be a reaction to bigger trends.
And if we are treating the symptom and ignoring the bigger trend, then we've got far bigger problems to deal with.
And so what are those trends?
Well, to a group like you, the trends are apparent.
We are living at a moment in which the very fabric of human society is being rewoven.
If you saw the cover of The Economist a couple of days ago -- it said that 80 percent of the people on the planet, by the year 2020, would have a smartphone.
They would have a small computer connected to the Internet in their pocket.
In most of Africa, the cell phone penetration rate is 80 percent.
We passed the point last October when there were more mobile cellular devices, SIM cards, out in the world than there were people.
We are within years of a profound moment in our history, when effectively every single human being on the planet is going to be part of a man-made system for the first time, able to touch anyone else -- touch them for good, touch them for ill.
And the changes associated with that are changing the very nature of every aspect of governance and life on the planet in ways that our leaders ought to be thinking about, when they're thinking about these immediate threats.
On the security side, we've come out of a Cold War in which it was too costly to fight a nuclear war, and so we didn't, to a period that I call Cool War, cyber war, where the costs of conflict are actually so low, that we may never stop.
We may enter a period of constant warfare, and we know this because we've been in it for several years.
And yet, we don't have the basic doctrines to guide us in this regard.
We don't have the basic ideas formulated.
If someone attacks us with a cyber attack, do have the ability to respond with a kinetic attack?
We don't know.
If somebody launches a cyber attack, how do we deter them?
When China launched a series of cyber attacks, what did the U.S. government do?
It said, we're going to indict a few of these Chinese guys, who are never coming to America.
They're never going to be anywhere near a law enforcement officer who's going to take them into custody.
It's a gesture -- it's not a deterrent.
Special forces operators out there in the field today discover that small groups of insurgents with cell phones have access to satellite imagery that once only superpowers had.
In fact, if you've got a cell phone, you've got access to power that a superpower didn't have, and would have highly classified 10 years ago.
In my cell phone, I have an app that tells me where every plane in the world is, and its altitude, and its speed, and what kind of aircraft it is, and where it's going and where it's landing.
They have apps that allow them to know what their adversary is about to do.
They're using these tools in new ways.
When a cafe in Sydney was taken over by a terrorist, he went in with a rifle...
and an iPad.
And the weapon was the iPad.
Because he captured people, he terrorized them, he pointed the iPad at them, and then he took the video and he put it on the Internet, and he took over the world's media.
But it doesn't just affect the security side.
The relations between great powers -- we thought we were past the bipolar era.
We thought we were in a unipolar world, where all the big issues were resolved.
Remember? It was the end of history.
But we're not.
We're now seeing that our basic assumptions about the Internet -- that it was going to connect us, weave society together -- are not necessarily true.
In countries like China, you have the Great Firewall of China.
You've got countries saying no, if the Internet happens within our borders we control it within our borders.
We control the content. We are going to control our security.
We are going to manage that Internet.
We are going to say what can be on it.
We're going to set a different set of rules.
Now you might think, well, that's just China.
But it's not just China.
It's China, India, Russia.
It's Saudi Arabia, it's Singapore, it's Brazil.
After the NSA scandal, the Russians, the Chinese, the Indians, the Brazilians, they said, let's create a new Internet backbone, because we can't be dependent on this other one.
And so all of a sudden, what do you have?
You have a new bipolar world in which cyber-internationalism, our belief, is challenged by cyber-nationalism, another belief.
We are seeing these changes everywhere we look.
We are seeing the advent of mobile money.
It's happening in the places you wouldn't expect.
It's happening in Kenya and Tanzania, where millions of people who haven't had access to financial services now conduct all those services on their phones.
There are 2.5 million people who don't have financial service access that are going to get it soon.
A billion of them are going to have the ability to access it on their cell phone soon.
It's not just going to give them the ability to bank.
It's going to change what monetary policy is.
It's going to change what money is.
Education is changing in the same way.
Healthcare is changing in the same way.
How government services are delivered is changing in the same way.
And yet, in Washington, we are debating whether to call the terrorist group that has taken over Syria and Iraq ISIS or ISIL or Islamic State.
We are trying to determine how much we want to give in a negotiation with the Iranians on a nuclear deal which deals with the technologies of 50 years ago, when in fact, we know that the Iranians right now are engaged in cyber war with us and we're ignoring it, partially because businesses are not willing to talk about the attacks that are being waged on them.
And that gets us to another breakdown that's crucial, and another breakdown that couldn't be more important to a group like this, because the growth of America and real American national security and all of the things that drove progress even during the Cold War, was a public-private partnership between science, technology and government that began when Thomas Jefferson sat alone in his laboratory inventing new things.
But it was the canals and railroads and telegraph; it was radar and the Internet.
It was Tang, the breakfast drink -- probably not the most important of those developments.
But what you had was a partnership and a dialogue, and the dialogue has broken down.
It's broken down because in Washington, less government is considered more.
It's broken down because there is, believe it or not, in Washington, a war on science -- despite the fact that in all of human history, every time anyone has waged a war on science, science has won.
(Applause) But we have a government that doesn't want to listen, that doesn't have people at the highest levels that understand this.
In the nuclear age, when there were people in senior national security jobs, they were expected to speak throw-weight.
They were expected to know the lingo, the vocabulary.
If you went to the highest level of the U.S. government now and said, "Talk to me about cyber, about neuroscience, about the things that are going to change the world of tomorrow," you'd get a blank stare.
I know, because when I wrote this book, I talked to 150 people, many from the science and tech side, who felt like they were being shunted off to the kids' table.
Meanwhile, on the tech side, we have lots of wonderful people creating wonderful things, but they started in garages and they didn't need the government and they don't want the government.
Many of them have a political view that's somewhere between libertarian and anarchic: leave me alone.
But the world's coming apart.
All of a sudden, there are going to be massive regulatory changes and massive issues associated with conflict and massive issues associated with security and privacy.
And we haven't even gotten to the next set of issues, which are philosophical issues.
If you can't vote, if you can't have a job, if you can't bank, if you can't get health care, if you can't be educated without Internet access, is Internet access a fundamental right that should be written into constitutions?
If Internet access is a fundamental right, is electricity access for the 1.2 billion who don't have access to electricity a fundamental right?
These are fundamental issues. Where are the philosophers?
Where's the dialogue?
And that brings me to the reason that I'm here.
I live in Washington. Pity me.
(Laughter) The dialogue isn't happening there.
These big issues that will change the world, change national security, change economics, create hope, create threats, can only be resolved when you bring together groups of people who understand science and technology back together with government.
Both sides need each other.
And until we recreate that connection, until we do what helped America grow and helped other countries grow, then we are going to grow ever more vulnerable.
The risks associated with 9/11 will not be measured in terms of lives lost by terror attacks or buildings destroyed or trillions of dollars spent.
They'll be measured in terms of the costs of our distraction from critical issues and our inability to get together scientists, technologists, government leaders, at a moment of transformation akin to the beginning of the Renaissance, akin to the beginning of the major transformational eras that have happened on Earth, and start coming up with, if not the right answers, then at least the right questions.
We are not there yet, but discussions like this and groups like you are the places where those questions can be formulated and posed.
And that's why I believe that groups like TED, discussions like this around the planet, are the place where the future of foreign policy, of economic policy, of social policy, of philosophy, will ultimately take place.
And that's why it's been a pleasure speaking to you.
Thank you very, very much.
(Applause)
Billie Jean King: Hi, everyone!
(Applause) Thanks, Pat.
Thank you!
Getting me all wound up, now!
(Laughter) Pat Mitchell: Good!
You know, when I was watching the video again of the match, you must have felt like the fate of the world's women was on every stroke you took.
Were you feeling that?
BJK: First of all, Bobby Riggs -- he was the former number one player, he wasn't just some hacker, by the way.
He was one of my heroes and I admired him.
And that's the reason I beat him, actually, because I respected him.
(Laughter) It's true -- my mom and especially my dad always said: "Respect your opponent, and never underestimate them, ever."
And he was correct. He was absolutely correct.
But I knew it was about social change.
And I was really nervous whenever we announced it, and I felt like the whole world was on my shoulders.
And I thought, "If I lose, it's going to put women back 50 years, at least."
Title IX had just been passed the year before -- June 23, 1972.
And women's professional tennis -- there were nine of us who signed a one-dollar contract in 1970 -- now remember, the match is in '73.
So we were only in our third year of having a tour where we could actually play, have a place to compete and make a living.
So there were nine of us that signed that one-dollar contract.
And our dream was for any girl, born any place in the world -- if she was good enough -- there would be a place for her to compete and for us to make a living.
Because before 1968, we made 14 dollars a day, and we were under the control of organizations.
So we really wanted to break away from that.
But we knew it wasn't really about our generation so much; we knew it was about the future generations.
We do stand on the shoulders of the people that came before us, there is no question.
But every generation has the chance to make it better.
That was really on my mind.
I really wanted to start matching the hearts and minds to Title IX.
Title IX, in case anybody doesn't know, which a lot of people probably don't, said that any federal funds given to a high school, college or university, either public or private, had to -- finally -- give equal monies to boys and girls.
And that changed everything.
(Applause) So you can have a law, but it's changing the hearts and minds to match up with it.
That's when it really rocks, totally.
So that was on my mind.
I wanted to start that change in the hearts and minds.
But two things came out of that match.
For women: self-confidence, empowerment.
They actually had enough nerve to ask for a raise.
Some women have waited 10, 15 years to ask.
I said, "More importantly, did you get it?"
(Laughter) And they did!
And for the men?
A lot of the men today don't realize it, but if you're in your 50s, 60s or whatever, late 40s, you're the first generation of men of the Women's Movement -- whether you like it or not!
(Laughter) (Applause) And for the men, what happened for the men, they'd come up to me -- and most times, the men are the ones who have tears in their eyes, it's very interesting.
They go, "Billie, I was very young when I saw that match, and now I have a daughter.
And I am so happy I saw that as a young man."
And one of those young men, at 12 years old, was President Obama.
And he actually told me that when I met him, he said: "You don't realize it, but I saw that match at 12.
And now I have two daughters, and it has made a difference in how I raise them."
So both men and women got a lot out of it, but different things.
PM: And now there are generations -- at least one or two -- who have experienced the equality that Title IX and other fights along the way made possible.
And for women, there are generations who have also experienced teamwork.
They got to play team sports in a way they hadn't before.
So you had a legacy already built in terms of being an athlete, a legacy of the work you did to lobby for equal pay for women athletes and the Women's Sports Foundation.
What now are you looking to accomplish with The Billie Jean King Leadership Initiative?
BJK: I think it goes back to an epiphany I had at 12.
At 11, I wanted to be the number one tennis player in the world, and a friend had asked me to play and I said, "What's that?"
Tennis was not in my family -- basketball was, other sports.
Fast forward to 12 years old, (Laughter) and I'm finally starting to play in tournaments where you get a ranking at the end of the year.
So I was daydreaming at the Los Angeles Tennis Club, and I started thinking about my sport and how tiny it was, but also that everybody who played wore white shoes, white clothes, played with white balls -- everybody who played was white.
And I said to myself, at 12 years old, "Where is everyone else?"
And that just kept sticking in my brain.
And that moment, I promised myself I'd fight for equal rights and opportunities for boys and girls, men and women, the rest of my life.
And that tennis, if I was fortunate enough to become number one -- and I knew, being a girl, it would be harder to have influence, already at that age -- that I had this platform.
And tennis is global.
And I thought, "You know what?
I've been given an opportunity that very few people have had."
I didn't know if I was going to make it -- this was only 12.
I sure wanted it, but making it is a whole other discussion.
I just remember I promised myself, and I really try to keep my word.
That's who I truly am, just fighting for people.
And, unfortunately, women have had less.
And we are considered less.
And so my attentions, where did they have to go?
It was just ... you have to.
And learn to stick up for yourself, hear your own voice.
You hear the same words keep coming out all the time, and I got really lucky because I had an education.
And I think if you can see it you can be it, you know?
If you can see it, you can be it.
You look at Pat, you look at other leaders, you look at these speakers, look at yourself, because everyone -- everyone -- can do something extraordinary.
Every single person.
PM: And your story, Billie, has inspired so many women everywhere.
Now with the Billie Jean King Leadership Initiative, you're taking on an even bigger cause.
Because one thing we hear a lot about is women taking their voice, working to find their way into leadership positions.
But what you're talking about is even bigger than that.
It's inclusive leadership.
And this is a generation that has grown up thinking more inclusively -- BJK: Isn't it great? Look at the technology!
It's amazing how it connects us all! It's about connection.
It's simply amazing what's possible because of it.
But the Billie Jean King Leadership Initiative is really about the workforce mostly, and trying to change it, so people can actually go to work and be their authentic selves.
Because most of us have two jobs: One, to fit in -- I'll give you a perfect example.
An African American woman gets up an hour earlier to go to work, straightens her hair in the bathroom, goes to the bathroom probably four, five, six times a day to keep straightening her hair, to keep making sure she fits in.
So she's working two jobs.
She's got this other job, whatever that may be, but she's also trying to fit in.
Or this poor man who kept his diploma -- he went to University of Michigan, but he never would talk about his poverty as a youngster, ever -- just would not mention it.
So he made sure they saw he was well-educated.
And then you see a gay guy who has an NFL -- which means American football for all of you out there, it's a big deal, it's very macho -- and he talked about football all the time, because he was gay and he didn't want anybody to know.
It just goes on and on.
So my wish for everyone is to be able to be their authentic self 24/7, that would be the ultimate.
And we catch ourselves -- I mean, I catch myself to this day.
Even being gay I catch myself, you know, like, (Gasp) a little uncomfortable, a little surge in my gut, feeling not totally comfortable in my own skin.
So, I think you have to ask yourself -- I want people to be themselves, whatever that is, just let it be.
PM: And the first research the Leadership Initiative did showed that, that these examples you just used -- that many of us have the problem of being authentic.
But what you've just looked at is this millennial generation, who have benefited from all these equal opportunities -- which may not be equal but exist everywhere -- BJK: First of all, I'm really lucky.
Partnership with Teneo, a strategic company that's amazing.
That's really the reason I'm able to do this.
I've had two times in my life where I've actually had men really behind me with power.
And that was in the old days with Philip Morris with Virginia Slims, and this is the second time in my entire life.
And then Deloitte.
The one thing I wanted was data -- facts.
So Deloitte sent out a survey, and over 4,000 people now have answered, and we're continuing in the workplace.
And what do the millennials feel?
Well, they feel a lot, but what they're so fantastic about is -- you know, our generation was like, "Oh, we're going to get representation."
So if you walk into a room, you see everybody represented.
That's not good enough anymore, which is so good!
So the millennials are fantastic; they want connection, engagement.
They just want you to tell us what you're feeling, what you're thinking, and get into the solution.
They're problem-solvers, and of course, you've got the information at your fingertips, compared to when I was growing up.
PM: What did the research show you about millennials?
Are they going to make a difference?
Are they going to create a world where there is really an inclusive work force?
BJK: Well, in 2025, 75 percent of the global workforce is going to be millennials.
I think they are going to help solve problems.
I think they have the wherewithal to do it.
I know they care a lot.
They have big ideas and they can make big things happen.
I want to stay in the now with the young people, I don't want to get behind.
(Laughter) PM: I don't think there's any chance!
But what you found out in the research about millennials is not really the experience that a lot of people have with millennials.
BJK: No, well, if we want to talk -- OK, I've been doing my little mini-survey.
I've been talking to the Boomers, who are their bosses, and I go, "What do you think about the millennials?"
And I'm pretty excited, like it's good, and they get this face -- (Laughter) "Oh, you mean the 'Me' generation?"
(Laughter) I say, "Do you really think so?
Because I do think they care about the environment and all these things."
And they go, "Oh, Billie, they cannot focus."
(Laughter) They actually have proven that the average focus for an 18-year-old is 37 seconds.
(Laughter) They can't focus.
And they don't really care.
I just heard a story the other night: a woman owns a gallery and she has these workers.
She gets a text from one of the workers, like an intern, she's just starting -- she goes, "Oh, by the way, I'm going to be late because I'm at the hairdresser's."
(Laughter) So she arrives, and this boss says, "What's going on?"
And she says, "Oh, I was late, sorry, how's it going?"
She says, "Well, guess what? I'd like you leave, you're finished."
She goes, "OK."
(Laughter) No problem!
PM: Now Billie, that story -- I know, but that's what scares the boomers -- I'm just telling you -- so I think it's good for us to share.
(Laughter) No, it is good for us to share, because we're our authentic selves and what we're really feeling, so we've got to take it both ways, you know?
But I have great faith because -- if you've been in sports like I have -- every generation gets better.
It's a fact.
With the Women's Sports Foundation being the advocates for Title IX still, because we're trying to keep protecting the law, because it's in a tenuous position always, so we really are concerned, and we do a lot of research.
That's very important to us.
And I want to hear from people.
But we really have to protect what Title IX stands for worldwide.
And you heard President Carter talk about how Title IX is protected.
And do you know that every single lawsuit that girls, at least in sports, have gone up against -- whatever institutions -- has won?
Title IX is there to protect us.
And it is amazing.
But we still have to get the hearts and minds -- the hearts and minds to match the legislation is huge.
PM: So what gets you up every morning?
What keeps you sustaining your work, sustaining the fight for equality, extending it, always exploring new areas, trying to find new ways ... ?
BJK: Well, I always drove my parents crazy because I was always the curious one.
I'm highly motivated.
My younger brother was a Major League Baseball player.
My poor parents did not care if we were any good.
(Laughter) And we drove them crazy because we pushed, we pushed because we wanted to be the best.
And I think it's because of what I'm hearing today in TED talks.
I think to listen to these different women, to listen to different people, to listen to President Carter -- 90 years old, by the way, and he we was throwing these figures out that I would never -- I'd have to go, "Excuse me, wait a minute, I need to get a list out of these figures."
He was rattling off -- I mean, that's amazing, I'm sorry.
PM: He's an amazing man.
(Applause) BJK: And then you're going to have President Mary Robinson, who's a former president -- Thank you, Irish! 62 percent! LGBTQ! Yes!
(Applause) Congress is voting in June on same-sex marriage, so these are things that for some people are very hard to hear.
But always remember, every one of us is an individual, a human being with a beating heart, who cares and wants to live their authentic life.
OK? You don't have to agree with somebody, but everyone has the opportunity.
I think we all have an obligation to continue to keep moving the needle forward, always.
And these people have been so inspiring.
Everyone matters.
And every one of you is an influencer.
You out there listening, out there in the world, plus the people here -- every single person's an influencer.
Never, ever forget that. OK?
So don't ever give up on yourself.
PM: Billie, you have been an inspiration for us.
BJK: Thanks, Pat!
(Applause) Thanks, TED!
(Applause) Thanks a lot!
For the last 50 years, a lot of smart, well-resourced people -- some of you, no doubt -- have been trying to figure out how to reduce poverty in the United States.
People have created and invested millions of dollars into non-profit organizations with the mission of helping people who are poor.
They've created think tanks that study issues like education, job creation and asset-building, and then advocated for policies to support our most marginalized communities.
They've written books and columns and given passionate speeches, decrying the wealth gap that is leaving more and more people entrenched at the bottom end of the income scale.
And that effort has helped.
But it's not enough.
Our poverty rates haven't changed that much in the last 50 years, since the War on Poverty was launched.
I'm here to tell you that we have overlooked the most powerful and practical resource.
Here it is: people who are poor.
Up in the left-hand corner is Jobana, Sintia and Bertha.
They met when they all had small children, through a parenting class at a family resource center in San Francisco.
As they grew together as parents and friends, they talked a lot about how hard it was to make money when your kids are little.
Child care is expensive, more than they'd earn in a job.
Their husbands worked, but they wanted to contribute financially, too.
So they hatched a plan.
They started a cleaning business.
They plastered neighborhoods with flyers and handed business cards out to their families and friends, and soon, they had clients calling.
Two of them would clean the office or house and one of them would watch the kids.
They'd rotate who'd cleaned and who'd watch the kids.
(Laughs) It's awesome, right?
(Laughter) And they split the money three ways.
It was not a full-time gig, no one could watch the little ones all day.
But it made a difference for their families.
Extra money to pay for bills when a husband's work hours were cut.
Money to buy the kids clothes as they were growing.
A little extra money in their pockets to make them feel some independence.
Up in the top-right corner is Theresa and her daughter, Brianna.
Brianna is one of those kids with this sparkly, infectious, outgoing personality.
For example, when Rosie, a little girl who spoke only Spanish, moved in next door, Brianna, who spoke only English, borrowed her mother's tablet and found a translation app so the two of them could communicate.
(Laughter) I know, right?
Rosie's family credits Brianna with helping Rosie to learn English.
A few years ago, Brianna started to struggle academically.
She was growing frustrated and kind of withdrawn and acting out in class.
And her mother was heartbroken over what was happening.
Then they found out that she was going to have to repeat second grade and Brianna was devastated.
Her mother felt hopeless and overwhelmed and alone because she knew that her daughter was not getting the support she needed, and she did not know how to help her.
One afternoon, Theresa was catching up with a group of friends, and one of them said, "Theresa, how are you?"
And she burst into tears.
After she shared her story, one of her friends said, "I went through the exact same thing with my son about a year ago."
And in that moment, Theresa realized that so much of her struggle was not having anybody to talk with about it.
So she created a support group for parents like her.
The first meeting was her and two other people.
But word spread, and soon 20 people, 30 people were showing up for these monthly meetings that she put together.
She went from feeling helpless to realizing how capable she was of supporting her daughter, with the support of other people who were going through the same struggle.
And Brianna is doing fantastic -- she's doing great academically and socially.
That in the middle is my man Baakir, standing in front of BlackStar Books and Caffe, which he runs out of part of his house.
As you walk in the door, Baakir greets you with a "Welcome black home."
(Laughter) Once inside, you can order some Algiers jerk chicken, perhaps a vegan walnut burger, or jive turkey sammich.
And that's sammich -- not sandwich.
You must finish your meal with a buttermilk drop, which is several steps above a donut hole and made from a very secret family recipe.
For real, it's very secret, he won't tell you about it.
But BlackStar is much more than a caf.
For the kids in the neighborhood, it's a place to go after school to get help with homework.
For the grown-ups, it's where they go to find out what's going on in the neighborhood and catch up with friends.
It's a performance venue.
It's a home for poets, musicians and artists.
Baakir and his partner Nicole, with their baby girl strapped to her back, are there in the mix of it all, serving up a cup of coffee, teaching a child how to play Mancala, or painting a sign for an upcoming community event.
I have worked with and learned from people just like them for more than 20 years.
I have organized against the prison system, which impacts poor folks, especially black, indigenous and Latino folks, at an alarming rate.
I have worked with young people who manifest hope and promise, despite being at the effect of racist discipline practices in their schools, and police violence in their communities.
I have learned from families who are unleashing their ingenuity and tenacity to collectively create their own solutions.
And they're not just focused on money.
They're addressing education, housing, health, community -- the things that we all care about.
Everywhere I go, I see people who are broke but not broken.
I see people who are struggling to realize their good ideas, so that they can create a better life for themselves, their families, their communities.
Jobana, Sintia, Bertha, Theresa and Baakir are the rule, not the shiny exception.
I am the exception.
I was raised by a quietly fierce single mother in Rochester, New York.
I was bussed to a school in the suburbs, from a neighborhood that many of my classmates and their parents considered dangerous.
At eight, I was a latchkey kid.
I'd get myself home after school every day and do homework and chores, and wait for my mother to come home.
After school, I'd go to the corner store and buy a can of Chef Boyardee ravioli, which I'd heat up on the stove as my afternoon snack.
If I had a little extra money, I'd buy a Hostess Fruit Pie.
(Laughter) Cherry.
Not as good as a buttermilk drop.
(Laughter) We were poor when I was a kid.
But now, I own a home in a quickly gentrifying neighborhood in Oakland, California.
I've built a career.
My husband is a business owner.
I have a retirement account.
My daughter is not even allowed to turn on the stove unless there's a grown-up at home and she doesn't have to, because she does not have to have the same kind of self-reliance that I had to at her age.
My kids' raviolis are organic and full of things like spinach and ricotta, because I have the luxury of choice when it comes to what my children eat.
I am the exception, not because I'm more talented than Baakir or my mother worked any harder than Jobana, Sintia or Bertha, or cared any more than Theresa.
Marginalized communities are full of smart, talented people, hustling and working and innovating, just like our most revered and most rewarded CEOs.
They are full of people tapping into their resilience to get up every day, get the kids off to school and go to jobs that don't pay enough, or get educations that are putting them in debt.
They are full of people applying their savvy intelligence to stretch a minimum wage paycheck, or balance a job and a side hustle to make ends meet.
They are full of people doing for themselves and for others, whether it's picking up medication for an elderly neighbor, or letting a sibling borrow some money to pay the phone bill, or just watching out for the neighborhood kids from the front stoop.
I am the exception because of luck and privilege, not hard work.
And I'm not being modest or self-deprecating -- I am amazing.
(Laughter) But most people work hard.
Hard work is the common denominator in this equation, and I'm tired of the story we tell that hard work leads to success, because that allows -- Thank you.
(Applause) ... because that story allows those of us who make it to believe we deserve it, and by implication, those who don't make it don't deserve it.
We tell ourselves, in the back of our minds, and sometimes in the front of our mouths, "There must be something a little wrong with those poor people."
We have a wide range of beliefs about what that something wrong is.
Some people tell the story that poor folks are lazy freeloaders who would cheat and lie to get out of an honest day's work.
Others prefer the story that poor people are helpless and probably had neglectful parents that didn't read to them enough, and if they were just told what to do and shown the right path, they could make it.
For every story I hear demonizing low-income single mothers or absentee fathers, which is how people might think of my parents, I've got 50 that tell a different story about the same people, showing up every day and doing their best.
I'm not saying that some of the negative stories aren't true, but those stories allow us to not really see who people really are, because they don't paint a full picture.
The quarter-truths and limited plot lines have us convinced that poor people are a problem that needs fixing.
What if we recognized that what's working is the people and what's broken is our approach?
What if we realized that the experts we are looking for, the experts we need to follow, are poor people themselves?
What if, instead of imposing solutions, we just added fire to the already-burning flame that they have?
Not directing -- not even empowering -- but just fueling their initiative.
Just north of here, we have an example of what this could look like: Silicon Valley.
A whole venture capital industry has grown up around the belief that if people have good ideas and the desire to manifest them, we should give them lots and lots and lots of money.
(Laughter) Right? But where is our strategy for Theresa and Baakir?
There are no incubators for them, no accelerators, no fellowships.
How are Jobana, Sintia and Bertha really all that different from the Mark Zuckerbergs of the world?
Baakir has experience and a track record.
I'd put my money on him.
So, consider this an invitation to rethink a flawed strategy.
Let's grasp this opportunity to let go of a tired, faulty narrative and listen and look for true stories, more beautifully complex stories, about who marginalized people and families and communities are.
I'm going to take a minute to speak to my people.
We cannot wait for somebody else to get it right.
Let us remember what we are capable of; all that we have built with blood, sweat and dreams; all the cogs that keep turning; and the people kept afloat because of our backbreaking work.
Let us remember that we are magic.
If you need some inspiration to jog your memory, read Octavia Butler's "Parable of the Sower."
Listen to Reverend King's "Letter from Birmingham Jail."
Listen to Suheir Hammad recite "First Writing Since," or Esperanza Spalding perform "Black Gold."
Set your gaze upon the art of Kehinde Wiley or Favianna Rodriguez.
Look at the hands of your grandmother or into the eyes of someone who loves you.
We are magic.
Individually, we don't have a lot of wealth and power, but collectively, we are unstoppable.
And we spend a lot of our time and energy organizing our power to demand change from systems that were not made for us.
Instead of trying to alter the fabric of existing ways, let's weave and cut some fierce new cloth.
Let's use some of our substantial collective power toward inventing and bringing to life new ways of being that work for us.
Desmond Tutu talks about the concept of ubuntu, in the context of South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation process that they embarked on after apartheid.
He says it means, "My humanity is caught up, is inextricably bound up, in yours; we belong to a bundle of life."
A bundle of life.
The Truth and Reconciliation process started by elevating the voices of the unheard.
If this country is going to live up to its promise of liberty and justice for all, then we need to elevate the voices of our unheard, of people like Jobana, Sintia and Bertha, Theresa and Baakir.
We must leverage their solutions and their ideas.
We must listen to their true stories, their more beautifully complex stories.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here to recruit men to support gender equality.
(Cheers) Wait, wait. What?
What do men have to do with gender equality?
Gender equality is about women, right?
I mean, the word gender is about women.
Actually, I'm even here speaking as a middle class white man.
Now, I wasn't always a middle class white man.
It all happened for me about 30 years ago when I was in graduate school, and a bunch of us graduate students got together one day, and we said, you know, there's an explosion of writing and thinking in feminist theory, but there's no courses yet.
So we did what graduate students typically do in a situation like that.
We said, OK, let's have a study group.
We'll read a text, we'll talk about it, we'll have a potluck dinner.
(Laughter) So every week, 11 women and me got together.
(Laughter) We would read some text in feminist theory and have a conversation about it.
And during one of our conversations, I witnessed an interaction that changed my life forever.
It was a conversation between two women.
One of the women was white, and one was black.
And the white woman said -- this is going to sound very anachronistic now -- the white woman said, "All women face the same oppression as women.
All women are similarly situated in patriarchy, and therefore all women have a kind of intuitive solidarity or sisterhood."
And the black woman said, "I'm not so sure.
Let me ask you a question."
So the black woman says to the white woman, "When you wake up in the morning and you look in the mirror, what do you see?"
And the white woman said, "I see a woman."
And the black woman said, "You see, that's the problem for me.
Because when I wake up in the morning and I look in the mirror," she said, "I see a black woman.
To me, race is visible. But to you, race is invisible. You don't see it."
And then she said something really startling.
She said, "That's how privilege works.
Privilege is invisible to those who have it."
It is a luxury, I will say to the white people sitting in this room, not to have to think about race every split second of our lives.
Privilege is invisible to those who have it.
Now remember, I was the only man in this group, so when I witnessed this, I went, "Oh no."
(Laughter) And somebody said, "Well what was that reaction?"
And I said, "Well, when I wake up in the morning and I look in the mirror, I see a human being.
I'm kind of the generic person.
You know, I'm a middle class white man. I have no race, no class, no gender.
I'm universally generalizable."
(Laughter) So I like to think that was the moment I became a middle class white man, that class and race and gender were not about other people, they were about me.
I had to start thinking about them, and it had been privilege that had kept it invisible to me for so long.
Now, I wish I could tell you this story ends 30 years ago in that little discussion group, but I was reminded of it quite recently at my university where I teach.
I have a colleague, and she and I both teach the sociology of gender course on alternate semesters.
So she gives a guest lecture for me when I teach.
I give a guest lecture for her when she teaches.
So I walk into her class to give a guest lecture, about 300 students in the room, and as I walk in, one of the students looks up and says, "Oh, finally, an objective opinion."
All that semester, whenever my colleague opened her mouth, what my students saw was a woman.
I mean, if you were to say to my students, "There is structural inequality based on gender in the United States," they'd say, "Well of course you'd say that.
You're a woman. You're biased."
When I say it, they go, "Wow, is that interesting.
Is that going to be on the test? How do you spell 'structural'?"
(Laughter) So I hope you all can see, this is what objectivity looks like.
(Laughter) (Applause) Disembodied Western rationality.
(Laughter) And that, by the way, is why I think men so often wear ties.
(Laughter) Because if you are going to embody disembodied Western rationality, you need a signifier, and what could be a better signifier of disembodied Western rationality than a garment that at one end is a noose and the other end points to the genitals?
(Laughter) (Applause) That is mind-body dualism right there.
So making gender visible to men is the first step to engaging men to support gender equality.
Now, when men first hear about gender equality, when they first start thinking about it, they often think, many men think, well, that's right, that's fair, that's just, that's the ethical imperative.
But not all men.
Some men think -- the lightning bolt goes off, and they go, "Oh my God, yes, gender equality," and they will immediately begin to mansplain to you your oppression.
They see supporting gender equality something akin to the cavalry, like, "Thanks very much for bringing this to our attention, ladies, we'll take it from here."
This results in a syndrome that I like to call 'premature self-congratulation.' (Laughter) (Applause) There's another group, though, that actively resists gender equality, that sees gender equality as something that is detrimental to men.
I was on a TV talk show opposite four white men.
This is the beginning of the book I wrote, 'Angry White Men.' These were four angry white men who believed that they, white men in America, were the victims of reverse discrimination in the workplace.
And they all told stories about how they were qualified for jobs, qualified for promotions, they didn't get them, they were really angry.
And the reason I'm telling you this is I want you to hear the title of this particular show.
It was a quote from one of the men, and the quote was, "A Black Woman Stole My Job."
And they all told their stories, qualified for jobs, qualified for promotions, didn't get it, really angry.
And then it was my turn to speak, and I said, "I have just one question for you guys, and it's about the title of the show, 'A Black Woman Stole My Job.' Actually, it's about one word in the title.
I want to know about the word 'my.' Where did you get the idea it was your job?
Why isn't the title of the show, 'A Black Woman Got the Job?' or 'A Black Woman Got A Job?'" Because without confronting men's sense of entitlement, I don't think we'll ever understand why so many men resist gender equality.
(Applause) Look, we think this is a level playing field, so any policy that tilts it even a little bit, we think, "Oh my God, water's rushing uphill.
It's reverse discrimination against us."
(Laughter) So let me be very clear: white men in Europe and the United States are the beneficiaries of the single greatest affirmative action program in the history of the world.
It is called "the history of the world."
(Laughter) (Applause) So, now I've established some of the obstacles to engaging men, but why should we support gender equality?
Of course, it's fair, it's right and it's just.
But more than that, gender equality is also in our interest as men.
If you listen to what men say about what they want in their lives, gender equality is actually a way for us to get the lives we want to live.
Gender equality is good for countries.
It turns out, according to most studies, that those countries that are the most gender equal are also the countries that score highest on the happiness scale.
And that's not just because they're all in Europe.
(Laughter) Even within Europe, those countries that are more gender equal also have the highest levels of happiness.
It is also good for companies.
Research by Catalyst and others has shown conclusively that the more gender-equal companies are, the better it is for workers, the happier their labor force is.
They have lower job turnover. They have lower levels of attrition.
They have an easier time recruiting.
They have higher rates of retention, higher job satisfaction, higher rates of productivity.
So the question I'm often asked in companies is, "Boy, this gender equality thing, that's really going to be expensive, huh?"
And I say, "Oh no, in fact, what you have to start calculating is how much gender inequality is already costing you.
It is extremely expensive."
So it is good for business.
And the other thing is, it's good for men.
It is good for the kind of lives we want to live, because young men especially have changed enormously, and they want to have lives that are animated by terrific relationships with their children.
They expect their partners, their spouses, their wives, to work outside the home and be just as committed to their careers as they are.
I was talking, to give you an illustration of this change -- Some of you may remember this.
When I was a lot younger, there was a riddle that was posed to us.
Some of you may wince to remember this riddle.
This riddle went something like this.
A man and his son are driving on the freeway, and they're in a terrible accident, and the father is killed, and the son is brought to the hospital emergency room, and as they're bringing the son into the hospital emergency room, the emergency room attending physician sees the boy and says, "Oh, I can't treat him, that's my son."
How is this possible?
We were flummoxed by this.
We could not figure this out.
(Laughter) Well, I decided to do a little experiment with my 16-year old son.
He had a bunch of his friends hanging out at the house watching a game on TV recently.
So I decided I would pose this riddle to them, just to see, to gauge the level of change.
Well, 16-year-old boys, they immediately turned to me and said, "It's his mom." Right?
No problem. Just like that.
Except for my son, who said, "Well, he could have two dads."
(Laughter) (Applause) That's an index, an indicator of how things have changed.
Younger men today expect to be able to balance work and family.
They want to be dual-career, dual-carer couples.
They want to be able to balance work and family with their partners.
They want to be involved fathers.
Now, it turns out that the more egalitarian our relationships, the happier both partners are.
Data from psychologists and sociologists are quite persuasive here.
I think we have the persuasive numbers, the data, to prove to men that gender equality is not a zero-sum game, but a win-win.
Here's what the data show.
Now, when men begin the process of engaging with balancing work and family, we often have two phrases that we use to describe what we do.
We pitch in and we help out.
(Laughter) And I'm going to propose something a little bit more radical, one word: "share."
(Laughter) Because here's what the data show: when men share housework and childcare, their children do better in school.
Their children have lower rates of absenteeism, higher rates of achievement.
They are less likely to be diagnosed with ADHD.
They are less likely to see a child psychiatrist.
They are less likely to be put on medication.
So when men share housework and childcare, their children are happier and healthier, and men want this.
When men share housework and childcare, their wives are happier. Duh.
Not only that, their wives are healthier.
Their wives are less likely to see a therapist, less likely to be diagnosed with depression, less likely to be put on medication, more likely to go to the gym, report higher levels of marital satisfaction.
So when men share housework and childcare, their wives are happier and healthier, and men certainly want this as well.
When men share housework and childcare, the men are healthier.
They smoke less, drink less, take recreational drugs less often.
They are less likely to go to the ER but more like to go to a doctor for routine screenings.
They are less likely to see a therapist, less likely to be diagnosed with depression, less likely to be taking prescription medication.
So when men share housework and childcare, the men are happier and healthier.
And who wouldn't want that?
And finally, when men share housework and childcare, they have more sex.
(Laughter) Now, of these four fascinating findings, which one do you think Men's Health magazine put on its cover?
(Laughter) "Housework Makes Her Horny.
(Not When She Does It.)" (Laughter) Now, I will say, just to remind the men in the audience, these data were collected over a really long period of time, so I don't want listeners to say, "Hmm, OK, I think I'll do the dishes tonight."
These data were collected over a really long period of time.
But I think it shows something important, that when Men's Health magazine put it on their cover, they also called, you'll love this, "Choreplay."
So, what we found is something really important, that gender equality is in the interest of countries, of companies, and of men, and their children and their partners, that gender equality is not a zero-sum game.
It's not a win-lose.
It is a win-win for everyone.
And what we also know is we cannot fully empower women and girls unless we engage boys and men.
We know this.
And my position is that men need the very things that women have identified that they need to live the lives they say they want to live in order to live the lives that we say we want to live.
In 1915, on the eve of one of the great suffrage demonstrations down Fifth Avenue in New York City, a writer in New York wrote an article in a magazine, and the title of the article was, "Feminism for Men."
And this was the first line of that article: "Feminism will make it possible for the first time for men to be free."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Thank you so much everyone from TED, and Chris and Amy in particular.
I cannot believe I'm here.
I have not slept in weeks.
Neil and I were sitting there comparing how little we've slept in anticipation for this. I've never been so nervous -- and I do this when I'm nervous, I just realized. (Laughter) So, I'm going to talk about sort of what we did at this organization called 826 Valencia, and then I'm going to talk about how we all might join in and do similar things.
Back in about 2000, I was living in Brooklyn, I was trying to finish my first book, I was wandering around dazed every day because I wrote from 12 a.m. to 5 a.m.
So I would walk around in a daze during the day.
I had no mental acuity to speak of during the day, but I had flexible hours.
In the Brooklyn neighborhood that I lived in, Park Slope, there are a lot of writers -- it's like a very high per capita ratio of writers to normal people.
Meanwhile, I had grown up around a lot of teachers.
My mom was a teacher, my sister became a teacher and after college so many of my friends went into teaching.
And so I was always hearing them talk about their lives and how inspiring they were, and they were really sort of the most hard-working and constantly inspiring people I knew.
But I knew so many of the things they were up against, so many of the struggles they were dealing with.
And one of them was that so many of my friends that were teaching in city schools were having trouble with their students keeping up at grade level, in their reading and writing in particular.
Now, so many of these students had come from households where English isn't spoken in the home, where a lot of them have different special needs, learning disabilities. And of course they're working in schools which sometimes and very often are under-funded.
And so they would talk to me about this and say, "You know, what we really need is just more people, more bodies, more one-on-one attention, more hours, more expertise from people that have skills in English and can work with these students one-on-one."
Now, I would say, "Well, why don't you just work with them one-on-one?"
And they would say, "Well, we have five classes of 30 to 40 students each.
This can lead up to 150, 180, 200 students a day.
How can we possibly give each student even one hour a week of one-on-one attention?"
You'd have to greatly multiply the workweek and clone the teachers.
And so we started talking about this.
And at the same time, I thought about this massive group of people I knew: writers, editors, journalists, graduate students, assistant professors, you name it.
All these people that had sort of flexible daily hours and an interest in the English word -- I hope to have an interest in the English language, but I'm not speaking it well right now. (Laughter) I'm trying. That clock has got me.
But everyone that I knew had an interest in the primacy of the written word in terms of nurturing a democracy, nurturing an enlightened life.
And so they had, you know, their time and their interest, but at the same time there wasn't a conduit that I knew of in my community to bring these two communities together.
So when I moved back to San Francisco, we rented this building.
And the idea was to put McSweeney's -- McSweeney's Quarterly, that we published twice or three times a year, and a few other magazines -- we were going to move it into an office for the first time.
It used to be in my kitchen in Brooklyn.
We were going to move it into an office, and we were going to actually share space with a tutoring center.
So we thought, "We'll have all these writers and editors and everybody -- sort of a writing community -- coming into the office every day anyway, why don't we just open up the front of the building for students to come in there after school, get extra help on their written homework, so you have basically no border between these two communities?"
So the idea was that we would be working on whatever we're working on, at 2:30 p.m. the students flow in and you put down what you're doing, or you trade, or you work a little bit later or whatever it is.
You give those hours in the afternoon to the students in the neighborhood.
So, we had this place, we rented it, the landlord was all for it. We did this mural, that's a Chris Ware mural, that basically explains the entire history of the printed word, in mural form -- it takes a long time to digest and you have to stand in the middle of the road.
So we rented this space.
And everything was great except the landlord said, "Well, the space is zoned for retail; you have to come up with something.
You've gotta sell something.
You can't just have a tutoring center."
So we thought, "Ha ha! Really!"
And we couldn't think of anything necessarily to sell, but we did all the necessary research.
It used to be a weight room, so there were rubber floors below, acoustic tile ceilings and fluorescent lights.
We took all that down, and we found beautiful wooden floors, whitewashed beams and it had the look -- while we were renovating this place, somebody said, "You know, it really kind of looks like the hull of a ship."
And we looked around and somebody else said, "Well, you should sell supplies to the working buccaneer." (Laughter) And so this is what we did. So it made everybody laugh, and we said, "There's a point to that.
Let's sell pirate supplies." This is the pirate supply store.
You see, this is sort of a sketch I did on a napkin.
A great carpenter built all this stuff and you see, we made it look sort of pirate supply-like.
Here you see planks sold by the foot and we have supplies to combat scurvy.
We have the peg legs there, that are all handmade and fitted to you.
Up at the top, you see the eyepatch display, which is the black column there for everyday use for your eyepatch, and then you have the pastel and other colors for stepping out at night -- special occasions, bar mitzvahs and whatever.
So we opened this place. And this is a vat that we fill with treasures that students dig in.
This is replacement eyes in case you lose one.
These are some signs that we have all over the place: "Practical Joking with Pirates."
While you're reading the sign, we pull a rope behind the counter and eight mop heads drop on your head.
That was just my one thing -- I said we had to have something that drops on people's heads.
It became mop heads. And this is the fish theater, which is just a saltwater tank with three seats, and then right behind it we set up this space, which was the tutoring center.
So right there is the tutoring center, and then behind the curtain were the McSweeney's offices, where all of us would be working on the magazine and book editing and things like that.
The kids would come in -- or we thought they would come in. I should back up.
We set the place up, we opened up, we spent months and months renovating this place.
We had tables, chairs, computers, everything.
I went to a dot-com auction at a Holiday Inn in Palo Alto and I bought 11 G4s with a stroke of a paddle.
Anyway, we bought 'em, we set everything up and then we waited.
It was started with about 12 of my friends, people that I had known for years that were writers in the neighborhood.
And we sat. And at 2:30 p.m. we put a sandwich board out on the front sidewalk and it just said, "Free Tutoring for Your English-Related and Writing-Related Needs -- Just Come In, It's All Free."
And we thought, "Oh, they're going to storm the gates, they're gonna love it." And they didn't.
And so we waited, we sat at the tables, we waited and waited.
And everybody was becoming very discouraged because it was weeks and weeks that we waited, really, where nobody came in.
And then somebody alerted us to the fact that maybe there was a trust gap, because we were operating behind a pirate supply store. (Laughter) We never put it together, you know?
And so then, around that time, I persuaded a woman named Nineveh Caligari, a longtime San Francisco educator -- she was teaching in Mexico City, she had all the experience necessary, knew everything about education, was connected with all the teachers and community members in the neighborhood -- I convinced her to move up from Mexico City where she was teaching.
She took over as executive director.
Immediately, she made the inroads with the teachers and the parents and the students and everything, and so suddenly it was actually full every day.
And what we were trying to offer every day was one-on-one attention.
The goal was to have a one-to-one ratio with every one of these students.
You know, it's been proven that 35 to 40 hours a year with one-on-one attention, a student can get one grade level higher.
And so most of these students, English is not spoken in the home.
They come there, many times their parents -- you can't see it, but there's a church pew that I bought in a Berkeley auction right there -- the parents will sometimes watch while their kids are being tutored.
So that was the basis of it, was one-on-one attention.
And we found ourselves full every day with kids.
If you're on Valencia Street within those few blocks at around 2 p.m., 2:30 p.m., you will get run over, often, by the kids and their big backpacks, or whatever, actually running to this space, which is very strange, because it's school, in a way.
But there was something psychological happening there that was just a little bit different.
And the other thing was, there was no stigma.
Kids weren't going into the "Center-for-Kids-That-Need-More-Help," or something like that. It was 826 Valencia.
First of all, it was a pirate supply store, which is insane.
And then secondly, there's a publishing company in the back.
And so our interns were actually working at the same tables very often, and shoulder-to-shoulder, computer-next-to-computer with the students.
And so it became a tutoring center -- publishing center, is what we called it -- and a writing center.
They go in, and they might be working with a high school student actually working on a novel -- because we had very gifted kids, too.
So there's no stigma.
They're all working next to each other. It's all a creative endeavor.
They're seeing adults. They're modeling their behavior.
These adults, they're working in their field.
They can lean over, ask a question of one of these adults and it all sort of feeds on each other.
There's a lot of cross-pollination. The only problem, especially for the adults working at McSweeney's who hadn't necessarily bought into all of this when they signed up, was that there was just the one bathroom. (Laughter) With like 60 kids a day, this is a problem.
But you know, there's something about the kids finishing their homework in a given day, working one-on-one, getting all this attention -- they go home, they're finished. They don't stall.
They don't do their homework in front of the TV.
They're allowed to go home at 5:30 p.m., enjoy their family, enjoy other hobbies, get outside, play.
And that makes a happy family.
A bunch of happy families in a neighborhood is a happy community.
A bunch of happy communities tied together is a happy city and a happy world.
So the key to it all is homework! (Laughter) (Applause) There you have it, you know -- one-on-one attention.
So we started off with about 12 volunteers, and then we had about 50, and then a couple hundred.
And we now have 1,400 volunteers on our roster.
And we make it incredibly easy to volunteer.
The key thing is, even if you only have a couple of hours a month, those two hours shoulder-to-shoulder, next to one student, concentrated attention, shining this beam of light on their work, on their thoughts and their self-expression, is going to be absolutely transformative, because so many of the students have not had that ever before.
So we said, "Even if you have two hours one Sunday every six months, it doesn't matter. That's going to be enough."
So that's partly why the tutor corps grew so fast.
Then we said, "Well, what are we going to do with the space during the day, because it has to be used before 2:30 p.m.?"
So we started bringing in classes during the day.
So every day, there's a field trip where they together create a book -- you can see it being typed up above.
This is one of the classes getting way too excited about writing.
You just point a camera at a class, and it always looks like this.
So this is one of the books that they do.
Notice the title of the book, "The Book That Was Never Checked Out: Titanic."
And the first line of that book is, "Once there was a book named Cindy that was about the Titanic."
So, meanwhile, there's an adult in the back typing this up, taking it completely seriously, which blows their mind.
So then we still had more tutors to use.
This is a shot of just some of the tutors during one of the events.
The teachers that we work with -- and everything is different to teachers -- they tell us what to do.
We went in there thinking, "We're ultimately, completely malleable. You're going to tell us.
The neighborhood's going to tell us, the parents are going to tell us.
The teachers are going to tell us how we're most useful."
So then they said, "Why don't you come into the schools?
Because what about the students that wouldn't come to you, necessarily, who don't have really active parents that are bringing them in, or aren't close enough?" So then we started saying, "Well, we've got 1,400 people on our tutor roster.
Let's just put out the word." A teacher will say, "I need 12 tutors for the next five Sundays.
We're working on our college essays. Send them in."
So we put that out on the wire: 1,400 tutors.
Whoever can make it signs up. They go in about a half an hour before the class.
The teacher tells them what to do, how to do it, what their training is, what their project is so far.
They work under the teacher's guide, and it's all in one big room.
And that's actually the brunt of what we do is, people going straight from their workplace, straight from home, straight into the classroom and working directly with the students.
So then we're able to work with thousands and thousands of more students.
Then another school said, "Well, what if we just give you a classroom and you can staff it all day?"
So this is the Everett Middle School Writers' Room, where we decorated it in buccaneer style.
It's right off the library. And there we serve all 529 kids in this middle school.
This is their newspaper, the "Straight-Up News," that has an ongoing column from Mayor Gavin Newsom in both languages -- English and Spanish.
So then one day Isabel Allende wrote to us and said, "Hey, why don't you assign a book with high school students?
I want them to write about how to achieve peace in a violent world."
And so we went into Thurgood Marshall High School, which is a school that we had worked with on some other things, and we gave that assignment to the students.
And we said, "Isabel Allende is going to read all your essays at the end.
She's going to publish them in a book.
She's going to sponsor the printing of this book in paperback form.
It's going to be available in all the bookstores in the Bay Area and throughout the world, on Amazon and you name it."
So these kids worked harder than they've ever worked on anything in their lives, because there was that outside audience, there was Isabel Allende on the other end.
I think we had about 170 tutors that worked on this book with them and so this worked out incredibly well.
We had a big party at the end.
This is a book that you can find anywhere. So that led to a series of these.
You can see Amy Tan sponsored the next one, "I Might Get Somewhere."
And this became an ongoing thing. More and more books.
Now we're sort of addicted to the book thing.
The kids will work harder than they've ever worked in their life if they know it's going to be permanent, know it's going to be on a shelf, know that nobody can diminish what they've thought and said, that we've honored their words, honored their thoughts with hundreds of hours of five drafts, six drafts -- all this attention that we give to their thoughts.
And once they achieve that level, once they've written at that level, they can never go back.
It's absolutely transformative.
And so then they're all sold in the store. This is near the planks.
We sell all the student books.
Where else would you put them, right?
So we sell 'em, and then something weird had been happening with the stores. The store, actually -- even though we started out as just a gag -- the store actually made money.
So it was paying the rent.
And maybe this is just a San Francisco thing -- I don't know, I don't want to judge.
But people would come in -- and this was before the pirate movies and everything!
It was making a lot of money. Not a lot of money, but it was paying the rent, paying a full-time staff member there.
There's the ocean maps you can see on the left.
And it became a gateway to the community.
People would come in and say, "What the --?
What is this?" I don't want to swear on the web. (Laughter) Is that a rule? I don't know.
They would say, "What is this?"
And people would come in and learn more about it.
And then right beyond -- there's usually a little chain there -- right beyond, they would see the kids being tutored.
This is a field trip going on. And so they would be shopping, and they might be more likely to buy some lard, or millet for their parrot, or, you know, a hook, or hook protector for nighttime, all of these things we sell.
So the store actually did really well.
But it brought in so many people -- teachers, donors, volunteers, everybody -- because it was street level. It was open to the public.
It wasn't a non-profit buried, you know, on the 30th floor of some building downtown. It was right in the neighborhood that it was serving, and it was open all the time to the public.
So, it became this sort of weird, happy accident.
So all the people I used to know in Brooklyn, they said, "Well, why don't we have a place like that here?"
And a lot of them had been former educators or would-be educators, so they combined with a lot of local designers, local writers, and they just took the idea independently and they did their own thing.
They didn't want to sell pirate supplies.
They didn't think that that was going to work there.
So, knowing the crime-fighting community in New York, they opened the Brooklyn Superhero Supply Company.
This is Sam Potts' great design that did this.
And this was to make it look sort of like one of those keysmith's shops that has to have every service they've ever offered, you know, all over there.
So they opened this place. Inside, it's like a Costco for superheroes -- all the supplies in kind of basic form.
These are all handmade.
These are all sort of repurposed other products, or whatever.
All the packaging is done by Sam Potts.
So then you have the villain containment unit, where kids put their parents. You have the office.
This is a little vault -- you have to put your product in there, it goes up an electric lift and then the guy behind the counter tells you that you have to recite the vow of heroism, which you do, if you want to buy anything. And it limits, really, their sales.
Personally, I think it's a problem.
Because they have to do it hand on heart and everything.
These are some of the products. These are all handmade.
This is a secret identity kit.
If you want to take on the identity of Sharon Boone, one American female marketing executive from Hoboken, New Jersey. It's a full dossier on everything you would need to know about Sharon Boone.
So, this is the capery where you get fitted for your cape, and then you walk up these three steel-graded steps and then we turn on three hydraulic fans from every side and then you can see the cape in action.
There's nothing worse than, you know, getting up there and the cape is bunching up or something like that.
So then, the secret door -- this is one of the shelves you don't see when you walk in, but it slowly opens.
You can see it there in the middle next to all the grappling hooks.
It opens and then this is the tutoring center in the back. (Applause) So you can see the full effect!
But this is -- I just want to emphasize -- locally funded, locally built.
All the designers, all of the builders, everybody was local, all the time was pro-bono.
I just came and visited and said, "Yes, you guys are doing great," or whatever. That was it. You can see the time in all five boroughs of New York in the back. (Laughter) (Applause) So this is the space during tutoring hours.
It's very busy. Same principles: one-on-one attention, complete devotion to the students' work and a boundless optimism and sort of a possibility of creativity and ideas.
And this switch is flicked in their heads when they walk through those 18 feet of this bizarre store, right?
So it's school, but it's not school.
It's clearly not school, even though they're working shoulder-to-shoulder on tables, pencils and papers, whatever.
This is one of the students, Khaled Hamdan.
You can read this quote.
Addicted to video games and TV. Couldn't concentrate at home.
Came in. Got this concentrated attention.
And he couldn't escape it.
So, soon enough, he was writing. He would finish his homework early -- got really addicted to finishing his homework early.
It's an addictive thing to sort of be done with it, and to have it checked, and to know he's going to achieve the next thing and be prepared for school the next day.
So he got hooked on that, and then he started doing other things.
He's now been published in five books.
He co-wrote a mockumentary about failed superheroes called "Super-Has-Beens."
He wrote a series on "Penguin Balboa," which is a fighting -- a boxing -- penguin.
And then he read aloud just a few weeks ago to 500 people at Symphony Space, at a benefit for 826 New York. So he's there every day.
He's evangelical about it. He brings his cousins in now.
There's four family members that come in every day.
So, I'll go through really quickly.
This is L.A., The Echo Park Time Travel Mart: "Whenever You Are, We're Already Then." (Laughter) This is sort of a 7-Eleven for time travelers.
So you see everything: it's exactly as a 7-Eleven would be.
Leeches. Mammoth chunks. They even have their own Slurpee machine: "Out of Order. Come Back Yesterday." (Laughter) (Applause) Anyway. So I'm going to jump ahead.
These are spaces that are only affiliated with us, doing this same thing: Word St. in Pittsfield, Massachusetts; Ink Spot in Cincinnati; Youth Speaks, San Francisco, California, which inspired us; Studio St. Louis in St. Louis; Austin Bat Cave in Austin; Fighting Words in Dublin, Ireland, started by Roddy Doyle, this will be open in April.
Now I'm going to the TED Wish -- is that okay?
All right, I've got a minute. So, the TED Wish: I wish that you -- you personally and every creative individual and organization you know -- will find a way to directly engage with a public school in your area and that you'll then tell the story of how you got involved, so that within a year we have a thousand examples -- a thousand! -- of transformative partnerships.
Profound leaps forward!
And these can be things that maybe you're already doing.
I know that so many people in this room are already doing really interesting things.
I know that for a fact. So, tell us these stories and inspire others on the website.
We created a website.
I'm going to switch to "we," and not "I," hope: We hope that the attendees of this conference will usher in a new era of participation in our public schools.
We hope that you will take the lead in partnering your innovative spirit and expertise with that of innovative educators in your community.
Always let the teachers lead the way.
They will tell you how to be useful. I hope that you'll step in and help out.
There are a million ways.
You can walk up to your local school and consult with the teachers. They'll always tell you how to help.
So, this is with Hot Studio in San Francisco, they did this phenomenal job.
This website is already up, it's already got a bunch of stories, a lot of ideas. It's called "Once Upon a School," which is a great title, I think.
This site will document every story, every project that comes out of this conference and around the world. So you go to the website, you see a bunch of ideas you can be inspired by and then you add your own projects once you get started.
Hot Studio did a great job in a very tight deadline. So, visit the site.
If you have any questions, you can ask this guy, who's our director of national programs. He'll be on the phone.
You email him, he'll answer any question you possibly want.
And he'll get you inspired and get you going and guide you through the process so that you can affect change.
And it can be fun! That's the point of this talk -- it needn't be sterile. It needn't be bureaucratically untenable.
You can do and use the skills that you have.
The schools need you. The teachers need you.
Students and parents need you. They need your actual person: your physical personhood and your open minds and open ears and boundless compassion, sitting next to them, listening and nodding and asking questions for hours at a time.
Some of these kids just don't plain know how good they are: how smart and how much they have to say.
You can tell them. You can shine that light on them, one human interaction at a time. So we hope you'll join us.
Thank you so much.
I published this article in the New York Times Modern Love column in January of this year.
"To Fall in Love With Anyone, Do This."
And the article is about a psychological study designed to create romantic love in the laboratory, and my own experience trying the study myself one night last summer.
So the procedure is fairly simple: two strangers take turns asking each other 36 increasingly personal questions and then they stare into each other's eyes without speaking for four minutes.
So here are a couple of sample questions.
Number 12: If you could wake up tomorrow having gained any one quality or ability, what would it be?
Number 28: When did you last cry in front of another person?
By yourself?
As you can see, they really do get more personal as they go along.
Number 30, I really like this one: Tell your partner what you like about them; be very honest this time, saying things you might not say to someone you just met.
So when I first came across this study a few years earlier, one detail really stuck out to me, and that was the rumor that two of the participants had gotten married six months later, and they'd invited the entire lab to the ceremony.
So I was of course very skeptical about this process of just manufacturing romantic love, but of course I was intrigued.
And when I got the chance to try this study myself, with someone I knew but not particularly well, I wasn't expecting to fall in love.
But then we did, and -- (Laughter) And I thought it made a good story, so I sent it to the Modern Love column a few months later.
Now, this was published in January, and now it is August, so I'm guessing that some of you are probably wondering, are we still together?
And the reason I think you might be wondering this is because I have been asked this question again and again and again for the past seven months.
And this question is really what I want to talk about today.
But let's come back to it.
(Laughter) So the week before the article came out, I was very nervous.
I had been working on a book about love stories for the past few years, so I had gotten used to writing about my own experiences with romantic love on my blog.
But a blog post might get a couple hundred views at the most, and those were usually just my Facebook friends, and I figured my article in the New York Times would probably get a few thousand views.
And that felt like a lot of attention on a relatively new relationship.
But as it turned out, I had no idea.
So the article was published online on a Friday evening, and by Saturday, this had happened to the traffic on my blog.
And by Sunday, both the Today Show and Good Morning America had called.
Within a month, the article would receive over 8 million views, and I was, to say the least, underprepared for this sort of attention.
It's one thing to work up the confidence to write honestly about your experiences with love, but it is another thing to discover that your love life has made international news -- (Laughter) and to realize that people across the world are genuinely invested in the status of your new relationship.
(Laughter) And when people called or emailed, which they did every day for weeks, they always asked the same question first: are you guys still together?
In fact, as I was preparing this talk, I did a quick search of my email inbox for the phrase "Are you still together?"
and several messages popped up immediately.
They were from students and journalists and friendly strangers like this one.
I did radio interviews and they asked.
I even gave a talk, and one woman shouted up to the stage, "Hey Mandy, where's your boyfriend?"
And I promptly turned bright red.
I understand that this is part of the deal.
If you write about your relationship in an international newspaper, you should expect people to feel comfortable asking about it.
But I just wasn't prepared for the scope of the response.
The 36 questions seem to have taken on a life of their own.
In fact, the New York Times published a follow-up article for Valentine's Day, which featured readers' experiences of trying the study themselves, with varying degrees of success.
So my first impulse in the face of all of this attention was to become very protective of my own relationship.
I said no to every request for the two of us to do a media appearance together.
I turned down TV interviews, and I said no to every request for photos of the two us.
I think I was afraid that we would become inadvertent icons for the process of falling in love, a position I did not at all feel qualified for.
And I get it: people didn't just want to know if the study worked, they wanted to know if it really worked: that is, if it was capable of producing love that would last, not just a fling, but real love, sustainable love.
But this was a question I didn't feel capable of answering.
My own relationship was only a few months old, and I felt like people were asking the wrong question in the first place.
What would knowing whether or not we were still together really tell them?
If the answer was no, would it make the experience of doing these 36 questions any less worthwhile?
Dr. Arthur Aron first wrote about these questions in this study here in 1997, and here, the researcher's goal was not to produce romantic love.
Instead, they wanted to foster interpersonal closeness among college students, by using what Aron called "sustained, escalating, reciprocal, personalistic self-disclosure."
Sounds romantic, doesn't it?
But the study did work.
The participants did feel closer after doing it, and several subsequent studies have also used Aron's fast friends protocol as a way to quickly create trust and intimacy between strangers.
They've used it between members of the police and members of community, and they've used it between people of opposing political ideologies.
The original version of the story, the one that I tried last summer, that pairs the personal questions with four minutes of eye contact, was referenced in this article, but unfortunately it was never published.
So a few months ago, I was giving a talk at a small liberal arts college, and a student came up to me afterwards and he said, kind of shyly, "So, I tried your study, and it didn't work."
He seemed a little mystified by this.
"You mean, you didn't fall in love with the person you did it with?" I asked.
"Well..." He paused.
"I think she just wants to be friends."
"But did you become better friends?" I asked.
"Did you feel like you got to really know each other after doing the study?"
He nodded.
"So, then it worked," I said.
I don't think this is the answer he was looking for.
In fact, I don't think this is the answer that any of us are looking for when it comes to love.
I first came across this study when I was 29 and I was going through a really difficult breakup.
I had been in the relationship since I was 20, which was basically my entire adult life, and he was my first real love, and I had no idea how or if I could make a life without him.
So I turned to science.
I researched everything I could find about the science of romantic love, and I think I was hoping that it might somehow inoculate me from heartache.
I don't know if I realized this at the time -- I thought I was just doing research for this book I was writing -- but it seems really obvious in retrospect.
I hoped that if I armed myself with the knowledge of romantic love, I might never have to feel as terrible and lonely as I did then.
And all this knowledge has been useful in some ways.
I am more patient with love. I am more relaxed.
I am more confident about asking for what I want.
But I can also see myself more clearly, and I can see that what I want is sometimes more than can reasonably be asked for.
What I want from love is a guarantee, not just that I am loved today and that I will be loved tomorrow, but that I will continue to be loved by the person I love indefinitely.
Maybe it's this possibility of a guarantee that people were really asking about when they wanted to know if we were still together.
So the story that the media told about the 36 questions was that there might be a shortcut to falling in love.
There might be a way to somehow mitigate some of the risk involved, and this is a very appealing story, because falling in love feels amazing, but it's also terrifying.
The moment you admit to loving someone, you admit to having a lot to lose, and it's true that these questions do provide a mechanism for getting to know someone quickly, which is also a mechanism for being known, and I think this is the thing that most of us really want from love: to be known, to be seen, to be understood.
But I think when it comes to love, we are too willing to accept the short version of the story.
The version of the story that asks, "Are you still together?"
and is content with a yes or no answer.
So rather than that question, I would propose we ask some more difficult questions, questions like: How do you decide who deserves your love and who does not?
How do you stay in love when things get difficult, and how do you know when to just cut and run?
How do you live with the doubt that inevitably creeps into every relationship, or even harder, how do you live with your partner's doubt?
I don't necessarily know the answers to these questions, but I think they're an important start at having a more thoughtful conversation about what it means to love someone.
So, if you want it, the short version of the story of my relationship is this: a year ago, an acquaintance and I did a study designed to create romantic love, and we fell in love, and we are still together, and I am so glad.
But falling in love is not the same thing as staying in love.
Falling in love is the easy part.
So at the end of my article, I wrote, "Love didn't happen to us.
We're in love because we each made the choice to be."
And I cringe a little when I read that now, not because it isn't true, but because at the time, I really hadn't considered everything that was contained in that choice.
I didn't consider how many times we would each have to make that choice, and how many times I will continue to have to make that choice without knowing whether or not he will always choose me.
I want it to be enough to have asked and answered 36 questions, and to have chosen to love someone so generous and kind and fun and to have broadcast that choice in the biggest newspaper in America.
But what I have done instead is turn my relationship into the kind of myth I don't quite believe in.
And what I want, what perhaps I will spend my life wanting, is for that myth to be true.
I want the happy ending implied by the title to my article, which is, incidentally, the only part of the article that I didn't actually write.
(Laughter) But what I have instead is the chance to make the choice to love someone, and the hope that he will choose to love me back, and it is terrifying, but that's the deal with love.
Thank you.
A question I'm often asked is, where did I get my passion for human rights and justice?
It started early.
I grew up in the west of Ireland, wedged between four brothers, two older than me and two younger than me.
So of course I had to be interested in human rights, and equality and justice, and using my elbows!
(Laughter) And those issues stayed with me and guided me, and in particular, when I was elected the first woman President of Ireland, from 1990 to 1997.
I dedicated my presidency to having a space for those who felt marginalized on the island of Ireland, and bringing together communities from Northern Ireland with those from the Republic, trying to build peace.
And I went as the first Irish president to the United Kingdom and met with Queen Elizabeth II, and also welcomed to my official residence -- which we call "ras an Uachtarin," the house of the president -- members of the royal family, including, notably, the Prince of Wales.
And I was aware that at the time of my presidency, Ireland was a country beginning a rapid economic progress.
We were a country that was benefiting from the solidarity of the European Union.
Indeed, when Ireland first joined the European Union in 1973, there were parts of the country that were considered developing, including my own beloved native county, County Mayo.
I led trade delegations here to the United States, to Japan, to India, to encourage investment, to help to create jobs, to build up our economy, to build up our health system, our education -- our development.
What I didn't have to do as president was buy land on mainland Europe, so that Irish citizens could go there because our island was going underwater.
What I didn't have to think about, either as president or as a constitutional lawyer, was the implications for the sovereignty of the territory because of the impact of climate change.
But that is what President Tong, of the Republic of Kiribati, has to wake up every morning thinking about.
He has bought land in Fiji as an insurance policy, what he calls, "migration with dignity," because he knows that his people may have to leave their islands.
As I listened to President Tong describing the situation, I really felt that this was a problem that no leader should have to face.
And as I heard him speak about the pain of his problems, I thought about Eleanor Roosevelt.
I thought about her and those who worked with her on the Commission on Human Rights, which she chaired in 1948, and drew up the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
For them, it would have been unimaginable that a whole country could go out of existence because of human-induced climate change.
I came to climate change not as a scientist or an environmental lawyer, and I wasn't really impressed by the images of polar bears or melting glaciers.
It was because of the impact on people, and the impact on their rights -- their rights to food and safe water, health, education and shelter.
And I say this with humility, because I came late to the issue of climate change.
When I served as UN High Commissioner for Human Rights from 1997 to 2002, climate change wasn't at the front of my mind.
I don't remember making a single speech on climate change.
I knew that there was another part of the United Nations -- the UN Convention on Climate Change -- that was dealing with the issue of climate change.
It was later when I started to work in African countries on issues of development and human rights.
And I kept hearing this pervasive sentence: "Oh, but things are so much worse now, things are so much worse."
And then I explored what was behind that; it was about changes in the climate -- climate shocks, changes in the weather.
I met Constance Okollet, who had formed a women's group in Eastern Uganda, and she told me that when she was growing up, she had a very normal life in her village and they didn't go hungry, they knew that the seasons would come as they were predicted to come, they knew when to sow and they knew when to harvest, and so they had enough food.
But, in recent years, at the time of this conversation, they had nothing but long periods of drought, and then flash flooding, and then more drought.
The school had been destroyed, livelihoods had been destroyed, their harvest had been destroyed.
She forms this women's group to try to keep her community together.
And this was a reality that really struck me, because of course, Constance Okollet wasn't responsible for the greenhouse gas emissions that were causing this problem.
Indeed, I was very struck about the situation in Malawi in January of this year.
There was an unprecedented flooding in the country, it covered about a third of the country, over 300 people were killed, and hundreds of thousands lost their livelihoods.
And the average person in Malawi emits about 80 kg of CO2 a year.
The average US citizen emits about 17.5 metric tons.
So those who are suffering disproportionately don't drive cars, don't have electricity, don't consume very significantly, and yet they are feeling more and more the impacts of the changes in the climate, the changes that are preventing them from knowing how to grow food properly, and knowing how to look after their future.
I think it was really the importance of the injustice that really struck me very forcibly.
And I know that we're not able to address some of that injustice because we're not on course for a safe world.
Governments around the world agreed at the conference in Copenhagen, and have repeated it at every conference on climate, that we have to stay below two degrees Celsius of warming above pre-Industrial standards.
But we're on course for about four degrees.
So we face an existential threat to the future of our planet.
And that made me realize that climate change is the greatest threat to human rights in the 21st century.
And that brought me then to climate justice.
Climate justice responds to the moral argument -- both sides of the moral argument -- to address climate change.
First of all, to be on the side of those who are suffering most and are most effected.
And secondly, to make sure that they're not left behind again, when we start to move and start to address climate change with climate action, as we are doing.
In our very unequal world today, it's very striking how many people are left behind.
In our world of 7.2 billion people, about 3 billion are left behind.
1.3 billion don't have access to electricity, and they light their homes with kerosene and candles, both of which are dangerous.
And in fact they spend a lot of their tiny income on that form of lighting.
2.6 billion people cook on open fires -- on coal, wood and animal dung.
And this causes about 4 million deaths a year from indoor smoke inhalation, and of course, most of those who die are women.
So we have a very unequal world, and we need to change from "business as usual."
And we shouldn't underestimate the scale and the transformative nature of the change which will be needed, because we have to go to zero carbon emissions by about 2050, if we're going to stay below two degrees Celsius of warming.
And that means we have to leave about two-thirds of the known resources of fossil fuels in the ground.
It's a very big change, and it means that obviously, industrialized countries must cut their emissions, must become much more energy-efficient, and must move as quickly as possible to renewable energy.
For developing countries and emerging economies, the problem and the challenge is to grow without emissions, because they must develop; they have very poor populations.
So they must develop without emissions, and that is a different kind of problem.
Indeed, no country in the world has actually grown without emissions.
All the countries have developed with fossil fuels, and then may be moving to renewable energy.
So it is a very big challenge, and it requires the total support of the international community, with the necessary finance and technology, and systems and support, because no country can make itself safe from the dangers of climate change.
This is an issue that requires complete human solidarity.
Human solidarity, if you like, based on self-interest -- because we are all in this together, and we have to work together to ensure that we reach zero carbon by 2050.
The good news is that change is happening, and it's happening very fast.
Here in California, there's a very ambitious emissions target to cut emissions.
In Hawaii, they're passing legislation to have 100 percent renewable energy by 2045.
And governments are very ambitious around the world.
In Costa Rica, they have committed to being carbon-neutral by 2021.
In Ethiopia, the commitment is to be carbon-neutral by 2027.
Apple have pledged that their factories in China will use renewable energy.
And there is a race on at the moment to convert electricity from tidal and wave power, in order that we can leave the coal in the ground.
And that change is both welcome and is happening very rapidly.
But it's still not enough, and the political will is still not enough.
Let me come back to President Tong and his people in Kiribati.
They actually could be able to live on their island and have a solution, but it would take a lot of political will.
President Tong told me about his ambitious idea to either build up or even float the little islands where his people live.
This, of course, is beyond the resources of Kiribati itself.
It would require great solidarity and support from other countries, and it would require the kind of imaginative idea that we bring together when we want to have a space station in the air.
But wouldn't it be wonderful to have this engineering wonder and to allow a people to remain in their sovereign territory, and be part of the community of nations?
That is the kind of idea that we should be thinking about.
Yes, the challenges of the transformation we need are big, but they can be solved.
We are actually, as a people, very capable of coming together to solve problems.
I was very conscious of this as I took part this year in commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second World War in 1945.
1945 was an extraordinary year.
It was a year when the world faced what must have seemed almost insoluble problems -- the devastation of the world wars, particularly the Second World War; the fragile peace that had been brought about; the need for a whole economic regeneration.
But the leaders of that time didn't flinch from this.
They had the capacity, they had a sense of being driven by never again must the world have this kind of problem.
And they had to build structures for peace and security.
And what did we get? What did they achieve?
The Charter of the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions, as they're called, The World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
A Marshall Plan for Europe, a devastated Europe, to reconstruct it.
And indeed a few years later, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
2015 is a year that is similar in its importance to 1945, with similar challenges and similar potential.
There will be two big summits this year: the first one, in September in New York, is the summit for the sustainable development goals.
And then the summit in Paris in December, to give us a climate agreement.
The sustainable development goals are intended to help countries to live sustainably, in tune with Mother Earth, not to take out of Mother Earth and destroy ecosystems, but rather, to live in harmony with Mother Earth, by living under sustainable development.
And the sustainable development goals will come into operation for all countries on January 1, 2016.
The climate agreement -- a binding climate agreement -- is needed because of the scientific evidence that we're on a trajectory for about a four-degree world and we have to change course to stay below two degrees.
So we need to take steps that will be monitored and reviewed, so that we can keep increasing the ambition of how we cut emissions, and how we move more rapidly to renewable energy, so that we have a safe world.
The reality is that this issue is much too important to be left to politicians and to the United Nations.
(Laughter) It's an issue for all of us, and it's an issue where we need more and more momentum.
Indeed, the face of the environmentalist has changed, because of the justice dimension.
It's now an issue for faith-based organizations, under very good leadership from Pope Francis, and indeed, the Church of England, which is divesting from fossil fuels.
It's an issue for the business community, and the good news is that the business community is changing very rapidly -- except for the fossil fuel industries -- (Laughter) Even they are beginning to slightly change their language -- but only slightly.
But business is not only moving rapidly to the benefits of renewable energy, but is urging politicians to give them more signals, so that they can move even more rapidly.
It's an issue for the trade union movement.
It's an issue for the women's movement.
It's an issue for young people.
I was very struck when I learned that Jibreel Khazan, one of the Greensboro Four who had taken part in the Woolworth sit-ins, said quite recently that climate change is the lunch counter moment for young people.
So, lunch counter moment for young people of the 21st century -- the sort of real human rights issue of the 21st century, because he said it is the greatest challenge to humanity and justice in our world.
I recall very much the Climate March last September, and that was a huge momentum, not just in New York, but all around the world.
and we have to build on that.
I was marching with some of The Elders family, and I saw a placard a little bit away from me, but we were wedged so closely together -- because after all, there were 400,000 people out in the streets of New York -- so I couldn't quite get to that placard, I would have just liked to have been able to step behind it, because it said, "Angry Grannies!"
(Laughter) That's what I felt.
And I have five grandchildren now, I feel very happy as an Irish grandmother to have five grandchildren, and I think about their world, and what it will be like when they will share that world with about 9 billion other people in 2050.
We know that inevitably it will be a climate-constrained world, because of the emissions we've already put up there, but it could be a world that is much more equal and much fairer, and much better for health, and better for jobs and better for energy security, than the world we have now, if we have switched sufficiently and early enough to renewable energy, and no one is left behind.
No one is left behind.
And just as we've been looking back this year -- in 2015 to 1945, looking back 70 years -- I would like to think that they will look back, that world will look back 35 years from 2050, 35 years to 2015, and that they will say, "Weren't they good to do what they did in 2015?
We really appreciate that they took the decisions that made a difference, and that put the world on the right pathway, and we benefit now from that pathway," that they will feel that somehow we took our responsibilities, we did what was done in 1945 in similar terms, we didn't miss the opportunity, we lived up to our responsibilities.
That's what this year is about.
And somehow for me, it's captured in words of somebody that I admired very much.
She was a mentor of mine, she was a friend, she died much too young, she was an extraordinary personality, a great champion of the environment: Wangari Maathai.
Wangari said once, "In the course of history, there comes a time when humanity is called upon to shift to a new level of consciousness, to reach a higher moral ground."
And that's what we have to do.
We have to reach a new level of consciousness, a higher moral ground.
And we have to do it this year in those two big summits.
And that won't happen unless we have the momentum from people around the world who say: "We want action now, we want to change course, we want a safe world, a safe world for future generations, a safe world for our children and our grandchildren, and we're all in this together."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Wow, what an honor. I always wondered what this would feel like.
So eight years ago, I got the worst career advice of my life.
I had a friend tell me, "Don't worry about how much you like the work you're doing now.
It's all about just building your resume."
And I'd just come back from living in Spain for a while, and I'd joined this Fortune 500 company. I thought, "This is fantastic.
I'm going to have big impact on the world."
I had all these ideas. And within about two months, I noticed at about 10am every morning I had this strange urge to want to slam my head through the monitor of my computer.
I don't know if anyone's ever felt that.
And I noticed pretty soon after that that all the competitors in our space had already automated my job role.
And this is right about when I got this sage advice to build up my resume.
Well, as I'm trying to figure out what two-story window I'm going to jump out of and change things up, I read some altogether different advice from Warren Buffett, and he said, "Taking jobs to build up your resume is the same as saving up sex for old age."
(Laughter) And I heard that, and that was all I needed.
Within two weeks, I was out of there, and I left with one intention: to find something that I could screw up. That's how tough it was.
I wanted to have some type of impact. It didn't matter what it was.
And I found pretty quickly that I wasn't alone: it turns out that over 80 percent of the people around don't enjoy their work.
I'm guessing this room is different, but that's the average that Deloitte has done with their studies.
So I wanted to find out, what is it that sets these people apart, the people who do the passionate, world-changing work, that wake up inspired every day, and then these people, the other 80 percent who lead these lives of quiet desperation.
So I started to interview all these people doing this inspiring work, and I read books and did case studies, 300 books altogether on purpose and career and all this, totally just self-immersion, really for the selfish reason of -- I wanted to find the work that I couldn't not do, what that was for me.
But as I was doing this, more and more people started to ask me, "You're into this career thing.
I don't like my job. Can we sit down for lunch?"
I'd say, "Sure." But I would have to warn them, because at this point, my quit rate was also 80 percent.
Of the people I'd sit down with for lunch, 80 percent would quit their job within two months.
I was proud of this, and it wasn't that I had any special magic.
It was that I would ask one simple question.
It was, "Why are you doing the work that you're doing?"
And so often their answer would be, "Well, because somebody told me I'm supposed to."
And I realized that so many people around us are climbing their way up this ladder that someone tells them to climb, and it ends up being leaned up against the wrong wall, or no wall at all.
The more time I spent around these people and saw this problem, I thought, what if we could create a community, a place where people could feel like they belonged and that it was OK to do things differently, to take the road less traveled, where that was encouraged, and inspire people to change?
And that later became what I now call Live Your Legend, which I'll explain in a little bit.
But as I've made these discoveries, I noticed a framework of really three simple things that all these different passionate world-changers have in common, whether you're a Steve Jobs or if you're just, you know, the person that has the bakery down the street.
I want to share those three with you, so we can use them as a lens for the rest of today and hopefully the rest of our life.
The first part of this three-step passionate work framework is becoming a self-expert and understanding yourself, because if you don't know what you're looking for, you're never going to find it.
And the thing is that no one is going to do this for us.
There's no major in university on passion and purpose and career.
I don't know how that's not a required double major, but don't even get me started on that.
I mean, you spend more time picking out a dorm room TV set than you do you picking your major and your area of study.
But the point is, it's on us to figure that out, and we need a framework, we need a way to navigate through this.
And so the first step of our compass is finding out what our unique strengths are.
What are the things that we wake up loving to do no matter what, whether we're paid or we're not paid, the things that people thank us for?
And the Strengths Finder 2.0 is a book and also an online tool.
I highly recommend it for sorting out what it is that you're naturally good at.
And next, what's our framework or our hierarchy for making decisions?
Do we care about the people, our family, health, or is it achievement, success, all this stuff?
We have to figure out what it is to make these decisions, so we know what our soul is made of, so that we don't go selling it to some cause we don't give a shit about.
And then the next step is our experiences.
All of us have these experiences. We learn things every day, every minute about what we love, what we hate, what we're good at, what we're terrible at.
And if we don't spend time paying attention to that and assimilating that learning and applying it to the rest of our lives, it's all for nothing.
Every day, every week, every month of every year I spend some time just reflecting on what went right, what went wrong, and what do I want to repeat, what can I apply more to my life.
And even more so than that, as you see people, especially today, who inspire you, who are doing things where you say "Oh God, what Jeff is doing, I want to be like him."
Why are you saying that? Open up a journal.
Write down what it is about them that inspires you.
It's not going to be everything about their life, but whatever it is, take note on that, so over time we'll have this repository of things that we can use to apply to our life and have a more passionate existence and make a better impact.
Because when we start to put these things together, we can then define what success actually means to us, and without these different parts of the compass, it's impossible.
We end up in the situation -- we have that scripted life that everybody seems to be living going up this ladder to nowhere.
It's kind of like in Wall Street 2, if anybody saw that, the peon employee asks the big Wall Street banker CEO, "What's your number? Everyone's got a number, where if they make this money, they'll leave it all."
He says, "Oh, it's simple. More."
And he just smiles.
And it's the sad state of most of the people that haven't spent time understanding what matters for them, who keep reaching for something that doesn't mean anything to us, but we're doing it because everyone said we're supposed to.
But once we have this framework together, we can start to identify the things that make us come alive.
You know, before this, a passion could come and hit you in the face, or maybe in your possible line of work, you might throw it away because you don't have a way of identifying it.
But once you do, you can see something that's congruent with my strengths, my values, who I am as a person, so I'm going to grab ahold of this, I'm going to do something with it, and I'm going to pursue it and try to make an impact with it.
And Live Your Legend and the movement we've built wouldn't exist if I didn't have this compass to identify, "Wow, this is something I want to pursue and make a difference with."
If we don't know what we're looking for, we're never going to find it, but once we have this framework, this compass, then we can move on to what's next -- and that's not me up there -- doing the impossible and pushing our limits.
There's two reasons why people don't do things.
One is they tell themselves they can't do them, or people around them tell them they can't do them.
Either way, we start to believe it.
Either we give up, or we never start in the first place.
The things is, everything was impossible until somebody did it.
Every invention, every new thing in the world, people thought were crazy at first.
Roger Bannister and the four-minute mile, it was a physical impossibility to break the four-minute mile in a foot race until Roger Bannister stood up and did it.
And then what happened?
Two months later, 16 people broke the four-minute mile.
The things that we have in our head that we think are impossible are often just milestones waiting to be accomplished if we can push those limits a bit.
And I think this starts with probably your physical body and fitness more than anything, because we can control that.
If you don't think you can run a mile, you show yourself you can run a mile or two, or a marathon, or lose five pounds, or whatever it is, you realize that confidence compounds and can be transferred into the rest of your world.
And I've actually gotten into the habit of this a little bit with my friends.
We have this little group. We go on physical adventures, and recently, I found myself in a kind of precarious spot.
I'm terrified of deep, dark, blue water.
I don't know if anyone's ever had that same fear ever since they watched Jaws 1, 2, 3 and 4 like six times when I was a kid.
But anything above here, if it's murky, I can already feel it right now.
I swear there's something in there.
Even if it's Lake Tahoe, it's fresh water, totally unfounded fear, ridiculous, but it's there.
Anyway, three years ago I find myself on this tugboat right down here in the San Francisco Bay.
It's a rainy, stormy, windy day, and people are getting sick on the boat, and I'm sitting there wearing a wetsuit, and I'm looking out the window in pure terror thinking I'm about to swim to my death.
I'm going to try to swim across the Golden Gate.
And my guess is some people in this room might have done that before.
I'm sitting there, and my buddy Jonathan, who had talked me into it, he comes up to me and he could see the state I was in.
And he says, "Scott, hey man, what's the worst that could happen?
You're wearing a wetsuit. You're not going to sink.
And If you can't make it, just hop on one of the 20 kayaks.
Plus, if there's a shark attack, why are they going to pick you over the 80 people in the water?" So thanks, that helps.
He's like, "But really, just have fun with this. Good luck."
And he dives in, swims off. OK.
Turns out, the pep talk totally worked, and I felt this total feeling of calm, and I think it was because Jonathan was 13 years old.
(Laughter) And of the 80 people swimming that day, 65 of them were between the ages of nine and 13.
Think how you would have approached your world differently if at nine years old you found out you could swim a mile and a half in 56-degree water from Alcatraz to San Francisco.
What would you have said yes to?
What would you have not given up on? What would you have tried?
As I'm finishing this swim, I get to Aquatic Park, and I'm getting out of the water and of course half the kids are already finished, so they're cheering me on and they're all excited.
And I got total popsicle head, if anyone's ever swam in the Bay, and I'm trying to just thaw my face out, and I'm watching people finish.
And I see this one kid, something didn't look right.
And he's just flailing like this.
And he's barely able to sip some air before he slams his head back down.
And I notice other parents were watching too, and I swear they were thinking the same thing I was: this is why you don't let nine-year-olds swim from Alcatraz.
This was not fatigue.
All of a sudden, two parents run up and grab him, and they put him on their shoulders, and they're dragging him like this, totally limp.
And then all of a sudden they walk a few more feet and they plop him down in his wheelchair.
And he puts his fists up in the most insane show of victory I've ever seen.
I can still feel the warmth and the energy on this guy when he made this accomplishment.
I had seen him earlier that day in his wheelchair.
I just had no idea he was going to swim.
I mean, where is he going to be in 20 years?
How many people told him he couldn't do that, that he would die if he tried that?
You prove people wrong, you prove yourself wrong, that you can make little incremental pushes of what you believe is possible.
You don't have to be the fastest marathoner in the world, just your own impossibilities, to accomplish those, and it starts with little bitty steps.
And the best way to do this is to surround yourself with passionate people.
The fastest things to do things you don't think can be done is to surround yourself with people already doing them.
There's this quote by Jim Rohn and it says.
"You are the average of the five people you spend the most time with."
And there is no bigger lifehack in the history of the world from getting where you are today to where you want to be than the people you choose to put in your corner.
They change everything, and it's a proven fact.
In 1898, Norman Triplett did this study with a bunch of cyclists, and he would measure their times around the track in a group, and also individually.
And he found that every time the cyclists in the group would cycle faster.
And it's been repeated in all kinds of walks of life since then, and it proves the same thing over again, that the people around you matter, and environment is everything.
But it's on you to control it, because it can go both ways.
With 80 percent of people who don't like the work they do, that means most people around us, not in this room, but everywhere else, are encouraging complacency and keeping us from pursuing the things that matter to us so we have to manage those surroundings.
I found myself in this situation -- personal example, a couple years ago.
Has anyone ever had a hobby or a passion they poured their heart and soul into, unbelievable amount of time, and they so badly want to call it a business, but no one's paying attention and it doesn't make a dime?
OK, I was there for four years trying to build this Live Your Legend movement to help people do work that they genuinely cared about and that inspired them, and I was doing all I could, and there were only three people paying attention, and they're all right there: my mother, father and my wife, Chelsea.
Thank you guys for the support.
(Applause) And this is how badly I wanted it, it grew at zero percent for four years, and I was about to shut it down, and right about then, I moved to San Francisco and started to meet some pretty interesting people who had these crazy lifestyles of adventure, of businesses and websites and blogs that surrounded their passions and helped people in a meaningful way.
And one of my friends, now, he has a family of eight, and he supports his whole family with a blog that he writes for twice a week.
They just came back from a month in Europe, all of them together.
This blew my mind. How does this even exist?
And I got unbelievably inspired by seeing this, and instead of shutting it down, I decided, let's take it seriously.
And I did everything I could to spend my time, every waking hour possible trying to hound these guys, hanging out and having beers and workouts, whatever it was.
And after four years of zero growth, within six months of hanging around these people, the community at Live Your Legend grew by 10 times.
In another 12 months, it grew by 160 times.
And today over 30,000 people from 158 countries use our career and connection tools on a monthly basis.
And those people have made up that community of passionate folks who inspired that possibility that I dreamed of for Live Your Legend so many years back.
The people change everything, and this is why -- you know, you ask what was going on.
Well, for four years, I knew nobody in this space, and I didn't even know it existed, that people could do this stuff, that you could have movements like this.
And then I'm over here in San Francisco, and everyone around me was doing it.
It became normal, so my thinking went from how could I possibly do this to how could I possibly not.
And right then, when that happens, that switch goes on in your head, it ripples across your whole world.
And without even trying, your standards go from here to here.
You don't need to change your goals. You just need to change your surroundings.
That's it, and that's why I love being around this whole group of people, why I go to every TED event I can, and watch them on my iPad on the way to work, whatever it is.
Because this is the group of people that inspires possibility.
We have a whole day to spend together and plenty more.
To sum things up, in terms of these three pillars, they all have one thing in common more than anything else.
They are 100 percent in our control.
No one can tell you you can't learn about yourself.
No one can tell you you can't push your limits and learn your own impossible and push that.
No one can tell you you can't surround yourself with inspiring people or get away from the people who bring you down.
You can't control a recession.
You can't control getting fired or getting in a car accident.
Most things are totally out of our hands.
These three things are totally on us, and they can change our whole world if we decide to do something about it.
And the thing is, it's starting to happen on a widespread level.
I just read in Forbes, the US Government reported for the first time in a month where more people had quit their jobs than had been laid off.
They thought this was an anomaly, but it's happened three months straight.
In a time where people claim it's kind of a tough environment, people are giving a middle finger to this scripted life, the things that people say you're supposed to do, in exchange for things that matter to them and do the things that inspire them.
And the thing is, people are waking up to this possibility, that really the only thing that limits possibility now is imagination.
That's not a clich anymore.
I don't care what it is that you're into, what passion, what hobby.
If you're into knitting, you can find someone who is killing it knitting, and you can learn from them. It's wild.
And that's what this whole day is about, to learn from the folks speaking, and we profile these people on Live Your Legend every day, because when ordinary people are doing the extraordinary, and we can be around that, it becomes normal.
And this isn't about being Gandhi or Steve Jobs, doing something crazy.
It's just about doing something that matters to you, and makes an impact that only you can make.
Speaking of Gandhi, he was a recovering lawyer, as I've heard the term, and he was called to a greater cause, something that mattered to him, he couldn't not do.
And he has this quote that I absolutely live by.
"First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win."
Everything was impossible until somebody did it.
You can either hang around the people who tell you it can't be done and tell you you're stupid for trying, or surround yourself with the people who inspire possibility, the people who are in this room.
Because I see it as our responsibility to show the world that what's seen as impossible can become that new normal.
And that's already starting to happen.
First, do the things that inspire us, so we can inspire other people to do the things that inspire them.
But we can't find that unless we know what we're looking for.
We have to do our work on ourself, be intentional about that, and make those discoveries.
Because I imagine a world where 80 percent of people love the work they do.
What would that look like?
What would the innovation be like? How would you treat the people around you?
Things would start to change.
And as we finish up, I have just one question to ask you guys, and I think it's the only question that matters.
And it's what is the work you can't not do?
Discover that, live it, not just for you, but for everybody around you, because that is what starts to change the world.
What is the work you can't not do?
Thank you guys.
(Applause)
Last year, I went on my first book tour.
In 13 months, I flew to 14 countries and gave some hundred talks.
Every talk in every country began with an introduction, and every introduction began, alas, with a lie: "Taiye Selasi comes from Ghana and Nigeria," or "Taiye Selasi comes from England and the States."
Whenever I heard this opening sentence, no matter the country that concluded it -- England, America, Ghana, Nigeria -- I thought, "But that's not true."
Yes, I was born in England and grew up in the United States.
My mum, born in England, and raised in Nigeria, currently lives in Ghana.
My father was born in Gold Coast, a British colony, raised in Ghana, and has lived for over 30 years in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
For this reason, my introducers also called me "multinational."
"But Nike is multinational," I thought, "I'm a human being."
Then, one fine day, mid-tour, I went to Louisiana, a museum in Denmark where I shared the stage with the writer Colum McCann.
We were discussing the role of locality in writing, when suddenly it hit me.
I'm not multinational.
I'm not a national at all.
How could I come from a nation?
How can a human being come from a concept?
It's a question that had been bothering me for going on two decades.
From newspapers, textbooks, conversations, I had learned to speak of countries as if they were eternal, singular, naturally occurring things, but I wondered: to say that I came from a country suggested that the country was an absolute, some fixed point in place in time, a constant thing, but was it?
In my lifetime, countries had disappeared -- Czechoslovakia; appeared -- Timor-Leste; failed -- Somalia.
My parents came from countries that didn't exist when they were born.
To me, a country -- this thing that could be born, die, expand, contract -- hardly seemed the basis for understanding a human being.
And so it came as a huge relief to discover the sovereign state.
What we call countries are actually various expressions of sovereign statehood, an idea that came into fashion only 400 years ago.
When I learned this, beginning my masters degree in international relations, I felt a sort of surge of relief.
It was as I had suspected.
History was real, cultures were real, but countries were invented.
For the next 10 years, I sought to re- or un-define myself, my world, my work, my experience, beyond the logic of the state.
In 2005, I wrote an essay, "What is an Afropolitan," sketching out an identity that privileged culture over country.
It was thrilling how many people could relate to my experience, and instructional how many others didn't buy my sense of self.
"How can Selasi claim to come from Ghana," one such critic asked, "when she's never known the indignities of traveling abroad on a Ghanian passport?"
Now, if I'm honest, I knew just what she meant.
I've got a friend named Layla who was born and raised in Ghana.
Her parents are third-generation Ghanians of Lebanese descent.
Layla, who speaks fluent Twi, knows Accra like the back of her hand, but when we first met years ago, I thought, "She's not from Ghana."
In my mind, she came from Lebanon, despite the patent fact that all her formative experience took place in suburban Accra.
I, like my critics, was imagining some Ghana where all Ghanaians had brown skin or none held U.K. passports.
I'd fallen into the limiting trap that the language of coming from countries sets -- the privileging of a fiction, the singular country, over reality: human experience.
Speaking with Colum McCann that day, the penny finally dropped.
"All experience is local," he said.
"All identity is experience," I thought.
"I'm not a national," I proclaimed onstage.
"I'm a local. I'm multi-local."
See, "Taiye Selasi comes from the United States," isn't the truth.
I have no relationship with the United States, all 50 of them, not really.
My relationship is with Brookline, the town where I grew up; with New York City, where I started work; with Lawrenceville, where I spend Thanksgiving.
What makes America home for me is not my passport or accent, but these very particular experiences and the places they occur.
Despite my pride in Ewe culture, the Black Stars, and my love of Ghanaian food, I've never had a relationship with the Republic of Ghana, writ large.
My relationship is with Accra, where my mother lives, where I go each year, with the little garden in Dzorwulu where my father and I talk for hours.
These are the places that shape my experience.
My experience is where I'm from.
What if we asked, instead of "Where are you from?" -- "Where are you a local?"
This would tell us so much more about who and how similar we are.
Tell me you're from France, and I see what, a set of clichs?
Adichie's dangerous single story, the myth of the nation of France?
Tell me you're a local of Fez and Paris, better yet, Goutte d'Or, and I see a set of experiences.
Our experience is where we're from.
So, where are you a local?
I propose a three-step test.
I call these the three "Rs": rituals, relationships, restrictions.
First, think of your daily rituals, whatever they may be: making your coffee, driving to work, harvesting your crops, saying your prayers.
What kind of rituals are these?
Where do they occur?
In what city or cities in the world do shopkeepers know your face?
As a child, I carried out fairly standard suburban rituals in Boston, with adjustments made for the rituals my mother brought from London and Lagos.
We took off our shoes in the house, we were unfailingly polite with our elders, we ate slow-cooked, spicy food.
In snowy North America, ours were rituals of the global South.
The first time I went to Delhi or to southern parts of Italy, I was shocked by how at home I felt.
The rituals were familiar.
"R" number one, rituals.
Now, think of your relationships, of the people who shape your days.
To whom do you speak at least once a week, be it face to face or on FaceTime?
Be reasonable in your assessment; I'm not talking about your Facebook friends.
I'm speaking of the people who shape your weekly emotional experience.
My mother in Accra, my twin sister in Boston, my best friends in New York: these relationships are home for me.
"R" number two, relationships.
We're local where we carry out our rituals and relationships, but how we experience our locality depends in part on our restrictions.
By restrictions, I mean, where are you able to live?
What passport do you hold?
Are you restricted by, say, racism, from feeling fully at home where you live?
By civil war, dysfunctional governance, economic inflation, from living in the locality where you had your rituals as a child?
This is the least sexy of the Rs, less lyric than rituals and relationships, but the question takes us past "Where are you now?"
to "Why aren't you there, and why?"
Rituals, relationships, restrictions.
Take a piece of paper and put those three words on top of three columns, then try to fill those columns as honestly as you can.
A very different picture of your life in local context, of your identity as a set of experiences, may emerge.
So let's try it.
I have a friend named Olu.
He's 35 years old.
His parents, born in Nigeria, came to Germany on scholarships.
Olu was born in Nuremberg and lived there until age 10.
When his family moved to Lagos, he studied in London, then came to Berlin.
He loves going to Nigeria -- the weather, the food, the friends -- but hates the political corruption there.
Where is Olu from?
I have another friend named Udo.
He's also 35 years old.
Udo was born in Crdoba, in northwest Argentina, where his grandparents migrated from Germany, what is now Poland, after the war.
Udo studied in Buenos Aires, and nine years ago came to Berlin.
He loves going to Argentina -- the weather, the food, the friends -- but hates the economic corruption there.
Where is Udo from?
With his blonde hair and blue eyes, Udo could pass for German, but holds an Argentinian passport, so needs a visa to live in Berlin.
That Udo is from Argentina has largely to do with history.
That he's a local of Buenos Aires and Berlin, that has to do with life.
Olu, who looks Nigerian, needs a visa to visit Nigeria.
He speaks Yoruba with an English accent, and English with a German one.
To claim that he's "not really Nigerian," though, denies his experience in Lagos, the rituals he practiced growing up, his relationship with family and friends.
Meanwhile, though Lagos is undoubtedly one of his homes, Olu always feels restricted there, not least by the fact that he's gay.
Both he and Udo are restricted by the political conditions of their parents' countries, from living where some of their most meaningful rituals and relationships occur.
To say Olu is from Nigeria and Udo is from Argentina distracts from their common experience.
Their rituals, their relationships, and their restrictions are the same.
Of course, when we ask, "Where are you from?"
we're using a kind of shorthand.
It's quicker to say "Nigeria" than "Lagos and Berlin," and as with Google Maps, we can always zoom in closer, from country to city to neighborhood.
But that's not quite the point.
The difference between "Where are you from?"
and "Where are you a local?"
isn't the specificity of the answer; it's the intention of the question.
Replacing the language of nationality with the language of locality asks us to shift our focus to where real life occurs.
Even that most glorious expression of countryhood, the World Cup, gives us national teams comprised mostly of multilocal players.
As a unit of measurement for human experience, the country doesn't quite work.
That's why Olu says, "I'm German, but my parents come from Nigeria."
The "but" in that sentence belies the inflexibility of the units, one fixed and fictional entity bumping up against another.
"I'm a local of Lagos and Berlin," suggests overlapping experiences, layers that merge together, that can't be denied or removed.
You can take away my passport, but you can't take away my experience.
That I carry within me.
Where I'm from comes wherever I go.
To be clear, I'm not suggesting that we do away with countries.
There's much to be said for national history, more for the sovereign state.
Culture exists in community, and community exists in context.
Geography, tradition, collective memory: these things are important.
What I'm questioning is primacy.
All of those introductions on tour began with reference to nation, as if knowing what country I came from would tell my audience who I was.
What are we really seeking, though, when we ask where someone comes from?
And what are we really seeing when we hear an answer?
Here's one possibility: basically, countries represent power.
"Where are you from?" Mexico. Poland. Bangladesh. Less power.
America. Germany. Japan. More power.
China. Russia. Ambiguous.
(Laughter) It's possible that without realizing it, we're playing a power game, especially in the context of multi-ethnic countries.
As any recent immigrant knows, the question "Where are you from?" or "Where are you really from?"
is often code for "Why are you here?"
Then we have the scholar William Deresiewicz's writing of elite American colleges.
"Students think that their environment is diverse if one comes from Missouri and another from Pakistan -- never mind that all of their parents are doctors or bankers."
I'm with him.
To call one student American, another Pakistani, then triumphantly claim student body diversity ignores the fact that these students are locals of the same milieu.
The same holds true on the other end of the economic spectrum.
A Mexican gardener in Los Angeles and a Nepali housekeeper in Delhi have more in common in terms of rituals and restrictions than nationality implies.
Perhaps my biggest problem with coming from countries is the myth of going back to them.
I'm often asked if I plan to "go back" to Ghana.
I go to Accra every year, but I can't "go back" to Ghana.
It's not because I wasn't born there.
My father can't go back, either.
The country in which he was born, that country no longer exists.
We can never go back to a place and find it exactly where we left it.
Something, somewhere will always have changed, most of all, ourselves.
People.
Finally, what we're talking about is human experience, this notoriously and gloriously disorderly affair.
In creative writing, locality bespeaks humanity.
The more we know about where a story is set, the more local color and texture, the more human the characters start to feel, the more relatable, not less.
The myth of national identity and the vocabulary of coming from confuses us into placing ourselves into mutually exclusive categories.
In fact, all of us are multi -- multi-local, multi-layered.
To begin our conversations with an acknowledgement of this complexity brings us closer together, I think, not further apart.
So the next time that I'm introduced, I'd love to hear the truth: "Taiye Selasi is a human being, like everybody here.
She isn't a citizen of the world, but a citizen of worlds.
She is a local of New York, Rome and Accra."
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I've had the great privilege of traveling to some incredible places, photographing these distant landscapes and remote cultures all over the world.
I love my job.
But people think it's this string of epiphanies and sunrises and rainbows, when in reality, it looks more something like this.
(Laughter) This is my office.
We can't afford the fanciest places to stay at night, so we tend to sleep a lot outdoors.
As long as we can stay dry, that's a bonus.
We also can't afford the fanciest restaurants.
So we tend to eat whatever's on the local menu.
And if you're in the Ecuadorian Pramo, you're going to eat a large rodent called a cuy.
(Laughter) But what makes our experiences perhaps a little bit different and a little more unique than that of the average person is that we have this gnawing thing in the back of our mind that even in our darkest moments, and those times of despair, we think, "Hey, there might be an image to be made here, there might be a story to be told."
And why is storytelling important?
Well, it helps us to connect with our cultural and our natural heritage.
And in the Southeast, there's an alarming disconnect between the public and the natural areas that allow us to be here in the first place.
We're visual creatures, so we use what we see to teach us what we know.
Now the majority of us aren't going to willingly go way down to a swamp.
So how can we still expect those same people to then advocate on behalf of their protection?
We can't.
So my job, then, is to use photography as a communication tool, to help bridge the gap between the science and the aesthetics, to get people talking, to get them thinking, and to hopefully, ultimately, get them caring.
I started doing this 15 years ago right here in Gainesville, right here in my backyard.
And I fell in love with adventure and discovery, going to explore all these different places that were just minutes from my front doorstep.
There are a lot of beautiful places to find.
Despite all these years that have passed, I still see the world through the eyes of a child and I try to incorporate that sense of wonderment and that sense of curiosity into my photography as often as I can.
And we're pretty lucky because here in the South, we're still blessed with a relatively blank canvas that we can fill with the most fanciful adventures and incredible experiences.
It's just a matter of how far our imagination will take us.
See, a lot of people look at this and they say, "Oh yeah, wow, that's a pretty tree."
But I don't just see a tree -- I look at this and I see opportunity.
I see an entire weekend.
Because when I was a kid, these were the types of images that got me off the sofa and dared me to explore, dared me to go find the woods and put my head underwater and see what we have.
And folks, I've been photographing all over the world and I promise you, what we have here in the South, what we have in the Sunshine State, rivals anything else that I've seen.
But yet our tourism industry is busy promoting all the wrong things.
Before most kids are 12, they'll have been to Disney World more times than they've been in a canoe or camping under a starry sky.
And I have nothing against Disney or Mickey; I used to go there, too.
But they're missing out on those fundamental connections that create a real sense of pride and ownership for the place that they call home.
And this is compounded by the issue that the landscapes that define our natural heritage and fuel our aquifer for our drinking water have been deemed as scary and dangerous and spooky.
When our ancestors first came here, they warned, "Stay out of these areas, they're haunted.
They're full of evil spirits and ghosts."
I don't know where they came up with that idea.
But it's actually led to a very real disconnect, a very real negative mentality that has kept the public disinterested, silent, and ultimately, our environment at risk.
We're a state that's surrounded and defined by water, and yet for centuries, swamps and wetlands have been regarded as these obstacles to overcome.
And so we've treated them as these second-class ecosystems, because they have very little monetary value and of course, they're known to harbor alligators and snakes -- which, I'll admit, these aren't the most cuddly of ambassadors.
(Laughter) So it became assumed, then, that the only good swamp was a drained swamp.
And in fact, draining a swamp to make way for agriculture and development was considered the very essence of conservation not too long ago.
But now we're backpedaling, because the more we come to learn about these sodden landscapes, the more secrets we're starting to unlock about interspecies relationships and the connectivity of habitats, watersheds and flyways.
Take this bird, for example: this is the prothonotary warbler.
I love this bird because it's a swamp bird, through and through, a swamp bird.
They nest and they mate and they breed in these old-growth swamps in these flooded forests.
And so after the spring, after they raise their young, they then fly thousand of miles over the Gulf of Mexico into Central and South America.
And then after the winter, the spring rolls around and they come back.
They fly thousands of miles over the Gulf of Mexico.
And where do they go? Where do they land?
Right back in the same tree.
That's nuts.
This is a bird the size of a tennis ball -- I mean, that's crazy!
I used a GPS to get here today, and this is my hometown.
(Laughter) It's crazy.
So what happens, then, when this bird flies over the Gulf of Mexico into Central America for the winter and then the spring rolls around and it flies back, and it comes back to this: a freshly sodded golf course?
This is a narrative that's all too commonly unraveling here in this state.
And this is a natural process that's occurred for thousands of years and we're just now learning about it.
So you can imagine all else we have to learn about these landscapes if we just preserve them first.
Now despite all this rich life that abounds in these swamps, they still have a bad name.
Many people feel uncomfortable with the idea of wading into Florida's blackwater.
I can understand that.
But what I loved about growing up in the Sunshine State is that for so many of us, we live with this latent but very palpable fear that when we put our toes into the water, there might be something much more ancient and much more adapted than we are.
Knowing that you're not top dog is a welcomed discomfort, I think.
How often in this modern and urban and digital age do you actually get the chance to feel vulnerable, or consider that the world may not have been made for just us?
So for the last decade, I began seeking out these areas where the concrete yields to forest and the pines turn to cypress, and I viewed all these mosquitoes and reptiles, all these discomforts, as affirmations that I'd found true wilderness, and I embrace them wholly.
Now as a conservation photographer obsessed with blackwater, it's only fitting that I'd eventually end up in the most famous swamp of all: the Everglades.
Growing up here in North Central Florida, it always had these enchanted names, places like Loxahatchee and Fakahatchee, Corkscrew, Big Cypress.
I started what turned into a five-year project to hopefully reintroduce the Everglades in a new light, in a more inspired light.
But I knew this would be a tall order, because here you have an area that's roughly a third the size the state of Florida, it's huge.
And when I say Everglades, most people are like, "Oh, yeah, the national park."
But the Everglades is not just a park; it's an entire watershed, starting with the Kissimmee chain of lakes in the north, and then as the rains would fall in the summer, these downpours would flow into Lake Okeechobee, and Lake Okeechobee would fill up and it would overflow its banks and spill southward, ever slowly, with the topography, and get into the river of grass, the Sawgrass Prairies, before meting into the cypress slews, until going further south into the mangrove swamps, and then finally -- finally -- reaching Florida Bay, the emerald gem of the Everglades, the great estuary, the 850 square-mile estuary.
So sure, the national park is the southern end of this system, but all the things that make it unique are these inputs that come in, the fresh water that starts 100 miles north.
So no manner of these political or invisible boundaries protect the park from polluted water or insufficient water.
And unfortunately, that's precisely what we've done.
Over the last 60 years, we have drained, we have dammed, we have dredged the Everglades to where now only one third of the water that used to reach the bay now reaches the bay today.
So this story is not all sunshine and rainbows, unfortunately.
For better or for worse, the story of the Everglades is intrinsically tied to the peaks and the valleys of mankind's relationship with the natural world.
But I'll show you these beautiful pictures, because it gets you on board.
And while I have your attention, I can tell you the real story.
It's that we're taking this, and we're trading it for this, at an alarming rate.
And what's lost on so many people is the sheer scale of which we're discussing.
Because the Everglades is not just responsible for the drinking water for 7 million Floridians; today it also provides the agricultural fields for the year-round tomatoes and oranges for over 300 million Americans.
And it's that same seasonal pulse of water in the summer that built the river of grass 6,000 years ago.
Ironically, today, it's also responsible for the over half a million acres of the endless river of sugarcane.
These are the same fields that are responsible for dumping exceedingly high levels of fertilizers into the watershed, forever changing the system.
But in order for you to not just understand how this system works, but to also get personally connected to it, I decided to break the story down into several different narratives.
And I wanted that story to start in Lake Okeechobee, the beating heart of the Everglade system.
And to do that, I picked an ambassador, an iconic species.
This is the Everglade snail kite.
It's a great bird, and they used to nest in the thousands, thousands in the northern Everglades.
And then they've gone down to about 400 nesting pairs today.
And why is that?
Well, it's because they eat one source of food, an apple snail, about the size of a ping-pong ball, an aquatic gastropod.
So as we started damming up the Everglades, as we started diking Lake Okeechobee and draining the wetlands, we lost the habitat for the snail.
And thus, the population of the kites declined.
And so, I wanted a photo that would not only communicate this relationship between wetland, snail and bird, but I also wanted a photo that would communicate how incredible this relationship was, and how very important it is that they've come to depend on each other, this healthy wetland and this bird.
And to do that, I brainstormed this idea.
I started sketching out these plans to make a photo, and I sent it to the wildlife biologist down in Okeechobee -- this is an endangered bird, so it takes special permission to do.
So I built this submerged platform that would hold snails just right under the water.
And I spent months planning this crazy idea.
And I took this platform down to Lake Okeechobee and I spent over a week in the water, wading waist-deep, 9-hour shifts from dawn until dusk, to get one image that I thought might communicate this.
And here's the day that it finally worked: [Video: (Mac Stone narrating) After setting up the platform, I look off and I see a kite coming over the cattails.
And I see him scanning and searching.
And he gets right over the trap, and I see that he's seen it.
And he beelines, he goes straight for the trap.
And in that moment, all those months of planning, waiting, all the sunburn, mosquito bites -- suddenly, they're all worth it.
(Mac Stone in film) Oh my gosh, I can't believe it!] You can believe how excited I was when that happened.
But what the idea was, is that for someone who's never seen this bird and has no reason to care about it, these photos, these new perspectives, will help shed a little new light on just one species that makes this watershed so incredible, so valuable, so important.
Now, I know I can't come here to Gainesville and talk to you about animals in the Everglades without talking about gators.
I love gators, I grew up loving gators.
My parents always said I had an unhealthy relationship with gators.
But what I like about them is, they're like the freshwater equivalent of sharks.
They're feared, they're hated, and they are tragically misunderstood.
Because these are a unique species, they're not just apex predators.
In the Everglades, they are the very architects of the Everglades, because as the water drops down in the winter during the dry season, they start excavating these holes called gator holes.
And they do this because as the water drops down, they'll be able to stay wet and they'll be able to forage.
And now this isn't just affecting them, other animals also depend on this relationship, so they become a keystone species as well.
So how do you make an apex predator, an ancient reptile, at once look like it dominates the system, but at the same time, look vulnerable?
Well, you wade into a pit of about 120 of them, then you hope that you've made the right decision.
(Laughter) I still have all my fingers, it's cool.
But I understand, I know I'm not going to rally you guys, I'm not going to rally the troops to "Save the Everglades for the gators!"
It won't happen because they're so ubiquitous, we see them now, they're one of the great conservation success stories of the US.
But there is one species in the Everglades that no matter who you are, you can't help but love, too, and that's the roseate spoonbill.
These birds are great, but they've had a really tough time in the Everglades, because they started out with thousands of nesting pairs in Florida Bay, and at the turn of the 20th century, they got down to two -- two nesting pairs.
And why?
That's because women thought they looked better on their hats then they did flying in the sky.
Then we banned the plume trade, and their numbers started rebounding.
And as their numbers started rebounding, scientists began to pay attention, they started studying these birds.
And what they found out is that these birds' behavior is intrinsically tied to the annual draw-down cycle of water in the Everglades, the thing that defines the Everglades watershed.
What they found out is that these birds started nesting in the winter as the water drew down, because they're tactile feeders, so they have to touch whatever they eat.
And so they wait for these concentrated pools of fish to be able to feed enough to feed their young.
So these birds became the very icon of the Everglades -- an indicator species of the overall health of the system.
And just as their numbers were rebounding in the mid-20th century -- shooting up to 900, 1,000, 1,100, 1,200 -- just as that started happening, we started draining the southern Everglades.
And we stopped two-thirds of that water from moving south.
And it had drastic consequences.
And just as those numbers started reaching their peak, unfortunately, today, the real spoonbill story, the real photo of what it looks like is more something like this.
And we're down to less than 70 nesting pairs in Florida Bay today, because we've disrupted the system so much.
So all these different organizations are shouting, they're screaming, "The Everglades is fragile! It's fragile!"
It is not.
It is resilient.
Because despite all we've taken, despite all we've done and we've drained and we've dammed and we've dredged it, pieces of it are still here, waiting to be put back together.
And this is what I've loved about South Florida, that in one place, you have this unstoppable force of mankind meeting the immovable object of tropical nature.
And it's at this new frontier that we are forced with a new appraisal.
What is wilderness worth?
What is the value of biodiversity, or our drinking water?
And fortunately, after decades of debate, we're finally starting to act on those questions.
We're slowly undertaking these projects to bring more freshwater back to the bay.
But it's up to us as citizens, as residents, as stewards to hold our elected officials to their promises.
What can you do to help?
It's so easy.
Just get outside, get out there.
Take your friends out, take your kids out, take your family out.
Hire a fishing guide.
Show the state that protecting wilderness not only makes ecological sense, but economic sense as well.
It's a lot of fun, just do it -- put your feet in the water.
The swamp will change you, I promise.
Over the years, we've been so generous with these other landscapes around the country, cloaking them with this American pride, places that we now consider to define us: Grand Canyon, Yosemite, Yellowstone.
And we use these parks and these natural areas as beacons and as cultural compasses.
And sadly, the Everglades is very commonly left out of that conversation.
But I believe it's every bit as iconic and emblematic of who we are as a country as any of these other wildernesses.
It's just a different kind of wild.
But I'm encouraged, because maybe we're finally starting to come around, because what was once deemed this swampy wasteland, today is a World Heritage site.
It's a wetland of international importance.
And we've come a long way in the last 60 years.
And as the world's largest and most ambitious wetland restoration project, the international spotlight is on us in the Sunshine State.
Because if we can heal this system, it's going to become an icon for wetland restoration all over the world.
But it's up to us to decide which legacy we want to attach our flag to.
They say that the Everglades is our greatest test.
If we pass it, we get to keep the planet.
I love that quote, because it's a challenge, it's a prod.
Can we do it? Will we do it?
We have to, we must.
But the Everglades is not just a test.
It's also a gift, and ultimately, our responsibility.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the last year, everyone's been watching the same show, and I'm not talking about "Game of Thrones," but a horrifying, real-life drama that's proved too fascinating to turn off.
It's a show produced by murderers and shared around the world via the Internet.
Their names have become familiar: James Foley, Steven Sotloff, David Haines, Alan Henning, Peter Kassig, Haruna Yukawa, Kenji Goto Jogo.
Their beheadings by the Islamic State were barbaric, but if we think they were archaic, from a remote, obscure age, then we're wrong.
They were uniquely modern, because the murderers acted knowing well that millions of people would tune in to watch.
The headlines called them savages and barbarians, because the image of one man overpowering another, killing him with a knife to the throat, conforms to our idea of ancient, primitive practices, the polar opposite of our urban, civilized ways.
We don't do things like that.
But that's the irony.
We think a beheading has nothing to do with us, even as we click on the screen to watch.
But it is to do with us.
The Islamic State beheadings are not ancient or remote.
They're a global, 21st century event, a 21st century event that takes place in our living rooms, at our desks, on our computer screens.
They're entirely dependent on the power of technology to connect us.
And whether we like it or not, everyone who watches is a part of the show.
And lots of people watch.
We don't know exactly how many.
Obviously, it's difficult to calculate.
But a poll taken in the UK, for example, in August 2014, estimated that 1.2 million people had watched the beheading of James Foley in the few days after it was released.
And that's just the first few days, and just Britain.
A similar poll taken in the United States in November 2014 found that nine percent of those surveyed had watched beheading videos, and a further 23 percent had watched the videos but had stopped just before the death was shown.
Nine percent may be a small minority of all the people who could watch, but it's still a very large crowd.
And of course that crowd is growing all the time, because every week, every month, more people will keep downloading and keep watching.
If we go back 11 years, before sites like YouTube and Facebook were born, it was a similar story.
When innocent civilians like Daniel Pearl, Nick Berg, Paul Johnson, were beheaded, those videos were shown during the Iraq War.
Nick Berg's beheading quickly became one of the most searched for items on the Internet.
Within a day, it was the top search term across search engines like Google, Lycos, Yahoo.
In the week after Nick Berg's beheading, these were the top 10 search terms in the United States.
The Berg beheading video remained the most popular search term for a week, and it was the second most popular search term for the whole month of May, runner-up only to "American Idol."
The al-Qaeda-linked website that first showed Nick Berg's beheading had to close down within a couple of days due to overwhelming traffic to the site.
One Dutch website owner said that his daily viewing figures rose from 300,000 to 750,000 every time a beheading in Iraq was shown.
He told reporters 18 months later that it had been downloaded many millions of times, and that's just one website.
A similar pattern was seen again and again when videos of beheadings were released during the Iraq War.
Social media sites have made these images more accessible than ever before, but if we take another step back in history, we'll see that it was the camera that first created a new kind of crowd in our history of beheadings as public spectacle.
As soon as the camera appeared on the scene, a full lifetime ago on June 17, 1939, it had an immediate and unequivocal effect.
That day, the first film of a public beheading was created in France.
It was the execution, the guillotining, of a German serial killer, Eugen Weidmann, outside the prison Saint-Pierre in Versailles.
Weidmann was due to be executed at the crack of dawn, as was customary at the time, but his executioner was new to the job, and he'd underestimated how long it would take him to prepare.
So Weidmann was executed at 4:30 in the morning, by which time on a June morning, there was enough light to take photographs, and a spectator in the crowd filmed the event, unbeknownst to the authorities.
Several still photographs were taken as well, and you can still watch the film online today and look at the photographs.
The crowd on the day of Weidmann's execution was called "unruly" and "disgusting" by the press, but that was nothing compared to the untold thousands of people who could now study the action over and over again, freeze-framed in every detail.
The camera may have made these scenes more accessible than ever before, but it's not just about the camera.
If we take a bigger leap back in history, we'll see that for as long as there have been public judicial executions and beheadings, there have been the crowds to see them.
In London, as late as the early 19th century, there might be four or five thousand people to see a standard hanging.
There could be 40,000 or 50,000 to see a famous criminal killed.
And a beheading, which was a rare event in England at the time, attracted even more.
In May 1820, five men known as the Cato Street Conspirators were executed in London for plotting to assassinate members of the British government.
They were hung and then decapitated.
It was a gruesome scene.
Each man's head was hacked off in turn and held up to the crowd.
And 100,000 people, that's 10,000 more than can fit into Wembley Stadium, had turned out to watch.
The streets were packed.
People had rented out windows and rooftops.
People had climbed onto carts and wagons in the street.
People climbed lamp posts.
People had been known to have died in the crush on popular execution days.
Evidence suggests that throughout our history of public beheadings and public executions, the vast majority of the people who come to see are either enthusiastic or, at best, unmoved.
Disgust has been comparatively rare, and even when people are disgusted and are horrified, it doesn't always stop them from coming out all the same to watch.
Perhaps the most striking example of the human ability to watch a beheading and remain unmoved and even be disappointed was the introduction in France in 1792 of the guillotine, that famous decapitation machine.
To us in the 21st century, the guillotine may seem like a monstrous contraption, but to the first crowds who saw it, it was actually a disappointment.
They were used to seeing long, drawn-out, torturous executions on the scaffold, where people were mutilated and burned and pulled apart slowly.
To them, watching the guillotine in action, it was so quick, there was nothing to see.
The blade fell, the head fell into a basket, out of sight immediately, and they called out, "Give me back my gallows, give me back my wooden gallows."
The end of torturous public judicial executions in Europe and America was partly to do with being more humane towards the criminal, but it was also partly because the crowd obstinately refused to behave in the way that they should.
All too often, execution day was more like a carnival than a solemn ceremony.
Today, a public judicial execution in Europe or America is unthinkable, but there are other scenarios that should make us cautious about thinking that things are different now and we don't behave like that anymore.
Take, for example, the incidents of suicide baiting.
This is when a crowd gathers to watch a person who has climbed to the top of a public building in order to kill themselves, and people in the crowd shout and jeer, "Get on with it! Go on and jump!"
This is a well-recognized phenomenon.
One paper in 1981 found that in 10 out of 21 threatened suicide attempts, there was incidents of suicide baiting and jeering from a crowd.
And there have been incidents reported in the press this year.
This was a very widely reported incident in Telford and Shropshire in March this year.
And when it happens today, people take photographs and they take videos on their phones and they post those videos online.
When it comes to brutal murderers who post their beheading videos, the Internet has created a new kind of crowd.
Today, the action takes place in a distant time and place, which gives the viewer a sense of detachment from what's happening, a sense of separation.
It's nothing to do with me.
It's already happened.
We are also offered an unprecedented sense of intimacy.
Today, we are all offered front row seats.
We can all watch in private, in our own time and space, and no one need ever know that we've clicked on the screen to watch.
This sense of separation -- from other people, from the event itself -- seems to be key to understanding our ability to watch, and there are several ways in which the Internet creates a sense of detachment that seems to erode individual moral responsibility.
Our activities online are often contrasted with real life, as though the things we do online are somehow less real.
We feel less accountable for our actions when we interact online.
There's a sense of anonymity, a sense of invisibility, so we feel less accountable for our behavior.
The Internet also makes it far easier to stumble upon things inadvertently, things that we would usually avoid in everyday life.
Today, a video can start playing before you even know what you're watching.
Or you may be tempted to look at material that you wouldn't look at in everyday life or you wouldn't look at if you were with other people at the time.
And when the action is pre-recorded and takes place in a distant time and space, watching seems like a passive activity.
There's nothing I can do about it now.
It's already happened.
All these things make it easier as an Internet user for us to give in to our sense of curiosity about death, to push our personal boundaries, to test our sense of shock, to explore our sense of shock.
But we're not passive when we watch.
On the contrary, we're fulfilling the murderer's desire to be seen.
When the victim of a decapitation is bound and defenseless, he or she essentially becomes a pawn in their killer's show.
Unlike a trophy head that's taken in battle, that represents the luck and skill it takes to win a fight, when a beheading is staged, when it's essentially a piece of theater, the power comes from the reception the killer receives as he performs.
In other words, watching is very much part of the event.
The event no longer takes place in a single location at a certain point in time as it used to and as it may still appear to.
Now the event is stretched out in time and place, and everyone who watches plays their part.
We should stop watching, but we know we won't.
History tells us we won't, and the killers know it too.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you. Let me get this back. Thank you.
Let's move here. While they install for the next performance, I want to ask you the question that probably many here have, which is how did you get interested in this topic?
Frances Larson: I used to work at a museum called the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, which was famous for its display of shrunken heads from South America.
People used to say, "Oh, the shrunken head museum, the shrunken head museum!"
And at the time, I was working on the history of scientific collections of skulls.
I was working on the cranial collections, and it just struck me as ironic that here were people coming to see this gory, primitive, savage culture that they were almost fantasizing about and creating without really understanding what they were seeing, and all the while these vast -- I mean hundreds of thousands of skulls in our museums, all across Europe and the States -- were kind of upholding this Enlightenment pursuit of scientific rationality.
So I wanted to kind of twist it round and say, "Let's look at us."
We're looking through the glass case at these shrunken heads.
Let's look at our own history and our own cultural fascination with these things.
BG: Thank you for sharing that.
FL: Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was only three or four, I fell in love with poetry, with the rhythms and the music of language; with the power of metaphor and of imagery, poetry being the essence of communication -- the discipline, the distillation.
And all these years later, the poems I'll read today are from my just-finished seventh book of poetry.
Well, five years ago, I was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease.
Though there's no cure yet, advances in treatment are really impressive.
But you can imagine that I was appalled to learn that women are largely left out of research trials, despite gender-specific medical findings having demonstrated that we are not actually just small men -- (Laughter) who happen to have different reproductive systems.
Gender-specific medicine is good for men, too.
But you bring to a crisis the person you already are, including the, yes, momentum that you've learned to invoke through passionate caring and through action, both of which require but also create energy.
So as an activist, I began working with the Parkinson's Disease Foundation -- that's pdf.org -- to create a major initiative to put women on the Parkinson's disease map.
And as a poet, I began working with this subject matter, finding it tragic, hilarious, sometimes even joyful.
I do not feel diminished by Parkinson's; I feel distilled by it, and I actually very much like the woman I'm distilling into.
"No Signs of Struggle" Growing small requires enormity of will: just sitting still in the doctor's waiting room watching the future shuffle in and out, watching it stoop; stare at you while you try not to look.
Rare is an exchange: a smile of brief, wry recognition.
You are the new kid on the block.
Everyone here was you once.
You are still learning that growing small requires a largeness of spirit you can't fit into yet: acceptance of irritating help from those who love you; giving way and over, but not up.
You've swallowed hard the contents of the "Drink Me" bottle, and felt yourself shrink.
Now, familiar furniture looms, floors tilt, and doorknobs yield only when wrestled round with both hands.
It demands colossal patience, all this growing small: your diminished sleep at night, your handwriting, your voice, your height.
You are more the incredible shrinking woman than the Buddhist mystic, serene, making do with less.
Less is not always more.
Yet in this emptying space, space glimmers, becoming visible.
Here is a place behind the eyes of those accustomed by what some would call diminishment.
It is a place of merciless poetry, a gift of presence previously ignored, drowned in the daily clutter.
Here every gesture needs intention, is alive with consciousness.
Nothing is automatic.
You can spot it in the provocation of a button, an arm poking at a sleeve, a balancing act at a night-time curb while negotiating the dark.
Feats of such modest valor, who would suspect them to be exercises in an intimate, fierce discipline, a metaphysics of being relentlessly aware?
Such understated power here, in these tottering dancers who exert stupendous effort on tasks most view as insignificant.
Such quiet beauty here, in these, my soft-voiced, stiff-limbed people; such resolve masked by each placid face.
There is immensity required in growing small, so bent on such unbending grace.
(Applause) Thank you.
This one is called "On Donating My Brain to Science."
(Laughter) Not a problem.
Skip over all the pages reassuring religious people.
Already a universal donor: kidneys, corneas, liver, lungs, tissue, heart, veins, whatever.
Odd that the modest brain never imagined its unique value in research, maybe saving someone else from what it is they're not quite sure I have.
Flattering, that.
So fill in the forms, drill through the answers, trill out a blithe spirit.
And slice me, dice me, spread me on your slides.
Find what I'm trying to tell you.
Earn me, learn me, scan me, squint through your lens.
Uncover what I'd hint at if I could.
Be my guest, do your best, harvest me, track the clues.
This was a good brain while alive.
This was a brain that paid its dues.
So slice me, dice me, smear me on your slides, stain me, explain me, drain me like a cup.
Share me, hear me: I want to be used I want to be used I want to be used up.
(Applause) (Applause ends) And this one's called "The Ghost Light."
Lit from within is the sole secure way to traverse dark matter.
Some life forms -- certain mushrooms, snails, jellyfish, worms -- glow bioluminescent, and people as well; we emit infra-red light from our most lucent selves.
Our tragedy is we can't see it.
We see by reflecting.
We need biofluorescence to show our true colors.
External illumination can distort, though.
When gravity bends light, huge galaxy clusters can act as telescopes, elongating background images of star systems to faint arcs -- a lensing effect like viewing distant street lamps through a glass of wine.
A glass of wine or two now makes me weave as if acting the drunkard's part; as if, besotted with unrequited love for the dynamic Turner canvasses spied out by the Hubble, I could lurch down a city street set without provoking every pedestrian walk-on stare.
Stare as long as you need to.
If you think about it, walking, even standing, is illogical -- such tiny things, feet! -- (Laughter) especially when one's body is not al dente anymore.
(Laughter) Besides, creature of extremes and excess, I've always thought Apollo beautiful but boring, and a bit of a dumb blonde.
Dionysians don't do balance.
Balance, in other words, has never been my strong point.
But I digress.
More and more these days, digression seems the most direct route through from where I've lost or found myself out of place, mind, turn, time.
Place your foot just so, mind how you turn: too swift a swivel can bring you down.
Take your time ushering the audience out, saying goodbye to the actors.
The ghost light is what they call the single bulb hanging above the bare stage in an empty theater.
In the empty theater of such a night, waking to meet no external radiance, this is the final struggle left to win, this the sole beacon to beckon the darkness in and let the rest begin, this the lens through which at last to see both Self and Other arrayed with the bright stain of original sin: lit from within.
(Applause) And this is the last one.
"This Dark Hour" Late summer, 4 A.M.
The rain slows to a stop, dripping still from the broad leaves of blue hostas unseen in the garden's dark.
Barefoot, careful on the slick slate slabs, I need no light, I know the way, stoop by the mint bed, scoop a fistful of moist earth, then grope for a chair, spread a shawl, and sit, breathing in the wet green August air.
This is the small, still hour before the newspaper lands in the vestibule like a grenade, the phone shrills, the computer screen blinks and glares awake.
There is this hour: poem in my head, soil in my hand: unnamable fullness.
This hour, when blood of my blood bone of bone, child grown to manhood now -- stranger, intimate, not distant but apart -- lies safe, off dreaming melodies while love sleeps, safe, in his arms.
To have come to this place, lived to this moment: immeasurable lightness.
The density of black starts to blur umber.
Tentative, a cardinal's coloratura, then the mourning dove's elegy.
Sable glimmers toward grey; objects emerge, trailing shadows; night ages toward day.
The city stirs.
There will be other dawns, nights, gaudy noons.
Likely, I'll lose my way.
There will be stumbling, falling, cursing the dark.
Whatever comes, there was this hour when nothing mattered, all was unbearably dear.
And when I'm done with daylights, should those who loved me grieve too long a while, let them remember that I had this hour -- this dark, perfect hour -- and smile.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Arabic) I seek refuge in Allah from cursed Satan. In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful.
(English) I was born in a middle class family.
My father was five years old when he lost his father, but by the time I was born, he was already a businessman.
But it didn't make a difference to him if his children were going to be a boy or a girl: they were going to go to school.
So I guess I was the lucky one.
My mother had 16 pregnancies.
From 16 pregnancies, five of us are alive.
You can imagine as a child what I went through.
Day to day, I watched women being carried to a graveyard, or watched children going to a graveyard.
At that time, when I finished my high school, I really wanted to be a doctor.
I wanted to be a doctor to help women and children.
So I completed my education, but I wanted to go to university.
Unfortunately, in my country, there wasn't a dormitory for girls, so I was accepted in medical school, but I could not go there.
So as a result, my father sent me to America.
I came to America.
I completed my education.
While I was completing my education, my country was invaded by Russia.
And do you know that at the time I was completing my education, I didn't know what was going on with my family or with my country.
There were months, years, I didn't know about it.
My family was in a refugee camp.
So as soon as I completed my education, I brought my family to America.
I wanted them to be safe.
But where was my heart?
My heart was in Afghanistan.
Day after day, when I listened to the news, when I followed what was going on with my country, my heart was breaking up.
I really wanted to go back to my country, but at the same time I knew I could not go there, because there was no place for me.
I had a good job.
I was a professor at a university.
I earned good money.
I had a good life.
My family was here.
I could live with them.
But I wasn't happy.
I wanted to go back home.
So I went to the refugee camp.
And when I went to the refugee camp in Pakistan, there were 7.5 million refugees.
7.5 million refugees.
About 90 percent of them were women and children.
Most of the men have been killed or they were in war.
And you know, in the refugee camp, when I went day-to-day to do a survey, I found things you never could imagine.
I saw a widow with five to eight children sitting there and weeping and not knowing what to do.
I saw a young woman have no way to go anywhere, no education, no entertainment, no place to even live.
I saw young men that had lost their father and their home, and they are supporting the family as a 10-to-12-year old boy -- being the head of the household, trying to protect their sister and their mother and their children.
So it was a very devastating situation.
My heart was beating for my people, and I didn't know what to do.
At that moment, we talk about momentum.
At that moment, I felt, what can I do for these people?
How could I help these people?
I am one individual. What can I do for them?
But at that moment, I knew that education changed my life.
It transformed me. It gave me status.
It gave me confidence. It gave me a career.
It helped me to support my family, to bring my family to another country, to be safe.
And I knew that at that moment that what I should give to my people is education and health, and that's what I went after.
But do you think it was easy?
No, because at that time, education was banned for girls, completely.
And also, by Russia invading Afghanistan, people were not trusting anyone.
It was very hard to come and say, "I want to do this."
Who am I?
Somebody who comes from the United States.
Somebody who got educated here.
Did they trust me? Of course not.
So I really needed to build the trust in this community.
How am I going to do that?
I went and surveyed and looked and looked.
I asked.
Finally, I found one man.
He was 80 years old.
He was a mullah.
I went to his tent in the camp, and I asked him, "I want to make you a teacher."
And he looked at me, and he said, "Crazy woman, crazy woman, how do you think I can be a teacher?"
And I told him, "I will make you a teacher."
Finally, he accepted my offer, and once I started a class in his compound, the word spread all over.
In a matter of one year, we had 25 schools set up, 15,000 children going to school, and it was amazing.
(Applause) Thank you.
Thank you.
But of course, we're doing all our work, we were giving teacher training.
We were training women's rights, human rights, democracy, rule of law.
We were giving all kinds of training.
And one day, I tell you, one day I was in the office in Peshawar, Pakistan.
All of a sudden, I saw my staff running to rooms and locking the doors and telling me, "Run away, hide!"
And you know, as a leader, what do you do?
You're scared. You know it's dangerous.
You know your life is on the line.
But as a leader, you have to hold it together.
You have to hold it together and show strength.
So I said, "What's going on?"
And these people were pouring into my office.
So I invited them to the office.
They came, and there were nine of them -- nine Taliban.
They were the ugliest looking men you can ever see.
(Laughter) Very mean-looking people, black clothes, black turban, and they pour into my office.
And I invited them to have a seat and have tea.
They said no. They are not going to drink tea.
And of course, with the tone of voice they were using, it was very scary, but I was really shaking up.
But also I was strong, holding myself up.
And, of course, by that time, you know how I dress -- I dress from head to toe in a black hijab.
The only thing you could see, my eyes.
They asked me, "What are you doing?
Don't you know that school is banned for girls?
What are you doing here?"
And you know, I just looked at them, and I said, "What school? Where is the school?"
(Laughter) (Applause) And they look at my face, and they said, "You are teaching girls here."
I said, "This is a house of somebody.
We have some students coming, and they are all learning Koran, Holy Book.
And you know, Koran says that if you learn the Holy Book, the woman, they can be a good wife, and they can obey their husband."
(Laughter) And I tell you one thing: that's the way you work with those people, and you know -- (Laughter) So by that time, they started speaking Pashto.
They talked to each other, and they said, "Let's go, leave her alone, she's OK."
And you know, this time, I offered them tea again, and they took a sip and they left.
By that time, my staff poured into my office.
They were scared to death.
They didn't know why they didn't kill me.
They didn't know why they didn't take me away.
But everybody was happy to see me.
Very happy, and I was happy to be alive, of course.
(Laughter) Of course, I was happy to be alive.
But also, as we continuously gave training during the fall of the Taliban -- of course during the Taliban there is another story.
We went underground and we provided education for 80 schoolgirls, 3,000 students underground, and continuously we trained.
With the fall of the Taliban, we went into the country, and we opened school after school.
We opened women's learning center.
We continuously opened clinics.
We worked with mothers and children.
We had reproductive health training.
We had all kinds of training that you can imagine.
I was very happy. I was delighted with the outcome of my work.
And one day, with four trainers and one bodyguard, I was going up north of Kabul, and all of a sudden, again, I was stopped in the middle of the road by 19 young men.
Rifles on their shoulders, they blocked the road.
And I told my driver, "What's going on?"
And the driver said, "I don't know."
He asked them. They said, "We have nothing to do with you."
They called my name. They said, "We want her."
My bodyguard got out, said, "I can answer you.
What do you want?"
They said, "Nothing." They called my name.
And by that time, the women are yelling and screaming inside the car.
I am very shaken up, and I told myself, this is it.
This time, we all are going to be killed.
There is no doubt in my mind.
But still, the moment comes, and you take strength from whatever you believe and whatever you do.
It's in your heart.
You believe in your worth, and you can walk on it.
So I just hold myself on the side of the car.
My leg was shaking, and I got outside.
And I asked them, "What can I do for you?"
You know what they said to me?
They said, "We know who you are.
We know where you are going.
Every day you go up north here and there.
You train women, you teach them and also you give them an opportunity to have a job.
You build their skills. How about us?"
(Laughter) (Applause) "And you know, how about us?
What are we going to do?"
I looked at them, and I said, "I don't know."
(Laughter) They said, "It's OK.
The only thing we can do, what we know, from the time we're born, we just hold the gun and kill.
That's all we know."
And you know what that means.
It's a trap to me, of course.
So I walk out of there. They said, "We'll let you go, go."
And so I walked into the car, I sit in the car, and I told the driver, "Turn around and go back to the office."
At that time, we only were supporting girls.
We only had money for women to train them, to send them to school, and nothing else.
By the time I came to the office, of course my trainers were gone.
They ran away home. Nobody stayed there.
My bodyguard was the only one there, and my voice was completely gone.
I was shaken up, and I sat on my table, and I said, "What am I going to do?"
How am I going to solve this problem?
Because we had training going on up north already.
Hundreds of women were there coming to get training.
So I was sitting there, all of a sudden, at this moment, talking about momentum, we are, at that moment, one of my wonderful donors called me about a report.
And she asked me, "Sakena?" And I answered her.
She said, "It's not you. What's wrong with you?"
I said, "Nothing." I tried to cover.
No matter what I tried to do, she didn't believe me, and she asked me again.
"OK, tell me what's going on?"
I told her the whole story.
At that time, she said, "OK, you go next time, and you will help them.
You will help them."
And when, two days later, I went the same route, and do you know, they were not in here, they were a little back further, the same young men, standing up there and holding the rifle and pointing to us to stop the car.
So we stopped the car.
I got out. I said, "OK, let's go with me."
And they said, "Yes."
I said, "On one condition, that whatever I say, you accept it."
And they said, yes, they do.
So I took them to the mosque, and to make a long story short, I told them I'd give them teachers.
Today, they are the best trainers.
They learn English, they learn how to be teachers, they learn computers, and they are my guides.
Every area that is unknown to us in the mountain areas, they go with me. They are ahead, and we go.
And they protect us.
And -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) That tells you that education transforms people.
When you educate people, they are going to be different, and today all over, we need to work for gender equality.
We cannot only train women but forget about the men, because the men are the real people who are giving women the hardest time.
(Laughter) So we started training men because the men should know the potential of women, know how much these potential men has, and how much these women can do the same job they are doing.
So we are continuously giving training to men, and I really believe strongly.
I live in a country that was a beautiful country.
I just want to share this with you.
It was a beautiful country, beautiful, peaceful country.
We were going everywhere.
Women were getting education: lawyer, engineer, teacher, and we were going from house to house.
We never locked our doors.
But you know what happened to my country.
Today, people cannot walk out of their door without security issues.
But we want the same Afghanistan we had before.
And I want to tell you the other side.
Today, the women of Afghanistan are working very, very hard.
They are earning degrees. They are training to be lawyers.
They are training to be doctors, back again.
They are training to be teachers, and they are running businesses.
So it is so wonderful to see people like that reach their complete potential, and all of this is going to happen.
I want to share this with you, because of love, because of compassion, and because of trust and honesty.
If you have these few things with you, you will accomplish.
We have one poet, Mawln Rm.
He said that by having compassion and having love, you can conquer the world.
And I tell you, we could.
And if we could do it in Afghanistan, I am sure 100 percent that everyone can do it in any part of the world.
Thank you very, very much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine being unable to say, "I am hungry," "I am in pain," "thank you," or "I love you."
Being trapped inside your body, a body that doesn't respond to commands.
Surrounded by people, yet utterly alone.
Wishing you could reach out, to connect, to comfort, to participate.
For 13 long years, that was my reality.
Most of us never think twice about talking, about communicating.
I've thought a lot about it.
I've had a lot of time to think.
For the first 12 years of my life, I was a normal, happy, healthy little boy.
Then everything changed.
I contracted a brain infection.
The doctors weren't sure what it was, but they treated me the best they could.
However, I progressively got worse.
Eventually, I lost my ability to control my movements, make eye contact, and finally, my ability to speak.
While in hospital, I desperately wanted to go home.
I said to my mother, "When home?"
Those were the last words I ever spoke with my own voice.
I would eventually fail every test for mental awareness.
My parents were told I was as good as not there.
A vegetable, having the intelligence of a three-month-old baby.
They were told to take me home and try to keep me comfortable until I died.
My parents, in fact my entire family's lives, became consumed by taking care of me the best they knew how.
Their friends drifted away.
One year turned to two, two turned to three.
It seemed like the person I once was began to disappear.
The Lego blocks and electronic circuits I'd loved as a boy were put away.
I had been moved out of my bedroom into another more practical one.
I had become a ghost, a faded memory of a boy people once knew and loved.
Meanwhile, my mind began knitting itself back together.
Gradually, my awareness started to return.
But no one realized that I had come back to life.
I was aware of everything, just like any normal person.
I could see and understand everything, but I couldn't find a way to let anybody know.
My personality was entombed within a seemingly silent body, a vibrant mind hidden in plain sight within a chrysalis.
The stark reality hit me that I was going to spend the rest of my life locked inside myself, totally alone.
I was trapped with only my thoughts for company.
I would never be rescued.
No one would ever show me tenderness.
I would never talk to a friend.
No one would ever love me.
I had no dreams, no hope, nothing to look forward to.
Well, nothing pleasant.
I lived in fear, and, to put it bluntly, was waiting for death to finally release me, expecting to die all alone in a care home.
I don't know if it's truly possible to express in words what it's like not to be able to communicate.
Your personality appears to vanish into a heavy fog and all of your emotions and desires are constricted, stifled and muted within you.
For me, the worst was the feeling of utter powerlessness.
I simply existed.
It's a very dark place to find yourself because in a sense, you have vanished.
Other people controlled every aspect of my life.
They decided what I ate and when.
Whether I was laid on my side or strapped into my wheelchair.
I often spent my days positioned in front of the TV watching Barney reruns.
I think because Barney is so happy and jolly, and I absolutely wasn't, it made it so much worse.
I was completely powerless to change anything in my life or people's perceptions of me.
I was a silent, invisible observer of how people behaved when they thought no one was watching.
Unfortunately, I wasn't only an observer.
With no way to communicate, I became the perfect victim: a defenseless object, seemingly devoid of feelings that people used to play out their darkest desires.
For more than 10 years, people who were charged with my care abused me physically, verbally and sexually.
Despite what they thought, I did feel.
The first time it happened, I was shocked and filled with disbelief.
How could they do this to me?
I was confused.
What had I done to deserve this?
Part of me wanted to cry and another part wanted to fight.
Hurt, sadness and anger flooded through me.
I felt worthless.
There was no one to comfort me.
But neither of my parents knew this was happening.
I lived in terror, knowing it would happen again and again.
I just never knew when.
All I knew was that I would never be the same.
I remember once listening to Whitney Houston singing, "No matter what they take from me, they can't take away my dignity."
And I thought to myself, "You want to bet?"
Perhaps my parents could have found out and could have helped.
But the years of constant caretaking, having to wake up every two hours to turn me, combined with them essentially grieving the loss of their son, had taken a toll on my mother and father.
Following yet another heated argument between my parents, in a moment of despair and desperation, my mother turned to me and told me that I should die.
I was shocked, but as I thought about what she had said, I was filled with enormous compassion and love for my mother, yet I could do nothing about it.
There were many moments when I gave up, sinking into a dark abyss.
I remember one particularly low moment.
My dad left me alone in the car while he quickly went to buy something from the store.
A random stranger walked past, looked at me and he smiled.
I may never know why, but that simple act, the fleeting moment of human connection, transformed how I was feeling, making me want to keep going.
My existence was tortured by monotony, a reality that was often too much to bear.
Alone with my thoughts, I constructed intricate fantasies about ants running across the floor.
I taught myself to tell the time by noticing where the shadows were.
As I learned how the shadows moved as the hours of the day passed, I understood how long it would be before I was picked up and taken home.
Seeing my father walk through the door to collect me was the best moment of the day.
My mind became a tool that I could use to either close down to retreat from my reality or enlarge into a gigantic space that I could fill with fantasies.
I hoped that my reality would change and someone would see that I had come back to life.
But I had been washed away like a sand castle built too close to the waves, and in my place was the person people expected me to be.
To some I was Martin, a vacant shell, the vegetable, deserving of harsh words, dismissal and even abuse.
To others, I was the tragically brain-damaged boy who had grown to become a man.
Someone they were kind to and cared for.
Good or bad, I was a blank canvas onto which different versions of myself were projected.
It took someone new to see me in a different way.
An aromatherapist began coming to the care home about once a week.
Whether through intuition or her attention to details that others failed to notice, she became convinced that I could understand what was being said.
She urged my parents to have me tested by experts in augmentative and alternative communication.
And within a year, I was beginning to use a computer program to communicate.
It was exhilarating, but frustrating at times.
I had so many words in my mind, that I couldn't wait to be able to share them.
Sometimes, I would say things to myself simply because I could.
In myself, I had a ready audience, and I believed that by expressing my thoughts and wishes, others would listen, too.
But as I began to communicate more, I realized that it was in fact only just the beginning of creating a new voice for myself.
I was thrust into a world I didn't quite know how to function in.
I stopped going to the care home and managed to get my first job making photocopies.
As simple as this may sound, it was amazing.
My new world was really exciting but often quite overwhelming and frightening.
I was like a man-child, and as liberating as it often was, I struggled.
I also learned that many of those who had known me for a long time found it impossible to abandon the idea of Martin they had in their heads.
While those I had only just met struggled to look past the image of a silent man in a wheelchair.
I realized that some people would only listen to me if what I said was in line with what they expected.
Otherwise, it was disregarded and they did what they felt was best.
I discovered that true communication is about more than merely physically conveying a message.
It is about getting the message heard and respected.
Still, things were going well.
My body was slowly getting stronger.
I had a job in computing that I loved, and had even got Kojak, the dog I had been dreaming about for years.
However, I longed to share my life with someone.
I remember staring out the window as my dad drove me home from work, thinking I have so much love inside of me and nobody to give it to.
Just as I had resigned myself to being single for the rest of my life, I met Joan.
Not only is she the best thing that has ever happened to me, but Joan helped me to challenge my own misconceptions about myself.
Joan said it was through my words that she fell in love with me.
However, after all I had been through, I still couldn't shake the belief that nobody could truly see beyond my disability and accept me for who I am.
I also really struggled to comprehend that I was a man.
The first time someone referred to me as a man, it stopped me in my tracks.
I felt like looking around and asking, "Who, me?"
That all changed with Joan.
We have an amazing connection and I learned how important it is to communicate openly and honestly.
I felt safe, and it gave me the confidence to truly say what I thought.
I started to feel whole again, a man worthy of love.
I began to reshape my destiny.
I spoke up a little more at work.
I asserted my need for independence to the people around me.
Being given a means of communication changed everything.
I used the power of words and will to challenge the preconceptions of those around me and those I had of myself.
Communication is what makes us human, enabling us to connect on the deepest level with those around us -- telling our own stories, expressing wants, needs and desires, or hearing those of others by really listening.
All this is how the world knows who we are.
So who are we without it?
True communication increases understanding and creates a more caring and compassionate world.
Once, I was perceived to be an inanimate object, a mindless phantom of a boy in a wheelchair.
Today, I am so much more.
A husband, a son, a friend, a brother, a business owner, a first-class honors graduate, a keen amateur photographer.
It is my ability to communicate that has given me all this.
We are told that actions speak louder than words.
But I wonder, do they?
Our words, however we communicate them, are just as powerful.
Whether we speak the words with our own voices, type them with our eyes, or communicate them non-verbally to someone who speaks them for us, words are among our most powerful tools.
I have come to you through a terrible darkness, pulled from it by caring souls and by language itself.
The act of you listening to me today brings me farther into the light.
We are shining here together.
If there is one most difficult obstacle to my way of communicating, it is that sometimes I want to shout and other times simply to whisper a word of love or gratitude.
It all sounds the same.
But if you will, please imagine these next two words as warmly as you can: Thank you.
(Applause)
Over our lifetimes, we've all contributed to climate change.
Actions, choices and behaviors will have led to an increase in greenhouse gas emissions.
And I think that that's quite a powerful thought.
But it does have the potential to make us feel guilty when we think about decisions we might have made around where to travel to, how often and how, about the energy that we choose to use in our homes or in our workplaces, or quite simply the lifestyles that we lead and enjoy.
But we can also turn that thought on its head, and think that if we've had such a profound but a negative impact on our climate already, then we have an opportunity to influence the amount of future climate change that we will need to adapt to.
So we have a choice.
We can either choose to start to take climate change seriously, and significantly cut and mitigate our greenhouse gas emissions, and then we will have to adapt to less of the climate change impacts in future.
Alternatively, we can continue to really ignore the climate change problem.
But if we do that, we are also choosing to adapt to very much more powerful climate impacts in future.
And not only that.
As people who live in countries with high per capita emissions, we're making that choice on behalf of others as well.
But the choice that we don't have is a no climate change future.
Over the last two decades, our government negotiators and policymakers have been coming together to discuss climate change, and they've been focused on avoiding a two-degree centigrade warming above pre-industrial levels.
That's the temperature that's associated with dangerous impacts across a range of different indicators, to humans and to the environment.
So two degrees centigrade constitutes dangerous climate change.
But dangerous climate change can be subjective.
So if we think about an extreme weather event that might happen in some part of the world, and if that happens in a part of the world where there is good infrastructure, where there are people that are well-insured and so on, then that impact can be disruptive.
It can cause upset, it could cause cost.
It could even cause some deaths.
But if that exact same weather event happens in a part of the world where there is poor infrastructure, or where people are not well-insured, or they're not having good support networks, then that same climate change impact could be devastating.
It could cause a significant loss of home, but it could also cause significant amounts of death.
So this is a graph of the CO2 emissions at the left-hand side from fossil fuel and industry, and time from before the Industrial Revolution out towards the present day.
And what's immediately striking about this is that emissions have been growing exponentially.
If we focus in on a shorter period of time from 1950, we have established in 1988 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, then rolling on a few years, in 2009 we had the Copenhagen Accord, where it established avoiding a two-degree temperature rise in keeping with the science and on the basis of equity.
And then in 2012, we had the Rio+20 event.
And all the way through, during all of these meetings and many others as well, emissions have continued to rise.
And if we focus on our historical emission trend in recent years, and we put that together with our understanding of the direction of travel in our global economy, then we are much more on track for a four-degree centigrade global warming than we are for the two-degree centigrade.
Now, let's just pause for a moment and think about this four-degree global average temperature.
Most of our planet is actually made up of the sea.
Now, because the sea has a greater thermal inertia than the land, the average temperatures over land are actually going to be higher than they are over the sea.
The second thing is that we as human beings don't experience global average temperatures.
We experience hot days, cold days, rainy days, especially if you live in Manchester like me.
So now put yourself in a city center.
Imagine somewhere in the world: Mumbai, Beijing, New York, London.
It's the hottest day that you've ever experienced.
There's sun beating down, there's concrete and glass all around you.
Now imagine that same day -- but it's six, eight, maybe 10 to 12 degrees warmer on that day during that heat wave.
That's the kind of thing we're going to experience under a four-degree global average temperature scenario.
And the problem with these extremes, and not just the temperature extremes, but also the extremes in terms of storms and other climate impacts, is our infrastructure is just not set up to deal with these sorts of events.
So our roads and our rail networks have been designed to last for a long time and withstand only certain amounts of impacts in different parts of the world.
And this is going to be extremely challenged.
Our power stations are expected to be cooled by water to a certain temperature to remain effective and resilient.
And our buildings are designed to be comfortable within a particular temperature range.
And this is all going to be significantly challenged under a four-degree-type scenario.
Our infrastructure has not been designed to cope with this.
So if we go back, also thinking about four degrees, it's not just the direct impacts, but also some indirect impacts.
So if we take food security, for example.
Maize and wheat yields in some parts of the world are expected to be up to 40 percent lower under a four-degree scenario, rice up to 30 percent lower.
This will be absolutely devastating for global food security.
So all in all, the kinds of impacts anticipated under this four-degree centigrade scenario are going to be incompatible with global organized living.
So back to our trajectories and our graphs of four degrees and two degrees.
Is it reasonable still to focus on the two-degree path?
There are quite a lot of my colleagues and other scientists who would say that it's now too late to avoid a two-degree warming.
But I would just like to draw on my own research on energy systems, on food systems, aviation and also shipping, just to say that I think there is still a small fighting chance of avoiding this two-degree dangerous climate change.
But we really need to get to grips with the numbers to work out how to do it.
So if you focus in on this trajectory and these graphs, the yellow circle there highlights that the departure from the red four-degree pathway to the two-degree green pathway is immediate.
And that's because of cumulative emissions, or the carbon budget.
So in other words, because of the lights and the projectors that are on in this room right now, the CO2 that is going into our atmosphere as a result of that electricity consumption lasts a very long time.
Some of it will be in our atmosphere for a century, maybe much longer.
It will accumulate, and greenhouse gases tend to be cumulative.
And that tells us something about these trajectories.
First of all, it tells us that it's the area under these curves that matter, not where we reach at a particular date in future.
And that's important, because it doesn't matter if we come up with some amazing whiz-bang technology to sort out our energy problem on the last day of 2049, just in the nick of time to sort things out.
Because in the meantime, emissions will have accumulated.
So if we continue on this red, four-degree centigrade scenario pathway, the longer we continue on it, that will need to be made up for in later years to keep the same carbon budget, to keep the same area under the curve, which means that that trajectory, the red one there, becomes steeper.
So in other words, if we don't reduce emissions in the short to medium term, then we'll have to make more significant year-on-year emission reductions.
We also know that we have to decarbonize our energy system.
But if we don't start to cut emissions in the short to medium term, then we will have to do that even sooner.
So this poses really big challenges for us.
The other thing it does is tells us something about energy policy.
If you live in a part of the world where per capita emissions are already high, it points us towards reducing energy demand.
And that's because with all the will in the world, the large-scale engineering infrastructure that we need to roll out rapidly to decarbonize the supply side of our energy system is just simply not going to happen in time.
So it doesn't matter whether we choose nuclear power or carbon capture and storage, upscale our biofuel production, or go for a much bigger roll-out of wind turbines and wave turbines.
All of that will take time.
So because it's the area under the curve that matters, we need to focus on energy efficiency, but also on energy conservation -- in other words, using less energy.
And if we do that, that also means that as we continue to roll out the supply-side technology, we will have less of a job to do if we've actually managed to reduce our energy consumption, because we will then need less infrastructure on the supply side.
Another issue that we really need to grapple with is the issue of well-being and equity.
There are many parts of the world where the standard of living needs to rise.
Bbut with energy systems currently reliant on fossil fuel, as those economies grow so will emissions.
And now, if we're all constrained by the same amount of carbon budget, that means that if some parts of the world's emissions are needing to rise, then other parts of the world's emissions need to reduce.
So that poses very significant challenges for wealthy nations.
Because according to our research, if you're in a country where per capita emissions are really high -- so North America, Europe, Australia -- emissions reductions of the order of 10 percent per year, and starting immediately, will be required for a good chance of avoiding the two-degree target.
Let me just put that into context.
The economist Nicholas Stern said that emission reductions of more than one percent per year had only ever been associated with economic recession or upheaval.
So this poses huge challenges for the issue of economic growth, because if we have our high carbon infrastructure in place, it means that if our economies grow, then so do our emissions.
So I'd just like to take a quote from a paper by myself and Kevin Anderson back in 2011 where we said that to avoid the two-degree framing of dangerous climate change, economic growth needs to be exchanged at least temporarily for a period of planned austerity in wealthy nations.
This is a really difficult message to take, because what it suggests is that we really need to do things differently.
This is not about just incremental change.
This is about doing things differently, about whole system change, and sometimes it's about doing less things.
And this applies to all of us, whatever sphere of influence we have.
So it could be from writing to our local politician to talking to our boss at work or being the boss at work, or talking with our friends and family, or, quite simply, changing our lifestyles.
Because we really need to make significant change.
At the moment, we're choosing a four-degree scenario.
If we really want to avoid the two-degree scenario, there really is no time like the present to act.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Alice, basically what you're saying, the talk is, unless wealthy nations start cutting 10 percent per year the emissions now, this year, not in 2020 or '25, we are going to go straight to the four-plus-degree scenario.
I am wondering what's your take on the cut by 70 percent for 2070.
Alice Bows-Larkin: Yeah, it's just nowhere near enough to avoid two degrees.
One of the things that often -- when there are these modeling studies that look at what we need to do, is they tend to hugely overestimate how quickly other countries in the world can start to reduce emissions.
So they make kind of heroic assumptions about that.
The more we do that, because it's the cumulative emissions, the short-term stuff that really matters.
So it does make a huge difference.
If a big country like China, for example, continues to grow even for just a few extra years, that will make a big difference to when we need to decarbonize.
So I don't think we can even say when it will be, because it all depends on what we have to do in the short term.
But I think we've just got huge scope, and we don't pull those levers that allow us to reduce the energy demand, which is a shame.
BG: Alice, thank you for coming to TED and sharing this data.
ABL: Thank you.
(Applause)
Well, this is such an honor. And it's wonderful to be in the presence of an organization that is really making a difference in the world.
And I'm intensely grateful for the opportunity to speak to you today.
And I'm also rather surprised, because when I look back on my life the last thing I ever wanted to do was write, or be in any way involved in religion.
After I left my convent, I'd finished with religion, frankly.
I thought that was it.
And for 13 years I kept clear of it. I wanted to be an English literature professor.
And I certainly didn't even want to be a writer, particularly.
But then I suffered a series of career catastrophes, one after the other, and finally found myself in television. (Laughter) I said that to Bill Moyers, and he said, "Oh, we take anybody." (Laughter) And I was doing some rather controversial religious programs.
This went down very well in the U.K., where religion is extremely unpopular.
And so, for once, for the only time in my life, I was finally in the mainstream.
But I got sent to Jerusalem to make a film about early Christianity.
And there, for the first time, I encountered the other religious traditions: Judaism and Islam, the sister religions of Christianity.
And while I found I knew nothing about these faiths at all -- despite my own intensely religious background, I'd seen Judaism only as a kind of prelude to Christianity, and I knew nothing about Islam at all.
But in that city, that tortured city, where you see the three faiths jostling so uneasily together, you also become aware of the profound connection between them.
And it has been the study of other religious traditions that brought me back to a sense of what religion can be, and actually enabled me to look at my own faith in a different light.
And I found some astonishing things in the course of my study that had never occurred to me. Frankly, in the days when I thought I'd had it with religion, I just found the whole thing absolutely incredible.
These doctrines seemed unproven, abstract.
And to my astonishment, when I began seriously studying other traditions, I began to realize that belief -- which we make such a fuss about today -- is only a very recent religious enthusiasm that surfaced only in the West, in about the 17th century.
The word "belief" itself originally meant to love, to prize, to hold dear.
In the 17th century, it narrowed its focus, for reasons that I'm exploring in a book I'm writing at the moment, to include -- to mean an intellectual assent to a set of propositions, a credo.
"I believe:" it did not mean, "I accept certain creedal articles of faith."
It meant: "I commit myself. I engage myself."
Indeed, some of the world traditions think very little of religious orthodoxy.
In the Quran, religious opinion -- religious orthodoxy -- is dismissed as "zanna:" self-indulgent guesswork about matters that nobody can be certain of one way or the other, but which makes people quarrelsome and stupidly sectarian. (Laughter) So if religion is not about believing things, what is it about?
What I've found, across the board, is that religion is about behaving differently.
Instead of deciding whether or not you believe in God, first you do something.
You behave in a committed way, and then you begin to understand the truths of religion.
And religious doctrines are meant to be summons to action; you only understand them when you put them into practice.
Now, pride of place in this practice is given to compassion.
And it is an arresting fact that right across the board, in every single one of the major world faiths, compassion -- the ability to feel with the other in the way we've been thinking about this evening -- is not only the test of any true religiosity, it is also what will bring us into the presence of what Jews, Christians and Muslims call "God" or the "Divine."
It is compassion, says the Buddha, which brings you to Nirvana.
Why? Because in compassion, when we feel with the other, we dethrone ourselves from the center of our world and we put another person there. And once we get rid of ego, then we're ready to see the Divine.
And in particular, every single one of the major world traditions has highlighted -- has said -- and put at the core of their tradition what's become known as the Golden Rule.
First propounded by Confucius five centuries before Christ: "Do not do to others what you would not like them to do to you."
That, he said, was the central thread which ran through all his teaching and that his disciples should put into practice all day and every day.
And it was -- the Golden Rule would bring them to the transcendent value that he called "ren," human-heartedness, which was a transcendent experience in itself.
And this is absolutely crucial to the monotheisms, too.
There's a famous story about the great rabbi, Hillel, the older contemporary of Jesus.
A pagan came to him and offered to convert to Judaism if the rabbi could recite the whole of Jewish teaching while he stood on one leg.
Hillel stood on one leg and said, "That which is hateful to you, do not do to your neighbor. That is the Torah. The rest is commentary.
Go and study it." (Laughter) And "go and study it" was what he meant.
He said, "In your exegesis, you must make it clear that every single verse of the Torah is a commentary, a gloss upon the Golden Rule."
The great Rabbi Meir said that any interpretation of Scripture which led to hatred and disdain, or contempt of other people -- any people whatsoever -- was illegitimate.
Saint Augustine made exactly the same point.
Scripture, he says, "teaches nothing but charity, and we must not leave an interpretation of Scripture until we have found a compassionate interpretation of it."
And this struggle to find compassion in some of these rather rebarbative texts is a good dress rehearsal for doing the same in ordinary life. (Applause) But now look at our world. And we are living in a world that is -- where religion has been hijacked. Where terrorists cite Quranic verses to justify their atrocities.
Where instead of taking Jesus' words, "Love your enemies.
Don't judge others," we have the spectacle of Christians endlessly judging other people, endlessly using Scripture as a way of arguing with other people, putting other people down. Throughout the ages, religion has been used to oppress others, and this is because of human ego, human greed.
We have a talent as a species for messing up wonderful things.
So the traditions also insisted -- and this is an important point, I think -- that you could not and must not confine your compassion to your own group: your own nation, your own co-religionists, your own fellow countrymen. You must have what one of the Chinese sages called "jian ai": concern for everybody. Love your enemies. Honor the stranger.
We formed you, says the Quran, into tribes and nations so that you may know one another.
And this, again -- this universal outreach -- is getting subdued in the strident use of religion -- abuse of religion -- for nefarious gains.
Now, I've lost count of the number of taxi drivers who, when I say to them what I do for a living, inform me that religion has been the cause of all the major world wars in history. Wrong.
The causes of our present woes are political.
But, make no mistake about it, religion is a kind of fault line, and when a conflict gets ingrained in a region, religion can get sucked in and become part of the problem. Our modernity has been exceedingly violent.
Between 1914 and 1945, 70 million people died in Europe alone as a result of armed conflict.
And so many of our institutions, even football, which used to be a pleasant pastime, now causes riots where people even die.
And it's not surprising that religion, too, has been affected by this violent ethos.
There's also a great deal, I think, of religious illiteracy around.
People seem to think, now equate religious faith with believing things.
As though that -- we call religious people often believers, as though that were the main thing that they do. And very often, secondary goals get pushed into the first place, in place of compassion and the Golden Rule.
Because the Golden Rule is difficult. I sometimes -- when I'm speaking to congregations about compassion, I sometimes see a mutinous expression crossing some of their faces because a lot of religious people prefer to be right, rather than compassionate. (Laughter) Now -- but that's not the whole story.
Since September the 11th, when my work on Islam suddenly propelled me into public life, in a way that I'd never imagined, I've been able to sort of go all over the world, and finding, everywhere I go, a yearning for change.
I've just come back from Pakistan, where literally thousands of people came to my lectures, because they were yearning, first of all, to hear a friendly Western voice.
And especially the young people were coming. And were asking me -- the young people were saying, "What can we do? What can we do to change things?"
And my hosts in Pakistan said, "Look, don't be too polite to us.
Tell us where we're going wrong. Let's talk together about where religion is failing."
Because it seems to me that with -- our current situation is so serious at the moment that any ideology that doesn't promote a sense of global understanding and global appreciation of each other is failing the test of the time.
And religion, with its wide following ... Here in the United States, people may be being religious in a different way, as a report has just shown -- but they still want to be religious. It's only Western Europe that has retained its secularism, which is now beginning to look rather endearingly old-fashioned.
But people want to be religious, and religion should be made to be a force for harmony in the world, which it can and should be -- because of the Golden Rule.
"Do not do to others what you would not have them do to you": an ethos that should now be applied globally.
We should not treat other nations as we would not wish to be treated ourselves.
And these -- whatever our wretched beliefs -- is a religious matter, it's a spiritual matter.
It's a profound moral matter that engages and should engage us all.
And as I say, there is a hunger for change out there.
Here in the United States, I think you see it in this election campaign: a longing for change.
And people in churches all over and mosques all over this continent after September the 11th, coming together locally to create networks of understanding.
With the mosque, with the synagogue, saying, "We must start to speak to one another."
I think it's time that we moved beyond the idea of toleration and move toward appreciation of the other.
I'd -- there's one story I'd just like to mention.
This comes from "The Iliad." But it tells you what this spirituality should be.
You know the story of "The Iliad," the 10-year war between Greece and Troy.
In one incident, Achilles, the famous warrior of Greece, takes his troops out of the war, and the whole war effort suffers. And in the course of the ensuing muddle, his beloved friend, Patroclus, is killed -- and killed in single combat by one of the Trojan princes, Hector. And Achilles goes mad with grief and rage and revenge, and he mutilates the body. He kills Hector, he mutilates his body and then he refuses to give the body back for burial to the family, which means that, in Greek ethos, Hector's soul will wander eternally, lost.
And then one night, Priam, king of Troy, an old man, comes into the Greek camp incognito, makes his way to Achilles' tent to ask for the body of his son.
And everybody is shocked when the old man takes off his head covering and shows himself.
And Achilles looks at him and thinks of his father. And he starts to weep.
And Priam looks at the man who has murdered so many of his sons, and he, too, starts to weep. And the sound of their weeping filled the house.
The Greeks believed that weeping together created a bond between people.
And then Achilles takes the body of Hector, he hands it very tenderly to the father, and the two men look at each other, and see each other as divine.
That is the ethos found, too, in all the religions.
It's what is meant by overcoming the horror that we feel when we are under threat of our enemies, and beginning to appreciate the other.
It's of great importance that the word for "holy" in Hebrew, applied to God, is "Kadosh": separate, other.
And it is often, perhaps, the very otherness of our enemies which can give us intimations of that utterly mysterious transcendence which is God.
And now, here's my wish: I wish that you would help with the creation, launch and propagation of a Charter for Compassion, crafted by a group of inspirational thinkers from the three Abrahamic traditions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, and based on the fundamental principle of the Golden Rule.
We need to create a movement among all these people that I meet in my travels -- you probably meet, too -- who want to join up, in some way, and reclaim their faith, which they feel, as I say, has been hijacked.
We need to empower people to remember the compassionate ethos, and to give guidelines. This Charter would not be a massive document.
I'd like to see it -- to give guidelines as to how to interpret the Scriptures, these texts that are being abused. Remember what the rabbis and what Augustine said about how Scripture should be governed by the principle of charity.
Let's get back to that. And the idea, too, of Jews, Christians and Muslims -- these traditions now so often at loggerheads -- working together to create a document which we hope will be signed by a thousand, at least, of major religious leaders from all the traditions of the world.
And you are the people. I'm just a solitary scholar.
Despite the idea that I love a good time, which I was rather amazed to see coming up on me -- I actually spend a great deal of time alone, studying, and I'm not very -- you're the people with media knowledge to explain to me how we can get this to everybody, everybody on the planet. I've had some preliminary talks, and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, for example, is very happy to give his name to this, as is Imam Feisal Rauf, the Imam in New York City.
Also, I would be working with the Alliance of Civilizations at the United Nations.
I was part of that United Nations initiative called the Alliance of Civilizations, which was asked by Kofi Annan to diagnose the causes of extremism, and to give practical guidelines to member states about how to avoid the escalation of further extremism.
And the Alliance has told me that they are very happy to work with it.
The importance of this is that this is -- I can see some of you starting to look worried, because you think it's a slow and cumbersome body -- but what the United Nations can do is give us some neutrality, so that this isn't seen as a Western or a Christian initiative, but that it's coming, as it were, from the United Nations, from the world -- who would help with the sort of bureaucracy of this.
And so I do urge you to join me in making -- in this charter -- to building this charter, launching it and propagating it so that it becomes -- I'd like to see it in every college, every church, every mosque, every synagogue in the world, so that people can look at their tradition, reclaim it, and make religion a source of peace in the world, which it can and should be. Thank you very much. (Applause)
In the year 1901, a woman called Auguste was taken to a medical asylum in Frankfurt.
Auguste was delusional and couldn't remember even the most basic details of her life.
Her doctor was called Alois.
Alois didn't know how to help Auguste, but he watched over her until, sadly, she passed away in 1906.
After she died, Alois performed an autopsy and found strange plaques and tangles in Auguste's brain -- the likes of which he'd never seen before.
Now here's the even more striking thing.
If Auguste had instead been alive today, we could offer her no more help than Alois was able to 114 years ago.
Alois was Dr. Alois Alzheimer.
And Auguste Deter was the first patient to be diagnosed with what we now call Alzheimer's disease.
Since 1901, medicine has advanced greatly.
We've discovered antibiotics and vaccines to protect us from infections, many treatments for cancer, antiretrovirals for HIV, statins for heart disease and much more.
But we've made essentially no progress at all in treating Alzheimer's disease.
I'm part of a team of scientists who has been working to find a cure for Alzheimer's for over a decade.
So I think about this all the time.
Alzheimer's now affects 40 million people worldwide.
But by 2050, it will affect 150 million people -- which, by the way, will include many of you.
If you're hoping to live to be 85 or older, your chance of getting Alzheimer's will be almost one in two.
In other words, odds are you'll spend your golden years either suffering from Alzheimer's or helping to look after a friend or loved one with Alzheimer's.
Already in the United States alone, Alzheimer's care costs 200 billion dollars every year.
One out of every five Medicare dollars get spent on Alzheimer's.
It is today the most expensive disease, and costs are projected to increase fivefold by 2050, as the baby boomer generation ages.
It may surprise you that, put simply, Alzheimer's is one of the biggest medical and social challenges of our generation.
But we've done relatively little to address it.
Today, of the top 10 causes of death worldwide, Alzheimer's is the only one we cannot prevent, cure or even slow down.
We understand less about the science of Alzheimer's than other diseases because we've invested less time and money into researching it.
The US government spends 10 times more every year on cancer research than on Alzheimer's despite the fact that Alzheimer's costs us more and causes a similar number of deaths each year as cancer.
The lack of resources stems from a more fundamental cause: a lack of awareness.
Because here's what few people know but everyone should: Alzheimer's is a disease, and we can cure it.
For most of the past 114 years, everyone, including scientists, mistakenly confused Alzheimer's with aging.
We thought that becoming senile was a normal and inevitable part of getting old.
But we only have to look at a picture of a healthy aged brain compared to the brain of an Alzheimer's patient to see the real physical damage caused by this disease.
As well as triggering severe loss of memory and mental abilities, the damage to the brain caused by Alzheimer's significantly reduces life expectancy and is always fatal.
Remember Dr. Alzheimer found strange plaques and tangles in Auguste's brain a century ago.
For almost a century, we didn't know much about these.
Today we know they're made from protein molecules.
You can imagine a protein molecule as a piece of paper that normally folds into an elaborate piece of origami.
There are spots on the paper that are sticky.
And when it folds correctly, these sticky bits end up on the inside.
This causes the protein molecules to stick to each other, forming clumps that eventually become large plaques and tangles.
That's what we see in the brains of Alzheimer's patients.
We've spent the past 10 years at the University of Cambridge trying to understand how this malfunction works.
There are many steps, and identifying which step to try to block is complex -- like defusing a bomb.
Cutting one wire might do nothing.
Cutting others might make the bomb explore.
We have to find the right step to block, and then create a drug that does it.
Until recently, we for the most part have been cutting wires and hoping for the best.
But now we've got together a diverse group of people -- medics, biologists, geneticists, chemists, physicists, engineers and mathematicians.
And together, we've managed to identify a critical step in the process and are now testing a new class of drugs which would specifically block this step and stop the disease.
No one outside of our lab has seen these yet.
Let's look at some videos of what happened when we tested these new drugs in worms.
So these are healthy worms, and you can see they're moving around normally.
These worms, on the other hand, have protein molecules sticking together inside them -- like humans with Alzheimer's.
And you can see they're clearly sick.
But if we give our new drugs to these worms at an early stage, then we see that they're healthy, and they live a normal lifespan.
This is just an initial positive result, but research like this shows us that Alzheimer's is a disease that we can understand and we can cure.
After 114 years of waiting, there's finally real hope for what can be achieved in the next 10 or 20 years.
But to grow that hope, to finally beat Alzheimer's, we need help.
This isn't about scientists like me -- it's about you.
We need you to raise awareness that Alzheimer's is a disease and that if we try, we can beat it.
In the case of other diseases, patients and their families have led the charge for more research and put pressure on governments, the pharmaceutical industry, scientists and regulators.
That was essential for advancing treatment for HIV in the late 1980s.
Today, we see that same drive to beat cancer.
But Alzheimer's patients are often unable to speak up for themselves.
And their families, the hidden victims, caring for their loved ones night and day, are often too worn out to go out and advocate for change.
So, it really is down to you.
Alzheimer's isn't, for the most part, a genetic disease.
Everyone with a brain is at risk.
Today, there are 40 million patients like Auguste, who can't create the change they need for themselves.
Help speak up for them, and help demand a cure.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Raise your hand if you've ever been asked the question "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
Now if you had to guess, how old would you say you were when you were first asked this question?
You can just hold up fingers.
Three. Five. Three. Five. Five. OK.
Now, raise your hand if the question "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
has ever caused you any anxiety.
(Laughter) Any anxiety at all.
I'm someone who's never been able to answer the question "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
See, the problem wasn't that I didn't have any interests -- it's that I had too many.
In high school, I liked English and math and art and I built websites and I played guitar in a punk band called Frustrated Telephone Operator.
Maybe you've heard of us.
(Laughter) This continued after high school, and at a certain point, I began to notice this pattern in myself where I would become interested in an area and I would dive in, become all-consumed, and I'd get to be pretty good at whatever it was, and then I would hit this point where I'd start to get bored.
And usually I would try and persist anyway, because I had already devoted so much time and energy and sometimes money into this field.
But eventually this sense of boredom, this feeling of, like, yeah, I got this, this isn't challenging anymore -- it would get to be too much.
And I would have to let it go.
But then I would become interested in something else, something totally unrelated, and I would dive into that, and become all-consumed, and I'd be like, "Yes! I found my thing," and then I would hit this point again where I'd start to get bored.
And eventually, I would let it go.
But then I would discover something new and totally different, and I would dive into that.
This pattern caused me a lot of anxiety, for two reasons.
The first was that I wasn't sure how I was going to turn any of this into a career.
I thought that I would eventually have to pick one thing, deny all of my other passions, and just resign myself to being bored.
The other reason it caused me so much anxiety was a little bit more personal.
I worried that there was something wrong with this, and something wrong with me for being unable to stick with anything.
I worried that I was afraid of commitment, or that I was scattered, or that I was self-sabotaging, afraid of my own success.
If you can relate to my story and to these feelings, I'd like you to ask yourself a question that I wish I had asked myself back then.
Ask yourself where you learned to assign the meaning of wrong or abnormal to doing many things.
I'll tell you where you learned it: you learned it from the culture.
We are first asked the question "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
when we're about five years old.
And the truth is that no one really cares what you say when you're that age.
(Laughter) It's considered an innocuous question, posed to little kids to elicit cute replies, like, "I want to be an astronaut," or "I want to be a ballerina," or "I want to be a pirate."
Insert Halloween costume here.
(Laughter) But this question gets asked of us again and again as we get older in various forms -- for instance, high school students might get asked what major they're going to pick in college.
And at some point, "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
goes from being the cute exercise it once was to the thing that keeps us up at night.
Why?
See, while this question inspires kids to dream about what they could be, it does not inspire them to dream about all that they could be.
In fact, it does just the opposite, because when someone asks you what you want to be, you can't reply with 20 different things, though well-meaning adults will likely chuckle and be like, "Oh, how cute, but you can't be a violin maker and a psychologist.
You have to choose."
This is Dr. Bob Childs -- (Laughter) and he's a luthier and psychotherapist.
And this is Amy Ng, a magazine editor turned illustrator, entrepreneur, teacher and creative director.
But most kids don't hear about people like this.
All they hear is that they're going to have to choose.
But it's more than that.
The notion of the narrowly focused life is highly romanticized in our culture.
It's this idea of destiny or the one true calling, the idea that we each have one great thing we are meant to do during our time on this earth, and you need to figure out what that thing is and devote your life to it.
But what if you're someone who isn't wired this way?
What if there are a lot of different subjects that you're curious about, and many different things you want to do?
Well, there is no room for someone like you in this framework.
And so you might feel alone.
You might feel like you don't have a purpose.
And you might feel like there's something wrong with you.
There's nothing wrong with you.
What you are is a multipotentialite.
(Laughter) (Applause) A multipotentialite is someone with many interests and creative pursuits.
It's a mouthful to say.
It might help if you break it up into three parts: multi, potential, and ite.
You can also use one of the other terms that connote the same idea, such as polymath, the Renaissance person.
Actually, during the Renaissance period, it was considered the ideal to be well-versed in multiple disciplines.
Barbara Sher refers to us as "scanners."
Use whichever term you like, or invent your own.
I have to say I find it sort of fitting that as a community, we cannot agree on a single identity.
(Laughter) It's easy to see your multipotentiality as a limitation or an affliction that you need to overcome.
But what I've learned through speaking with people and writing about these ideas on my website, is that there are some tremendous strengths to being this way.
Here are three multipotentialite super powers.
One: idea synthesis.
That is, combining two or more fields and creating something new at the intersection.
Sha Hwang and Rachel Binx drew from their shared interests in cartography, data visualization, travel, mathematics and design, when they founded Meshu.
Meshu is a company that creates custom geographically-inspired jewelry.
Sha and Rachel came up with this unique idea not despite, but because of their eclectic mix of skills and experiences.
Innovation happens at the intersections.
That's where the new ideas come from.
And multipotentialites, with all of their backgrounds, are able to access a lot of these points of intersection.
The second multipotentialite superpower is rapid learning.
When multipotentialites become interested in something, we go hard.
We observe everything we can get our hands on.
We're also used to being beginners, because we've been beginners so many times in the past, and this means that we're less afraid of trying new things and stepping out of our comfort zones.
What's more, many skills are transferable across disciplines, and we bring everything we've learned to every new area we pursue, so we're rarely starting from scratch.
Nora Dunn is a full-time traveler and freelance writer.
As a child concert pianist, she honed an incredible ability to develop muscle memory.
Now, she's the fastest typist she knows.
(Laughter) Before becoming a writer, Nora was a financial planner.
She had to learn the finer mechanics of sales when she was starting her practice, and this skill now helps her write compelling pitches to editors.
It is rarely a waste of time to pursue something you're drawn to, even if you end up quitting.
You might apply that knowledge in a different field entirely, in a way that you couldn't have anticipated.
The third multipotentialite superpower is adaptability; that is, the ability to morph into whatever you need to be in a given situation.
Abe Cajudo is sometimes a video director, sometimes a web designer, sometimes a Kickstarter consultant, sometimes a teacher, and sometimes, apparently, James Bond.
(Laughter) He's valuable because he does good work.
He's even more valuable because he can take on various roles, depending on his clients' needs.
Fast Company magazine identified adaptability as the single most important skill to develop in order to thrive in the 21st century.
The economic world is changing so quickly and unpredictably that it is the individuals and organizations that can pivot in order to meet the needs of the market that are really going to thrive.
Idea synthesis, rapid learning and adaptability: three skills that multipotentialites are very adept at, and three skills that they might lose if pressured to narrow their focus.
As a society, we have a vested interest in encouraging multipotentialites to be themselves.
We have a lot of complex, multidimensional problems in the world right now, and we need creative, out-of-the-box thinkers to tackle them.
Now, let's say that you are, in your heart, a specialist.
You came out of the womb knowing you wanted to be a pediatric neurosurgeon.
Don't worry -- there's nothing wrong with you, either.
(Laughter) In fact, some of the best teams are comprised of a specialist and multipotentialite paired together.
The specialist can dive in deep and implement ideas, while the multipotentialite brings a breadth of knowledge to the project.
It's a beautiful partnership.
But we should all be designing lives and careers that are aligned with how we're wired.
And sadly, multipotentialites are largely being encouraged simply to be more like their specialist peers.
So with that said, if there is one thing you take away from this talk, I hope that it is this: embrace your inner wiring, whatever that may be.
If you're a specialist at heart, then by all means, specialize.
That is where you'll do your best work.
But to the multipotentialites in the room, including those of you who may have just realized in the last 12 minutes that you are one -- (Laughter) to you I say: embrace your many passions.
Follow your curiosity down those rabbit holes.
Explore your intersections.
Embracing our inner wiring leads to a happier, more authentic life.
And perhaps more importantly -- multipotentialites, the world needs us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Can we, as adults, grow new nerve cells?
There's still some confusion about that question, as this is a fairly new field of research.
For example, I was talking to one of my colleagues, Robert, who is an oncologist, and he was telling me, "Sandrine, this is puzzling.
Some of my patients that have been told they are cured of their cancer still develop symptoms of depression."
And I responded to him, "Well, from my point of view that makes sense.
The drug you give to your patients that stops the cancer cells multiplying also stops the newborn neurons being generated in their brain."
And then Robert looked at me like I was crazy and said, "But Sandrine, these are adult patients -- adults do not grow new nerve cells."
And much to his surprise, I said, "Well actually, we do."
And this is a phenomenon that we call neurogenesis.
[Neurogenesis] Now Robert is not a neuroscientist, and when he went to medical school he was not taught what we know now -- that the adult brain can generate new nerve cells.
So Robert, you know, being the good doctor that he is, wanted to come to my lab to understand the topic a little bit better.
And I took him for a tour of one of the most exciting parts of the brain when it comes to neurogenesis -- and this is the hippocampus.
So this is this gray structure in the center of the brain.
And what we've known already for very long, is that this is important for learning, memory, mood and emotion.
However, what we have learned more recently is that this is one of the unique structures of the adult brain where new neurons can be generated.
And if we slice through the hippocampus and zoom in, what you actually see here in blue is a newborn neuron in an adult mouse brain.
So when it comes to the human brain -- my colleague Jonas Frisn from the Karolinska Institutet, has estimated that we produce 700 new neurons per day in the hippocampus.
You might think this is not much, compared to the billions of neurons we have.
But by the time we turn 50, we will have all exchanged the neurons we were born with in that structure with adult-born neurons.
So why are these new neurons important and what are their functions?
First, we know that they're important for learning and memory.
And in the lab we have shown that if we block the ability of the adult brain to produce new neurons in the hippocampus, then we block certain memory abilities.
And this is especially new and true for spatial recognition -- so like, how you navigate your way in the city.
We are still learning a lot, and neurons are not only important for memory capacity, but also for the quality of the memory.
And they will have been helpful to add time to our memory and they will help differentiate very similar memories, like: how do you find your bike that you park at the station every day in the same area, but in a slightly different position?
And more interesting to my colleague Robert is the research we have been doing on neurogenesis and depression.
So in an animal model of depression, we have seen that we have a lower level of neurogenesis.
And if we give antidepressants, then we increase the production of these newborn neurons, and we decrease the symptoms of depression, establishing a clear link between neurogenesis and depression.
But moreover, if you just block neurogenesis, then you block the efficacy of the antidepressant.
So by then, Robert had understood that very likely his patients were suffering from depression even after being cured of their cancer, because the cancer drug had stopped newborn neurons from being generated.
And it will take time to generate new neurons that reach normal functions.
So, collectively, now we think we have enough evidence to say that neurogenesis is a target of choice if we want to improve memory formation or mood, or even prevent the decline associated with aging, or associated with stress.
So the next question is: can we control neurogenesis?
The answer is yes.
And we are now going to do a little quiz.
I'm going to give you a set of behaviors and activities, and you tell me if you think they will increase neurogenesis or if they will decrease neurogenesis.
Are we ready?
OK, let's go.
So what about learning?
Increasing?
Yes.
Learning will increase the production of these new neurons.
How about stress?
Yes, stress will decrease the production of new neurons in the hippocampus.
How about sleep deprivation?
Indeed, it will decrease neurogenesis.
How about sex?
Oh, wow!
(Laughter) Yes, you are right, it will increase the production of new neurons.
However, it's all about balance here.
We don't want to fall in a situation -- (Laughter) about too much sex leading to sleep deprivation.
(Laughter) How about getting older?
So the neurogenesis rate will decrease as we get older, but it is still occurring.
And then finally, how about running?
I will let you judge that one by yourself.
So this is one of the first studies that was carried out by one of my mentors, Rusty Gage from the Salk Institute, showing that the environment can have an impact on the production of new neurons.
And here you see a section of the hippocampus of a mouse that had no running wheel in its cage.
And the little black dots you see are actually newborn neurons-to-be.
And now, you see a section of the hippocampus of a mouse that had a running wheel in its cage.
So you see the massive increase of the black dots representing the new neurons-to-be.
So activity impacts neurogenesis, but that's not all.
What you eat will have an effect on the production of new neurons in the hippocampus.
So here we have a sample of diet -- of nutrients that have been shown to have efficacy.
And I'm just going to point a few out to you: Calorie restriction of 20 to 30 percent will increase neurogenesis.
Intermittent fasting -- spacing the time between your meals -- will increase neurogenesis.
Intake of flavonoids, which are contained in dark chocolate or blueberries, will increase neurogenesis.
Omega-3 fatty acids, present in fatty fish, like salmon, will increase the production of these new neurons.
Conversely, a diet rich in high saturated fat will have a negative impact on neurogenesis.
Ethanol -- intake of alcohol -- will decrease neurogenesis.
However, not everything is lost; resveratrol, which is contained in red wine, has been shown to promote the survival of these new neurons.
So next time you are at a dinner party, you might want to reach for this possibly "neurogenesis-neutral" drink.
(Laughter) And then finally, let me point out the last one -- a quirky one.
So Japanese groups are fascinated with food textures, and they have shown that actually soft diet impairs neurogenesis, as opposed to food that requires mastication -- chewing -- or crunchy food.
So all of this data, where we need to look at the cellular level, has been generated using animal models.
But this diet has also been given to human participants, and what we could see is that the diet modulates memory and mood in the same direction as it modulates neurogenesis, such as: calorie restriction will improve memory capacity, whereas a high-fat diet will exacerbate symptoms of depression -- as opposed to omega-3 fatty acids, which increase neurogenesis, and also help to decrease the symptoms of depression.
So we think that the effect of diet on mental health, on memory and mood, is actually mediated by the production of the new neurons in the hippocampus.
And it's not only what you eat, but it's also the texture of the food, when you eat it and how much of it you eat.
On our side -- neuroscientists interested in neurogenesis -- we need to understand better the function of these new neurons, and how we can control their survival and their production.
We also need to find a way to protect the neurogenesis of Robert's patients.
And on your side -- I leave you in charge of your neurogenesis.
Thank you.
(Applause) Margaret Heffernan: Fantastic research, Sandrine.
Now, I told you you changed my life -- I now eat a lot of blueberries.
Sandrine Thuret: Very good.
MH: I'm really interested in the running thing.
Do I have to run?
Or is it really just about aerobic exercise, getting oxygen to the brain?
Could it be any kind of vigorous exercise?
ST: So for the moment, we can't really say if it's just the running itself, but we think that anything that indeed will increase the production -- or moving the blood flow to the brain, should be beneficial.
MH: So I don't have to get a running wheel in my office?
ST: No, you don't!
MH: Oh, what a relief! That's wonderful.
Sandrine Thuret, thank you so much.
ST: Thank you, Margaret.
(Applause)
Here lies Arthur, king who was, and king who will be. So reads the inscription on King Arthurs gravestone in Thomas Malorys Le Morte dArthur.
Writing in the 15th century, Malory couldnt have known how prophetic this inscription would turn out to be.
King Arthur has risen again and again in our collective imagination, along with his retinue of knights, Guinevere, the Round Table, Camelot, and of course, Excalibur.
But where do these stories come from, and is there any truth to them?
King Arthur as we know him is a creation of the later Middle Ages, but his legend actually has its roots in Celtic poetry from an earlier time: the Saxon invasions of Britain.
After the Romans left Britain in 410 CE, Saxon invaders from whats now Germany and Denmark quickly capitalized on the vulnerability of the abandoned territory.
The inhabitants of Britain fought fiercely against the invaders through several centuries of turmoil.
There are hardly any written records from this time, so its difficult to reconstruct an accurate history.
However, surviving poetry from the era gives us some clues.
One of the poems, The Gododdin, contains the very first reference to Arthur, though Arthur himself doesnt actually appear in it.
It says a different warrior, named Gwawrddur, was skilled at slaying his enemies, but was no Arthur.
Thats not much to go on, but whoever this Arthur was, he mustve been the gold standard of warriors.
Whether he ruled anyone, or even lived at all is, unfortunately, less clear.
Despite this uncertainty, references to Arthur caught the attention of an aspiring historian hundreds of years later.
In 1130, Geoffrey of Monmouth was a lowly cleric with grand ambitions.
Using Celtic and Latin sources, he spent years creating a lengthy chronicle titled, "The History of the Kings of Britain."
The centerpiece of this tome was King Arthur.
History is a generous term for Geoffreys account.
Writing six hundred years after the Saxon invasions, he cobbled together fragments of myth and poetry to compensate for the almost complete lack of official records.
A few of his sources contained mentions of Arthur, and some others were realistic accounts of battles and places.
But many featured mythic heroes fighting long odds with the help of magical swords and sorcery.
Geoffrey blended them all: A magical sword called Caledfwlch and a Roman fortress called Caerleon appeared in his source material, so Geoffreys Arthur ruled from Caerleon and wielded Caliburnus, the Latin translation of Caledfwlch.
Geoffrey even added a wise counselor named Merlin, based on the Celtic bard Myrrdin, to Arthurs story.
If Arthur did live, he would likely have been a military leader, but a castle-bound king better fit Geoffreys regal history.
Geoffreys chronicle got the attention hed hoped for, and was soon translated from Latin into French by the poet Wace around 1155 CE.
Wace added another centerpiece of Arthurian lore to Geoffreys sword, castle, and wizard: the Round Table.
He wrote that Arthur had the table constructed so that all guests in his court would be equally placed, and none could boast that he had the highest position at the table.
After reading Waces translation, another French poet, Chrtien de Troyes, wrote a series of romances that catapulted Arthurs story to fame.
He introduced tales of individual knights like Lancelot and Gawain, and mixed elements of romance in with the adventures.
He conceived Arthur, Lancelot, and Guineveres love triangle.
In addition to interpersonal intrigue, he also introduced the Holy Grail.
Chrtien probably based his Grails powers on magical objects in Celtic mythology.
He lived in the middle of the Crusades, and others imposed the preoccupations of the time on the Grail, casting it as a powerful relic from the crucifixion.
Numerous adaptations in French and other languages followed from Chrtiens work.
In the course of these retellings, Caerleon became Camelot, and Caliburnus was rechristened Excalibur.
In the 15th century, Sir Thomas Malory synthesized these stories in Le Morte Darthur, the basis of many modern accounts of King Arthur.
In the thousand years since Arthur first appeared in a Celtic poem, his story has transformed over and over to reflect the concerns of his chroniclers and their audiences.
And were still rewriting and adapting the legend today.
Whether or not the man ever lived, loved, reigned, or adventured, its undeniable that the character has achieved immortality.
The universe began its cosmic life in a big bang nearly fourteen billion years ago, and has been expanding ever since.
But what is it expanding into?
That's a complicated question.
Here's why: Einstein's equations of general relativity describe space and time as a kind of inter-connected fabric for the universe.
This means that what we know of as space and time exist only as part of the universe and not beyond it.
Now, when everyday objects expand, they move out into more space.
But if there is no such thing as space to expand into, what does expanding even mean?
In 1929 Edwin Hubble's astronomy observations gave us a definitive answer.
His survey of the night sky found all faraway galaxies recede, or move away, from the Earth.
Moreover, the further the galaxy, the faster it recedes.
How can we interpret this?
Consider a loaf of raisin bread rising in the oven.
The batter rises by the same amount in between each and every raisin.
If we think of raisins as a stand-in for galaxies, and batter as the space between them, we can imagine that the stretching or expansion of intergalactic space will make the galaxies recede from each other, and for any galaxy, its faraway neighbors will recede a larger distance than the nearby ones in the same amount of time.
Sure enough, the equations of general relativity predict a cosmic tug-of-war between gravity and expansion.
It's only in the dark void between galaxies where expansion wins out, and space stretches.
So there's our answer.
The universe is expanding unto itself.
That said, cosmologists are pushing the limits of mathematical models to speculate on what, if anything, exists beyond our spacetime.
These aren't wild guesses, but hypotheses that tackle kinks in the scientific theory of the Big Bang.
The Big Bang predicts matter to be distributed evenly across the universe, as a sparse gas --but then, how did galaxies and stars come to be?
The inflationary model describes a brief era of incredibly rapid expansion that relates quantum fluctuations in the energy of the early universe, to the formation of clumps of gas that eventually led to galaxies.
If we accept this paradigm, it may also imply our universe represents one region in a greater cosmic reality that undergoes endless, eternal inflation.
We know nothing of this speculative inflating reality, save for the mathematical prediction that its endless expansion may be driven by an unstable quantum energy state.
In many local regions, however, the energy may settle by random chance into a stable state, stopping inflation and forming bubble universes.
Each bubble universe ours being one of them would be described by its own Big Bang and laws of physics.
Our universe would be part of a greater multiverse, in which the fantastic rate of eternal inflation makes it impossible for us to encounter a neighbor universe.
The Big Bang also predicts that in the early, hot universe, our fundamental forces may unify into one super-force.
Mathematical string theories suggest descriptions of this unification, in addition to a fundamental structure for sub-atomic quarks and electrons.
In these proposed models, vibrating strings are the building blocks of the universe.
Competing models for strings have now been consolidated into a unified description, and suggest these structures may interact with massive, higher dimensional surfaces called branes.
Our universe may be contained within one such brane, floating in an unknown higher dimensional place, playfully named the bulk, or hyperspace.
Other branescontaining other types of universesmay co-exist in hyperspace, and neighboring branes may even share certain fundamental forces like gravity.
Both eternal inflation and branes describe a multiverse, but while universes in eternal inflation are isolated, brane universes could bump into each other.
An echo of such a collision may appear in the cosmic microwave background a soup of radiation throughout our universe, thats a relic from an early Big Bang era.
So far, though, weve found no such cosmic echo.
Some suspect these differing multiverse hypotheses may eventually coalesce into a common description, or be replaced by something else.
As it stands now, theyre speculative explorations of mathematical models.
While these models are inspired and guided by many scientific experiments, there are very few objective experiments to directly test them, yet.
Until the next Edwin Hubble comes along, scientists will likely be left to argue about the elegance of their competing models and continue to dream about what, if anything, lies beyond our universe.
From asteroids capable of destroying entire species, to gamma-ray bursts and supernovae that could exterminate life on Earth, outer space has no shortage of forces that could wreak havoc on our tiny planet.
But theres something in space that seems more terrifying than any of these  something that wipes out everything it comes near.
Could the Earth be swallowed by a black hole?
A black hole is an object so dense that space and time around it are inescapably modified, warped into an infinite sink.
Nothing, not even light, can move fast enough to escape a black holes gravitational pull once it passes a certain boundary, known as the event horizon.
Thus, a black hole is like a cosmic vacuum cleaner with infinite capacity, gobbling up everything in its path, and letting nothing out.
To determine whether a black hole could swallow the Earth, we first have to figure out where they are.
But since they dont emit light, hows that possible?
Fortunately, were able to observe their effect on the space around them.
When matter approaches a black hole, the immense gravitational field accelerates it to high speed.
This emits an enormous amount of light.
And for objects too far away to be sucked in, the massive gravitational force still affects their orbits.
If we observe several stars orbiting around an apparently empty point, a black hole could be leading the dance.
Similarly, light that passes close enough to an event horizon will be deflected in a phenomenon known as gravitational lensing.
Most of the black holes that weve found can be thought of as two main types.
The smaller ones, called stellar mass black holes, have a mass up to 100 times larger than that of our sun.
Theyre formed when a massive star consumes all its nuclear fuel and its core collapses.
Weve observed several of these objects as close as 3000 light-years away, and there could be up to 100 million small black holes just in the Milky Way galaxy.
So should we be worried?
Probably not.
Despite their large mass, stellar black holes only have a radius of around 300 kilometers or less, making the chances of a direct hit with us miniscule.
Although because their gravitational fields can affect a planet from a large distance, they could be dangerous even without a direct collision.
If a typical stellar-mass black hole were to pass in the region of Neptune, the orbit of the Earth would be considerably modified, with dire results.
Still, the combination of how small they are and how vast the galaxy is means that stellar black holes dont give us much to worry about.
But we still have to meet the second type: supermassive black holes.
These have masses millions or billions times greater than that of our sun and have event horizons that could span billions of kilometers.
These giants have grown to immense proportions by swallowing matter and merging with other black holes.
Unlike their stellar cousins, supermassive black holes arent wandering through space.
Instead, they lie at the center of galaxies, including our own.
Our solar system is in a stable orbit around a supermassive black hole that resides at the center of the Milky Way, at a safe distance of 25,000 light-years.
But that could change.
If our galaxy collides with another, the Earth could be thrown towards the galactic center, close enough to the supermassive black hole to be eventually swallowed up.
In fact, a collision with the Andromeda Galaxy is predicted to happen 4 billion years from now, which may not be great news for our home planet.
But before we judge them too harshly, black holes arent simply agents of destruction.
They played a crucial role in the formation of galaxies, the building blocks of our universe.
Far from being shadowy characters in the cosmic play, black holes have fundamentally contributed in making the universe a bright and astonishing place.
I want to talk to you about the future of medicine.
But before I do that, I want to talk a little bit about the past.
Now, throughout much of the recent history of medicine, we've thought about illness and treatment in terms of a profoundly simple model.
In fact, the model is so simple that you could summarize it in six words: have disease, take pill, kill something.
Now, the reason for the dominance of this model is of course the antibiotic revolution.
Many of you might not know this, but we happen to be celebrating the hundredth year of the introduction of antibiotics into the United States.
But what you do know is that that introduction was nothing short of transformative.
Here you had a chemical, either from the natural world or artificially synthesized in the laboratory, and it would course through your body, it would find its target, lock into its target -- a microbe or some part of a microbe -- and then turn off a lock and a key with exquisite deftness, exquisite specificity.
And you would end up taking a previously fatal, lethal disease -- a pneumonia, syphilis, tuberculosis -- and transforming that into a curable, or treatable illness.
You have a pneumonia, you take penicillin, you kill the microbe and you cure the disease.
So seductive was this idea, so potent the metaphor of lock and key and killing something, that it really swept through biology.
It was a transformation like no other.
And we've really spent the last 100 years trying to replicate that model over and over again in noninfectious diseases, in chronic diseases like diabetes and hypertension and heart disease.
And it's worked, but it's only worked partly.
Let me show you.
You know, if you take the entire universe of all chemical reactions in the human body, every chemical reaction that your body is capable of, most people think that that number is on the order of a million.
Let's call it a million.
And now you ask the question, what number or fraction of reactions can actually be targeted by the entire pharmacopoeia, all of medicinal chemistry?
That number is 250.
The rest is chemical darkness.
In other words, 0.025 percent of all chemical reactions in your body are actually targetable by this lock and key mechanism.
You know, if you think about human physiology as a vast global telephone network with interacting nodes and interacting pieces, then all of our medicinal chemistry is operating on one tiny corner at the edge, the outer edge, of that network.
It's like all of our pharmaceutical chemistry is a pole operator in Wichita, Kansas who is tinkering with about 10 or 15 telephone lines.
So what do we do about this idea?
What if we reorganized this approach?
In fact, it turns out that the natural world gives us a sense of how one might think about illness in a radically different way, rather than disease, medicine, target.
In fact, the natural world is organized hierarchically upwards, not downwards, but upwards, and we begin with a self-regulating, semi-autonomous unit called a cell.
These self-regulating, semi-autonomous units give rise to self-regulating, semi-autonomous units called organs, and these organs coalesce to form things called humans, and these organisms ultimately live in environments, which are partly self-regulating and partly semi-autonomous.
What's nice about this scheme, this hierarchical scheme building upwards rather than downwards, is that it allows us to think about illness as well in a somewhat different way.
Take a disease like cancer.
Since the 1950s, we've tried rather desperately to apply this lock and key model to cancer.
We've tried to kill cells using a variety of chemotherapies or targeted therapies, and as most of us know, that's worked.
It's worked for diseases like leukemia.
It's worked for some forms of breast cancer, but eventually you run to the ceiling of that approach.
And it's only in the last 10 years or so that we've begun to think about using the immune system, remembering that in fact the cancer cell doesn't grow in a vacuum.
It actually grows in a human organism.
And could you use the organismal capacity, the fact that human beings have an immune system, to attack cancer?
In fact, it's led to the some of the most spectacular new medicines in cancer.
And finally there's the level of the environment, isn't there?
You know, we don't think of cancer as altering the environment.
But let me give you an example of a profoundly carcinogenic environment.
It's called a prison.
You take loneliness, you take depression, you take confinement, and you add to that, rolled up in a little white sheet of paper, one of the most potent neurostimulants that we know, called nicotine, and you add to that one of the most potent addictive substances that you know, and you have a pro-carcinogenic environment.
But you can have anti-carcinogenic environments too.
There are attempts to create milieus, change the hormonal milieu for breast cancer, for instance.
We're trying to change the metabolic milieu for other forms of cancer.
Or take another disease, like depression.
Again, working upwards, since the 1960s and 1970s, we've tried, again, desperately to turn off molecules that operate between nerve cells -- serotonin, dopamine -- and tried to cure depression that way, and that's worked, but then that reached the limit.
And we now know that what you really probably need to do is to change the physiology of the organ, the brain, rewire it, remodel it, and that, of course, we know study upon study has shown that talk therapy does exactly that, and study upon study has shown that talk therapy combined with medicines, pills, really is much more effective than either one alone.
Can we imagine a more immersive environment that will change depression?
Can you lock out the signals that elicit depression?
Again, moving upwards along this hierarchical chain of organization.
What's really at stake perhaps here is not the medicine itself but a metaphor.
Rather than killing something, in the case of the great chronic degenerative diseases -- kidney failure, diabetes, hypertension, osteoarthritis -- maybe what we really need to do is change the metaphor to growing something.
And that's the key, perhaps, to reframing our thinking about medicine.
Now, this idea of changing, of creating a perceptual shift, as it were, came home to me to roost in a very personal manner about 10 years ago.
About 10 years ago -- I've been a runner most of my life -- I went for a run, a Saturday morning run, I came back and woke up and I basically couldn't move.
My right knee was swollen up, and you could hear that ominous crunch of bone against bone.
And one of the perks of being a physician is that you get to order your own MRIs.
And I had an MRI the next week, and it looked like that.
Essentially, the meniscus of cartilage that is between bone had been completely torn and the bone itself had been shattered.
Now, if you're looking at me and feeling sorry, let me tell you a few facts.
If I was to take an MRI of every person in this audience, 60 percent of you would show signs of bone degeneration and cartilage degeneration like this.
85 percent of all women by the age of 70 would show moderate to severe cartilage degeneration.
50 to 60 percent of the men in this audience would also have such signs.
So this is a very common disease.
Well, the second perk of being a physician is that you can get to experiment on your own ailments.
So about 10 years ago we began, we brought this process into the laboratory, and we began to do simple experiments, mechanically trying to fix this degeneration.
We tried to inject chemicals into the knee spaces of animals to try to reverse cartilage degeneration, and to put a short summary on a very long and painful process, essentially it came to naught.
Nothing happened.
And then about seven years ago, we had a research student from Australia.
The nice thing about Australians is that they're habitually used to looking at the world upside down.
(Laughter) And so Dan suggested to me, "You know, maybe it isn't a mechanical problem.
Maybe it isn't a chemical problem. Maybe it's a stem cell problem."
In other words, he had two hypotheses.
Number one, there is such a thing as a skeletal stem cell -- a skeletal stem cell that builds up the entire vertebrate skeleton, bone, cartilage and the fibrous elements of skeleton, just like there's a stem cell in blood, just like there's a stem cell in the nervous system.
And two, that maybe that, the degeneration or dysfunction of this stem cell is what's causing osteochondral arthritis, a very common ailment.
So really the question was, were we looking for a pill when we should have really been looking for a cell.
So we switched our models, and now we began to look for skeletal stem cells.
And to cut again a long story short, about five years ago, we found these cells.
They live inside the skeleton.
Here's a schematic and then a real photograph of one of them.
The white stuff is bone, and these red columns that you see and the yellow cells are cells that have arisen from one single skeletal stem cell -- columns of cartilage, columns of bone coming out of a single cell.
These cells are fascinating. They have four properties.
Number one is that they live where they're expected to live.
They live just underneath the surface of the bone, underneath cartilage.
You know, in biology, it's location, location, location.
And they move into the appropriate areas and form bone and cartilage.
That's one.
Here's an interesting property.
You can take them out of the vertebrate skeleton, you can culture them in petri dishes in the laboratory, and they are dying to form cartilage.
Remember how we couldn't form cartilage for love or money?
These cells are dying to form cartilage.
They form their own furls of cartilage around themselves.
They're also, number three, the most efficient repairers of fractures that we've ever encountered.
This is a little bone, a mouse bone that we fractured and then let it heal by itself.
These stem cells have come in and repaired, in yellow, the bone, in white, the cartilage, almost completely.
So much so that if you label them with a fluorescent dye you can see them like some kind of peculiar cellular glue coming into the area of a fracture, fixing it locally and then stopping their work.
Now, the fourth one is the most ominous, and that is that their numbers decline precipitously, precipitously, tenfold, fiftyfold, as you age.
And so what had happened, really, is that we found ourselves in a perceptual shift.
We had gone hunting for pills but we ended up finding theories.
And in some ways we had hooked ourselves back onto this idea: cells, organisms, environments, because we were now thinking about bone stem cells, we were thinking about arthritis in terms of a cellular disease.
And then the next question was, are there organs?
Can you build this as an organ outside the body?
Can you implant cartilage into areas of trauma?
And perhaps most interestingly, can you ascend right up and create environments?
You know, we know that exercise remodels bone, but come on, none of us is going to exercise.
So could you imagine ways of passively loading and unloading bone so that you can recreate or regenerate degenerating cartilage?
And perhaps more interesting, and more importantly, the question is, can you apply this model more globally outside medicine?
What's at stake, as I said before, is not killing something, but growing something.
And it raises a series of, I think, some of the most interesting questions about how we think about medicine in the future.
Could your medicine be a cell and not a pill?
How would we grow these cells?
What we would we do to stop the malignant growth of these cells?
We heard about the problems of unleashing growth.
Could we implant suicide genes into these cells to stop them from growing?
Could your medicine be an organ that's created outside the body and then implanted into the body?
Could that stop some of the degeneration?
What if the organ needed to have memory?
In cases of diseases of the nervous system some of those organs had memory.
How could we implant those memories back in?
Could we store these organs?
Would each organ have to be developed for an individual human being and put back?
And perhaps most puzzlingly, could your medicine be an environment?
Could you patent an environment?
You know, in every culture, shamans have been using environments as medicines.
Could we imagine that for our future?
I've talked a lot about models. I began this talk with models.
So let me end with some thoughts about model building.
That's what we do as scientists.
You know, when an architect builds a model, he or she is trying to show you a world in miniature.
But when a scientist is building a model, he or she is trying to show you the world in metaphor.
He or she is trying to create a new way of seeing.
The former is a scale shift. The latter is a perceptual shift.
Now, antibiotics created such a perceptual shift in our way of thinking about medicine that it really colored, distorted, very successfully, the way we've thought about medicine for the last hundred years.
But we need new models to think about medicine in the future.
That's what's at stake.
You know, there's a popular trope out there that the reason we haven't had the transformative impact on the treatment of illness is because we don't have powerful-enough drugs, and that's partly true.
But perhaps the real reason is that we don't have powerful-enough ways of thinking about medicines.
It's certainly true that it would be lovely to have new medicines.
But perhaps what's really at stake are three more intangible M's: mechanisms, models, metaphors.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: I really like this metaphor.
How does it link in?
There's a lot of talk in technologyland about the personalization of medicine, that we have all this data and that medical treatments of the future will be for you specifically, your genome, your current context.
Does that apply to this model you've got here?
Siddhartha Mukherjee: It's a very interesting question.
We've thought about personalization of medicine very much in terms of genomics.
That's because the gene is such a dominant metaphor, again, to use that same word, in medicine today, that we think the genome will drive the personalization of medicine.
But of course the genome is just the bottom of a long chain of being, as it were.
That chain of being, really the first organized unit of that, is the cell.
So, if we are really going to deliver in medicine in this way, we have to think of personalizing cellular therapies, and then personalizing organ or organismal therapies, and ultimately personalizing immersion therapies for the environment.
So I think at every stage, you know -- there's that metaphor, there's turtles all the way.
Well, in this, there's personalization all the way.
CA: So when you say medicine could be a cell and not a pill, you're talking about potentially your own cells.
SM: Absolutely. CA: So converted to stem cells, perhaps tested against all kinds of drugs or something, and prepared.
SM: And there's no perhaps. This is what we're doing.
This is what's happening, and in fact, we're slowly moving, not away from genomics, but incorporating genomics into what we call multi-order, semi-autonomous, self-regulating systems, like cells, like organs, like environments.
CA: Thank you so much.
SM: Pleasure. Thanks.
Two twin domes, two radically opposed design cultures.
One is made of thousands of steel parts, the other of a single silk thread.
One is synthetic, the other organic.
One is imposed on the environment, the other creates it.
One is designed for nature, the other is designed by her.
Michelangelo said that when he looked at raw marble, he saw a figure struggling to be free.
The chisel was Michelangelo's only tool.
But living things are not chiseled.
They grow.
And in our smallest units of life, our cells, we carry all the information that's required for every other cell to function and to replicate.
Tools also have consequences.
At least since the Industrial Revolution, the world of design has been dominated by the rigors of manufacturing and mass production.
Assembly lines have dictated a world made of parts, framing the imagination of designers and architects who have been trained to think about their objects as assemblies of discrete parts with distinct functions.
But you don't find homogenous material assemblies in nature.
Take human skin, for example.
Our facial skins are thin with large pores.
Our back skins are thicker, with small pores.
One acts mainly as filter, the other mainly as barrier, and yet it's the same skin: no parts, no assemblies.
It's a system that gradually varies its functionality by varying elasticity.
So here this is a split screen to represent my split world view, the split personality of every designer and architect operating today between the chisel and the gene, between machine and organism, between assembly and growth, between Henry Ford and Charles Darwin.
These two worldviews, my left brain and right brain, analysis and synthesis, will play out on the two screens behind me.
My work, at its simplest level, is about uniting these two worldviews, moving away from assembly and closer into growth.
You're probably asking yourselves: Why now?
Why was this not possible 10 or even five years ago?
We live in a very special time in history, a rare time, a time when the confluence of four fields is giving designers access to tools we've never had access to before.
These fields are computational design, allowing us to design complex forms with simple code; additive manufacturing, letting us produce parts by adding material rather than carving it out; materials engineering, which lets us design the behavior of materials in high resolution; and synthetic biology, enabling us to design new biological functionality by editing DNA.
And at the intersection of these four fields, my team and I create.
Please meet the minds and hands of my students.
We design objects and products and structures and tools across scales, from the large-scale, like this robotic arm with an 80-foot diameter reach with a vehicular base that will one day soon print entire buildings, to nanoscale graphics made entirely of genetically engineered microorganisms that glow in the dark.
Here we've reimagined the mashrabiya, an archetype of ancient Arabic architecture, and created a screen where every aperture is uniquely sized to shape the form of light and heat moving through it.
In our next project, we explore the possibility of creating a cape and skirt -- this was for a Paris fashion show with Iris van Herpen -- like a second skin that are made of a single part, stiff at the contours, flexible around the waist.
Together with my long-term 3D printing collaborator Stratasys, we 3D-printed this cape and skirt with no seams between the cells, and I'll show more objects like it.
This helmet combines stiff and soft materials in 20-micron resolution.
This is the resolution of a human hair.
It's also the resolution of a CT scanner.
That designers have access to such high-resolution analytic and synthetic tools, enables to design products that fit not only the shape of our bodies, but also the physiological makeup of our tissues.
Next, we designed an acoustic chair, a chair that would be at once structural, comfortable and would also absorb sound.
Professor Carter, my collaborator, and I turned to nature for inspiration, and by designing this irregular surface pattern, it becomes sound-absorbent.
We printed its surface out of 44 different properties, varying in rigidity, opacity and color, corresponding to pressure points on the human body.
Its surface, as in nature, varies its functionality not by adding another material or another assembly, but by continuously and delicately varying material property.
But is nature ideal?
Are there no parts in nature?
I wasn't raised in a religious Jewish home, but when I was young, my grandmother used to tell me stories from the Hebrew Bible, and one of them stuck with me and came to define much of what I care about.
As she recounts: "On the third day of Creation, God commands the Earth to grow a fruit-bearing fruit tree."
For this first fruit tree, there was to be no differentiation between trunk, branches, leaves and fruit.
The whole tree was a fruit.
Instead, the land grew trees that have bark and stems and flowers.
The land created a world made of parts.
I often ask myself, "What would design be like if objects were made of a single part?
Would we return to a better state of creation?"
So we looked for that biblical material, that fruit-bearing fruit tree kind of material, and we found it.
The second-most abundant biopolymer on the planet is called chitin, and some 100 million tons of it are produced every year by organisms such as shrimps, crabs, scorpions and butterflies.
We thought if we could tune its properties, we could generate structures that are multifunctional out of a single part.
So that's what we did.
We called Legal Seafood -- (Laughter) we ordered a bunch of shrimp shells, we grinded them and we produced chitosan paste.
By varying chemical concentrations, we were able to achieve a wide array of properties -- from dark, stiff and opaque, to light, soft and transparent.
In order to print the structures in large scale, we built a robotically controlled extrusion system with multiple nozzles.
The robot would vary material properties on the fly and create these 12-foot-long structures made of a single material, 100 percent recyclable.
When the parts are ready, they're left to dry and find a form naturally upon contact with air.
So why are we still designing with plastics?
The air bubbles that were a byproduct of the printing process were used to contain photosynthetic microorganisms that first appeared on our planet 3.5 billion year ago, as we learned yesterday.
Together with our collaborators at Harvard and MIT, we embedded bacteria that were genetically engineered to rapidly capture carbon from the atmosphere and convert it into sugar.
For the first time, we were able to generate structures that would seamlessly transition from beam to mesh, and if scaled even larger, to windows.
A fruit-bearing fruit tree.
Working with an ancient material, one of the first lifeforms on the planet, plenty of water and a little bit of synthetic biology, we were able to transform a structure made of shrimp shells into an architecture that behaves like a tree.
And here's the best part: for objects designed to biodegrade, put them in the sea, and they will nourish marine life; place them in soil, and they will help grow a tree.
The setting for our next exploration using the same design principles was the solar system.
We looked for the possibility of creating life-sustaining clothing for interplanetary voyages.
To do that, we needed to contain bacteria and be able to control their flow.
So like the periodic table, we came up with our own table of the elements: new lifeforms that were computationally grown, additively manufactured and biologically augmented.
I like to think of synthetic biology as liquid alchemy, only instead of transmuting precious metals, you're synthesizing new biological functionality inside very small channels.
It's called microfluidics.
We 3D-printed our own channels in order to control the flow of these liquid bacterial cultures.
In our first piece of clothing, we combined two microorganisms.
The first is cyanobacteria.
And the second, E. coli, the bacterium that inhabits the human gut.
One converts light into sugar, the other consumes that sugar and produces biofuels useful for the built environment.
Now, these two microorganisms never interact in nature.
In fact, they never met each other.
They've been here, engineered for the first time, to have a relationship inside a piece of clothing.
Think of it as evolution not by natural selection, but evolution by design.
In order to contain these relationships, we've created a single channel that resembles the digestive tract, that will help flow these bacteria and alter their function along the way.
We then started growing these channels on the human body, varying material properties according to the desired functionality.
Where we wanted more photosynthesis, we would design more transparent channels.
This wearable digestive system, when it's stretched end to end, spans 60 meters.
This is half the length of a football field, and 10 times as long as our small intestines.
And here it is for the first time unveiled at TED -- our first photosynthetic wearable, liquid channels glowing with life inside a wearable clothing.
(Applause) Thank you.
Mary Shelley said, "We are unfashioned creatures, but only half made up."
What if design could provide that other half?
What if we could create structures that would augment living matter?
What if we could create personal microbiomes that would scan our skins, repair damaged tissue and sustain our bodies?
Think of this as a form of edited biology.
This entire collection, Wanderers, that was named after planets, was not to me really about fashion per se, but it provided an opportunity to speculate about the future of our race on our planet and beyond, to combine scientific insight with lots of mystery and to move away from the age of the machine to a new age of symbiosis between our bodies, the microorganisms that we inhabit, our products and even our buildings.
I call this material ecology.
To do this, we always need to return back to nature.
By now, you know that a 3D printer prints material in layers.
You also know that nature doesn't.
It grows. It adds with sophistication.
This silkworm cocoon, for example, creates a highly sophisticated architecture, a home inside which to metamorphisize.
No additive manufacturing today gets even close to this level of sophistication.
It does so by combining not two materials, but two proteins in different concentrations.
One acts as the structure, the other is the glue, or the matrix, holding those fibers together.
And this happens across scales.
The silkworm first attaches itself to the environment -- it creates a tensile structure -- and it then starts spinning a compressive cocoon.
Tension and compression, the two forces of life, manifested in a single material.
In order to better understand how this complex process works, we glued a tiny earth magnet to the head of a silkworm, to the spinneret.
We placed it inside a box with magnetic sensors, and that allowed us to create this 3-dimensional point cloud and visualize the complex architecture of the silkworm cocoon.
However, when we placed the silkworm on a flat patch, not inside a box, we realized it would spin a flat cocoon and it would still healthily metamorphisize.
So we started designing different environments, different scaffolds, and we discovered that the shape, the composition, the structure of the cocoon, was directly informed by the environment.
Silkworms are often boiled to death inside their cocoons, their silk unraveled and used in the textile industry.
We realized that designing these templates allowed us to give shape to raw silk without boiling a single cocoon.
(Applause) They would healthily metamorphisize, and we would be able to create these things.
So we scaled this process up to architectural scale.
We had a robot spin the template out of silk, and we placed it on our site.
We knew silkworms migrated toward darker and colder areas, so we used a sun path diagram to reveal the distribution of light and heat on our structure.
We then created holes, or apertures, that would lock in the rays of light and heat, distributing those silkworms on the structure.
We were ready to receive the caterpillars.
We ordered 6,500 silkworms from an online silk farm.
And after four weeks of feeding, they were ready to spin with us.
We placed them carefully at the bottom rim of the scaffold, and as they spin they pupate, they mate, they lay eggs, and life begins all over again -- just like us but much, much shorter.
Bucky Fuller said that tension is the great integrity, and he was right.
As they spin biological silk over robotically spun silk, they give this entire pavilion its integrity.
And over two to three weeks, 6,500 silkworms spin 6,500 kilometers.
In a curious symmetry, this is also the length of the Silk Road.
The moths, after they hatch, produce 1.5 million eggs.
This could be used for 250 additional pavilions for the future.
So here they are, the two worldviews.
One spins silk out of a robotic arm, the other fills in the gaps.
If the final frontier of design is to breathe life into the products and the buildings around us, to form a two-material ecology, then designers must unite these two worldviews.
Which brings us back, of course, to the beginning.
Here's to a new age of design, a new age of creation, that takes us from a nature-inspired design to a design-inspired nature, and that demands of us for the first time that we mother nature.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause)
(Guitar music) I was just thinking that I have been missing you way too long There's something inside this weary head that wants us to love just instead But I was just thinking, merely thinking I've got loads of pictures, I've got the one of you in that dancing dress But man I feel silly in that dim light Just after doing you by the sight of my Kodak delights, I am sinking, merely sinking I think about long distance rates instead of kissing you babe I'm a singer without a song If I wait for you longer my affection is stronger and I ... I was just thinking, merely thinking that this boat is sinking I'm tired of postcards, especially the ones with cute dogs and cupids I'm tired of calling you and missing you and dreaming I slept with you Don't get me wrong I still desperately love you inside this weary head I just want us to love just instead But I was just thinking and thinking, merely thinking I think about long distance rates instead of kissing you babe and time is running me still If I wait for you longer my affection is stronger I ... I was just thinking I ... I was just thinking that I'm tired of calling you once a week thinking of long distance rates instead of kissing you So baby I'm sinking, merely sinking (Guitar music ends) (Applause) Thank you.
Singing is sharing.
When you sing, you have to know what you're talking about intimately, and you have to be willing to share this insight and give away a piece of yourself.
I look for this intention to share in everything, and I ask: what are the intentions behind this architecture or this product or this restaurant or this meal?
And if your intentions are to impress people or to get the big applause at the end, then you are taking, not giving.
And this is a song that's about -- it's the kind of song that everyone has their version of.
This song is called "Home," and it's sort of a "This is where I'm from, nice to meet you all," kind of song.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Piano music) Home is the sound of birds early in the morning Home is a song I've always remembered Home is the memory of my first day in school Home is the books that I carry around Home is an alley in a faraway town Home is the places Ive been and where Id like to go Home I'm always gonna feel at home No matter where I may roam I'm always gonna find my way back home No matter how far Im gone Im always gonna feel this longing No matter where I might stay Home is a feather twirling in the air Home is flowers in a windowsill Home is all the things she said to me Home is a photo I never threw away Home is the smile on my face when I die Home is the taste of an apple pie I met a woman, she always lived in the same place And she said home is where youre born and raised And I met a man, he sat looking out to the sea And he said home is where you want to be I met a girl in some downtown bar And she said I'll have whatever he's having And I asked her how come we never met before?
And she said all my life Ive been trying to get a place of my own Im always gonna feel at home No matter where I may roam Always gonna find my way back home No matter how far Im gone I'm always gonna feel this longing No matter where I might stay (Piano music) (Piano music ends) (Applause)
In my lab, we build autonomous aerial robots like the one you see flying here.
Unlike the commercially available drones that you can buy today, this robot doesn't have any GPS on board.
So without GPS, it's hard for robots like this to determine their position.
This robot uses onboard sensors, cameras and laser scanners, to scan the environment.
It detects features from the environment, and it determines where it is relative to those features, using a method of triangulation.
And then it can assemble all these features into a map, like you see behind me.
And this map then allows the robot to understand where the obstacles are and navigate in a collision-free manner.
What I want to show you next is a set of experiments we did inside our laboratory, where this robot was able to go for longer distances.
So here you'll see, on the top right, what the robot sees with the camera.
And on the main screen -- and of course this is sped up by a factor of four -- on the main screen you'll see the map that it's building.
So this is a high-resolution map of the corridor around our laboratory.
And in a minute you'll see it enter our lab, which is recognizable by the clutter that you see.
(Laughter) But the main point I want to convey to you is that these robots are capable of building high-resolution maps at five centimeters resolution, allowing somebody who is outside the lab, or outside the building to deploy these without actually going inside, and trying to infer what happens inside the building.
Now there's one problem with robots like this.
The first problem is it's pretty big.
Because it's big, it's heavy.
And these robots consume about 100 watts per pound.
And this makes for a very short mission life.
The second problem is that these robots have onboard sensors that end up being very expensive -- a laser scanner, a camera and the processors.
That drives up the cost of this robot.
So we asked ourselves a question: what consumer product can you buy in an electronics store that is inexpensive, that's lightweight, that has sensing onboard and computation?
And we invented the flying phone.
(Laughter) So this robot uses a Samsung Galaxy smartphone that you can buy off the shelf, and all you need is an app that you can download from our app store.
And you can see this robot reading the letters, "TED" in this case, looking at the corners of the "T" and the "E" and then triangulating off of that, flying autonomously.
That joystick is just there to make sure if the robot goes crazy, Giuseppe can kill it.
(Laughter) In addition to building these small robots, we also experiment with aggressive behaviors, like you see here.
So this robot is now traveling at two to three meters per second, pitching and rolling aggressively as it changes direction.
The main point is we can have smaller robots that can go faster and then travel in these very unstructured environments.
And in this next video, just like you see this bird, an eagle, gracefully coordinating its wings, its eyes and feet to grab prey out of the water, our robot can go fishing, too.
(Laughter) In this case, this is a Philly cheesesteak hoagie that it's grabbing out of thin air.
(Laughter) So you can see this robot going at about three meters per second, which is faster than walking speed, coordinating its arms, its claws and its flight with split-second timing to achieve this maneuver.
In another experiment, I want to show you how the robot adapts its flight to control its suspended payload, whose length is actually larger than the width of the window.
So in order to accomplish this, it actually has to pitch and adjust the altitude and swing the payload through.
But of course we want to make these even smaller, and we're inspired in particular by honeybees.
So if you look at honeybees, and this is a slowed down video, they're so small, the inertia is so lightweight -- (Laughter) that they don't care -- they bounce off my hand, for example.
This is a little robot that mimics the honeybee behavior.
And smaller is better, because along with the small size you get lower inertia.
Along with lower inertia -- (Robot buzzing, laughter) along with lower inertia, you're resistant to collisions.
And that makes you more robust.
So just like these honeybees, we build small robots.
And this particular one is only 25 grams in weight.
It consumes only six watts of power.
And it can travel up to six meters per second.
So if I normalize that to its size, it's like a Boeing 787 traveling ten times the speed of sound.
(Laughter) And I want to show you an example.
This is probably the first planned mid-air collision, at one-twentieth normal speed.
These are going at a relative speed of two meters per second, and this illustrates the basic principle.
The two-gram carbon fiber cage around it prevents the propellers from entangling, but essentially the collision is absorbed and the robot responds to the collisions.
And so small also means safe.
In my lab, as we developed these robots, we start off with these big robots and then now we're down to these small robots.
And if you plot a histogram of the number of Band-Aids we've ordered in the past, that sort of tailed off now.
Because these robots are really safe.
The small size has some disadvantages, and nature has found a number of ways to compensate for these disadvantages.
The basic idea is they aggregate to form large groups, or swarms.
So, similarly, in our lab, we try to create artificial robot swarms.
And this is quite challenging because now you have to think about networks of robots.
And within each robot, you have to think about the interplay of sensing, communication, computation -- and this network then becomes quite difficult to control and manage.
So from nature we take away three organizing principles that essentially allow us to develop our algorithms.
The first idea is that robots need to be aware of their neighbors.
They need to be able to sense and communicate with their neighbors.
So this video illustrates the basic idea.
You have four robots -- one of the robots has actually been hijacked by a human operator, literally.
But because the robots interact with each other, they sense their neighbors, they essentially follow.
And here there's a single person able to lead this network of followers.
So again, it's not because all the robots know where they're supposed to go.
It's because they're just reacting to the positions of their neighbors.
(Laughter) So the next experiment illustrates the second organizing principle.
And this principle has to do with the principle of anonymity.
Here the key idea is that the robots are agnostic to the identities of their neighbors.
They're asked to form a circular shape, and no matter how many robots you introduce into the formation, or how many robots you pull out, each robot is simply reacting to its neighbor.
It's aware of the fact that it needs to form the circular shape, but collaborating with its neighbors it forms the shape without central coordination.
Now if you put these ideas together, the third idea is that we essentially give these robots mathematical descriptions of the shape they need to execute.
And these shapes can be varying as a function of time, and you'll see these robots start from a circular formation, change into a rectangular formation, stretch into a straight line, back into an ellipse.
And they do this with the same kind of split-second coordination that you see in natural swarms, in nature.
So why work with swarms?
Let me tell you about two applications that we are very interested in.
The first one has to do with agriculture, which is probably the biggest problem that we're facing worldwide.
As you well know, one in every seven persons in this earth is malnourished.
Most of the land that we can cultivate has already been cultivated.
And the efficiency of most systems in the world is improving, but our production system efficiency is actually declining.
And that's mostly because of water shortage, crop diseases, climate change and a couple of other things.
So what can robots do?
Well, we adopt an approach that's called Precision Farming in the community.
And the basic idea is that we fly aerial robots through orchards, and then we build precision models of individual plants.
So just like personalized medicine, while you might imagine wanting to treat every patient individually, what we'd like to do is build models of individual plants and then tell the farmer what kind of inputs every plant needs -- the inputs in this case being water, fertilizer and pesticide.
Here you'll see robots traveling through an apple orchard, and in a minute you'll see two of its companions doing the same thing on the left side.
And what they're doing is essentially building a map of the orchard.
Within the map is a map of every plant in this orchard.
(Robot buzzing) Let's see what those maps look like.
In the next video, you'll see the cameras that are being used on this robot.
On the top-left is essentially a standard color camera.
On the left-center is an infrared camera.
And on the bottom-left is a thermal camera.
And on the main panel, you're seeing a three-dimensional reconstruction of every tree in the orchard as the sensors fly right past the trees.
Armed with information like this, we can do several things.
The first and possibly the most important thing we can do is very simple: count the number of fruits on every tree.
By doing this, you tell the farmer how many fruits she has in every tree and allow her to estimate the yield in the orchard, optimizing the production chain downstream.
The second thing we can do is take models of plants, construct three-dimensional reconstructions, and from that estimate the canopy size, and then correlate the canopy size to the amount of leaf area on every plant.
And this is called the leaf area index.
So if you know this leaf area index, you essentially have a measure of how much photosynthesis is possible in every plant, which again tells you how healthy each plant is.
By combining visual and infrared information, we can also compute indices such as NDVI.
And in this particular case, you can essentially see there are some crops that are not doing as well as other crops.
This is easily discernible from imagery, not just visual imagery but combining both visual imagery and infrared imagery.
And then lastly, one thing we're interested in doing is detecting the early onset of chlorosis -- and this is an orange tree -- which is essentially seen by yellowing of leaves.
But robots flying overhead can easily spot this autonomously and then report to the farmer that he or she has a problem in this section of the orchard.
Systems like this can really help, and we're projecting yields that can improve by about ten percent and, more importantly, decrease the amount of inputs such as water by 25 percent by using aerial robot swarms.
Lastly, I want you to applaud the people who actually create the future, Yash Mulgaonkar, Sikang Liu and Giuseppe Loianno, who are responsible for the three demonstrations that you saw.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A high forehead topped by disheveled black hair, a sickly pallor, and a look of deep intelligence and deeper exhaustion in his dark, sunken eyes.
Edgar Allan Poes image is not just instantly recognizable  its perfectly suited to his reputation.
From the prisoner strapped under a descending pendulum blade, to a raven who refuses to leave the narrators chamber, Poes macabre and innovative stories of gothic horror have left a timeless mark on literature.
But just what is it that makes Edgar Allan Poe one of the greatest American authors?
After all, horror was a popular genre of the period, with many practitioners.
Yet Poe stood out thanks to his careful attention to form and style.
As a literary critic, he identified two cardinal rules for the short story form: it must be short enough to read in one sitting, and every word must contribute to its purpose.
By mastering these rules, Poe commands the readers attention and rewards them with an intense and singular experience  what Poe called the unity of effect.
Though often frightening, this effect goes far beyond fear.
Poes stories use violence and horror to explore the paradoxes and mysteries of love, grief, and guilt, while resisting simple interpretations or clear moral messages.
And while they often hint at supernatural elements, the true darkness they explore is the human mind and its propensity for self-destruction.
In The Tell-Tale Heart, a ghastly murder is juxtaposed with the killers tender empathy towards the victim  a connection that soon returns to haunt him.
The title character of "Ligeia" returns from the dead through the corpse of her husbands second wife  or at least the opium-addicted narrator thinks she does.
And when the protagonist of William Wilson violently confronts a man he believes has been following him, he might just be staring at his own image in a mirror.
Through his pioneering use of unreliable narrators, Poe turns readers into active participants who must decide when a storyteller might be misinterpreting or even lying about the events theyre relating.
Although hes best known for his short horror stories, Poe was actually one of the most versatile and experimental writers of the nineteenth century.
He invented the detective story as we know it, with The Murders in the Rue Morgue, followed by The Mystery of Marie Roget and The Purloined Letter. All three feature the original armchair detective, C. Auguste Dupin, who uses his genius and unusual powers of observation and deduction to solve crimes that baffle the police.
Poe also wrote satires of social and literary trends, and hoaxes that in some cases anticipated science fiction.
Those included an account of a balloon voyage to the moon, and a report of a dying patient put into a hypnotic trance so he could speak from the other side.
Poe even wrote an adventure novel about a voyage to the South Pole and a treatise on astrophysics, all while he worked as an editor, producing hundreds of pages of book reviews and literary theory.
An appreciation of Poes career wouldnt be complete without his poetry: haunting and hypnotic.
His best-known poems are songs of grief, or in his words, mournful and never-ending remembrance. The Raven, in which the speaker projects his grief onto a bird who merely repeats a single sound, made Poe famous.
But despite his literary success, Poe lived in poverty throughout his career, and his personal life was often as dark as his writing.
He was haunted by the loss of his mother and his wife, who both died of tuberculosis at the age of 24.
Poe struggled with alcoholism and frequently antagonized other popular writers.
Much of his fame came from posthumous  and very loose  adaptations of his work.
And yet, if he couldve known how much pleasure and inspiration his writing would bring to generations of readers and writers alike, perhaps it may have brought a smile to that famously brooding visage.
Do you think the world is going to be a better place next year?
In the next decade?
Can we end hunger, achieve gender equality, halt climate change, all in the next 15 years?
Well, according to the governments of the world, yes we can.
In the last few days, the leaders of the world, meeting at the UN in New York, agreed a new set of Global Goals for the development of the world to 2030.
And here they are: these goals are the product of a massive consultation exercise.
The Global Goals are who we, humanity, want to be.
Now that's the plan, but can we get there?
Can this vision for a better world really be achieved?
Well, I'm here today because we've run the numbers, and the answer, shockingly, is that maybe we actually can.
But not with business as usual.
Now, the idea that the world is going to get a better place may seem a little fanciful.
Watch the news every day and the world seems to be going backwards, not forwards.
And let's be frank: it's pretty easy to be skeptical about grand announcements coming out of the UN.
But please, I invite you to suspend your disbelief for just a moment.
Because back in 2001, the UN agreed another set of goals, the Millennium Development Goals.
And the flagship target there was to halve the proportion of people living in poverty by 2015.
The target was to take from a baseline of 1990, when 36 percent of the world's population lived in poverty, to get to 18 percent poverty this year.
Did we hit this target?
Well, no, we didn't.
We exceeded it.
This year, global poverty is going to fall to 12 percent.
Now, that's still not good enough, and the world does still have plenty of problems.
But the pessimists and doomsayers who say that the world can't get better are simply wrong.
So how did we achieve this success?
Well, a lot of it was because of economic growth.
Some of the biggest reductions in poverty were in countries such as China and India, which have seen rapid economic growth in recent years.
So can we pull off the same trick again?
Can economic growth get us to the Global Goals?
Well, to answer that question, we need to benchmark where the world is today against the Global Goals and figure out how far we have to travel.
But that ain't easy, because the Global Goals aren't just ambitious, they're also pretty complicated.
Over 17 goals, there are then 169 targets and literally hundreds of indicators.
Also, while some of the goals are pretty specific -- end hunger -- others are a lot vaguer -- promote peaceful and tolerant societies.
So to help us with this benchmarking, I'm going to use a tool called the Social Progress Index.
What this does is measures all the stuff the Global Goals are trying to achieve, but sums it up into a single number that we can use as our benchmark and track progress over time.
The Social Progress Index basically asks three fundamental questions about a society.
First of all, does everyone have the basic needs of survival: food, water, shelter, safety?
Secondly, does everyone have the building blocks of a better life: education, information, health and a sustainable environment?
And does everyone have the opportunity to improve their lives, through rights, freedom of choice, freedom from discrimination, and access to the world's most advanced knowledge?
The Social Progress Index sums all this together using 52 indicators to create an aggregate score on a scale of 0 to 100.
And what we find is that there's a wide diversity of performance in the world today.
The highest performing country, Norway, scores 88.
The lowest performing country, Central African Republic, scores 31.
And we can add up all the countries together, weighting for the different population sizes, and that global score is 61.
In concrete terms, that means that the average human being is living on a level of social progress about the same of Cuba or Kazakhstan today.
That's where we are today: 61 out of 100.
What do we have to get to to achieve the Global Goals?
Now, the Global Goals are certainly ambitious, but they're not about turning the world into Norway in just 15 years.
So having looked at the numbers, my estimate is that a score of 75 would not only be a giant leap forward in human well-being, it would also count as hitting the Global Goals target.
So there's our target, 75 out of 100.
Can we get there?
Well, the Social Progress Index can help us calculate this, because as you might have noticed, there are no economic indicators in there; there's no GDP or economic growth in the Social Progress Index model.
And what that lets us do is understand the relationship between economic growth and social progress.
Let me show you on this chart.
So here on the vertical axis, I've put social progress, the stuff the Global Goals are trying to achieve.
Higher is better.
And then on the horizontal axis, is GDP per capita.
Further to the right means richer.
And in there, I'm now going to put all the countries of the world, each one represented by a dot, and on top of that I'm going to put the regression line that shows the average relationship.
And what this tells us is that as we get richer, social progress does tend to improve.
However, as we get richer, each extra dollar of GDP is buying us less and less social progress.
And now we can use this information to start building our forecast.
So here is the world in 2015.
We have a social progress score of 61 and a GDP per capita of $14,000.
And the place we're trying to get to, remember, is 75, that Global Goals target.
So here we are today, $14,000 per capita GDP.
How rich are we going to be in 2030?
That's what we need to know next.
Well, the best forecast we can find comes from the US Department of Agriculture, which forecasts 3.1 percent average global economic growth over the next 15 years, which means that in 2030, if they're right, per capita GDP will be about $23,000.
So now the question is: if we get that much richer, how much social progress are we going to get?
Well, we asked a team of economists at Deloitte who checked and crunched the numbers, and they came back and said, well, look: if the world's average wealth goes from $14,000 a year to $23,000 a year, social progress is going to increase from 61 to 62.4.
(Laughter) Just 62.4. Just a tiny increase.
Now this seems a bit strange.
Economic growth seems to have really helped in the fight against poverty, but it doesn't seem to be having much impact on trying to get to the Global Goals.
So what's going on?
Well, I think there are two things.
The first is that in a way, we're the victims of our own success.
We've used up the easy wins from economic growth, and now we're moving on to harder problems.
And also, we know that economic growth comes with costs as well as benefits.
There are costs to the environment, costs from new health problems like obesity.
So that's the bad news.
We're not going to get to the Global Goals just by getting richer.
So are the pessimists right?
Well, maybe not.
Because the Social Progress Index also has some very good news.
Let me take you back to that regression line.
So this is the average relationship between GDP and social progress, and this is what our last forecast was based on.
But as you saw already, there is actually lots of noise around this trend line.
What that tells us, quite simply, is that GDP is not destiny.
We have countries that are underperforming on social progress, relative to their wealth.
Russia has lots of natural resource wealth, but lots of social problems.
China has boomed economically, but hasn't made much headway on human rights or environmental issues.
India has a space program and millions of people without toilets.
Now, on the other hand, we have countries that are overperforming on social progress relative to their GDP.
Costa Rica has prioritized education, health and environmental sustainability, and as a result, it's achieving a very high level of social progress, despite only having a rather modest GDP.
And Costa Rica's not alone.
From poor countries like Rwanda to richer countries like New Zealand, we see that it's possible to get lots of social progress, even if your GDP is not so great.
And that's really important, because it tells us two things.
First of all, it tells us that we already in the world have the solutions to many of the problems that the Global Goals are trying to solve.
It also tells us that we're not slaves to GDP.
Our choices matter: if we prioritize the well-being of people, then we can make a lot more progress than our GDP might expect.
How much? Enough to get us to the Global Goals?
Well, let's look at some numbers.
What we know already: the world today is scoring 61 on social progress, and the place we want to get to is 75.
If we rely on economic growth alone, we're going to get to 62.4.
So let's assume now that we can get the countries that are currently underperforming on social progress -- the Russia, China, Indias -- just up to the average.
How much social progress does that get us?
Well, that takes us to 65.
It's a bit better, but still quite a long way to go.
So let's get a little bit more optimistic and say, what if every country gets a little bit better at turning its wealth into well-being?
Well then, we get to 67.
And now let's be even bolder still.
What if every country in the world chose to be like Costa Rica in prioritizing human well-being, using its wealth for the well-being of its citizens?
Well then, we get to nearly 73, very close to the Global Goals.
Can we achieve the Global Goals?
Certainly not with business as usual.
Even a flood tide of economic growth is not going to get us there, if it just raises the mega-yachts and the super-wealthy and leaves the rest behind.
If we're going to achieve the Global Goals we have to do things differently.
We have to prioritize social progress, and really scale solutions around the world.
I believe the Global Goals are a historic opportunity, because the world's leaders have promised to deliver them.
Let's not dismiss the goals or slide into pessimism; let's hold them to that promise.
And we need to hold them to that promise by holding them accountable, tracking their progress all the way through the next 15 years.
And I want to finish by showing you a way to do that, called the People's Report Card.
The People's Report Card brings together all this data into a simple framework that we'll all be familiar with from our school days, to hold them to account.
It grades our performance on the Global Goals on a scale from F to A, where F is humanity at its worst, and A is humanity at its best.
Our world today is scoring a C-.
The Global Goals are all about getting to an A, and that's why we're going to be updating the People's Report Card annually, for the world and for all the countries of the world, so we can hold our leaders to account to achieve this target and fulfill this promise.
Because getting to the Global Goals will only happen if we do things differently, if our leaders do things differently, and for that to happen, that needs us to demand it.
So let's reject business as usual.
Let's demand a different path.
Let's choose the world that we want.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Michael.
Michael, just one question: the Millennium Development Goals established 15 years ago, they were kind of applying to every country but it turned out to be really a scorecard for emerging countries.
Now the new Global Goals are explicitly universal.
They ask for every country to show action and to show progress.
How can I, as a private citizen, use the report card to create pressure for action?
Michael Green: This is a really important point; it's a big shift in priorities -- it's no longer about poor countries and just poverty.
It's about every country.
And every country is going to have challenges in getting to the Global Goals.
Even, I'm sorry to say, Bruno, Switzerland has got to work to do.
And so that's why we're going to produce these report cards in 2016 for every country in the world.
Then we can really see, how are we doing?
And it's not going to be rich countries scoring straight A's.
And that, then, I think, is to provide a point of focus for people to start demanding action and start demanding progress.
BG: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A portly Miller, barely sober enough to sit on his horse, rambles on about the flighty wife of a crotchety old carpenter and the scholar she takes as her lover.
To get some time alone together, the scholar and the wife play various tricks that involve feigning madness, staging a biblical flood, and exposing themselves in public.
But the parish clerk is also lusting after the wife, and comes by every night to sing outside her house.
This becomes so tiresome that she tries to scare him away by hanging her rear end out the window for him to kiss.
When this appears not to work, her scholar decides to try farting in the same position, but this time, the clerk is waiting with a red-hot poker.
This might all sound like a bawdy joke, but its part of one of the most esteemed works of English literature ever created: The Canterbury Tales, which seamlessly blends the lofty and the lowly.
The work consists of 24 stories, each told by one of Chaucers spirited characters.
Narrators include familiar Medieval figures such as a Knight, a Clerk, and a Nun, and the less recognizable Reeve, and Mancible, and others.
The Tales are written in Middle English, which often looks entirely different from the language spoken today.
It was used between the 12th and 15th centuries, and evolved from Old English due to increased contact with European romantic languages after the Norman Conquest of 1066.
Most of the Middle English alphabet is still familiar today, with the inclusion of a few archaic symbols, such as yogh, which denotes the y, j, or gh sound.
The loquacious cast of the Tales first meet at the Tabard Inn in Southwark.
They have a journey in common: a pilgrimage to Canterbury to visit the shrine of St. Thomas Beckett, a martyred archbishop who was murdered in his own Cathedral.
Eager and nosy for some personal details, the host of the Inn proposes a competition: whoever tells the best tale will be treated to dinner.
If not for their pilgrimage, many of these figures would never have had the chance to interact.
This is because Medieval society followed a feudal system that divided the clergy and nobility from the working classes, made up of peasants and serfs.
By Chaucers time, a professional class of merchants and intellectuals had also emerged.
Chaucer spent most of his life as a government official during the Hundred Years' War, traveling throughout Italy and France, as well as his native England.
This may have influenced the panoramic vision of his work, and in the Tales, no level of society is above mockery.
Chaucer uses the quirks of the characters language  the ribald humor of the Cook, the solemn prose of the Parson, and the lofty notions of the Squire  to satirize their worldviews.
The varied dialects, genres, and literary tropes also make the work a vivid record of the different ways Medieval audiences entertained themselves.
For instance, the Knights tale of courtly love, chivalry, and destiny riffs on romance, while the tales of working-class narrators are generally comedies filled with scatological language, sexual deviance, and slapstick.
This variation includes something for everyone, and thats one reason why readers continue to delight in the work in both Middle English and translation.
While the narrative runs to over 17,000 lines, it's apparently unfinished, as the prologue ambitiously introduces 29 pilgrims and promises four stories apiece, and the innkeeper never crowns a victor.
Its possible that Chaucer was so caught up in his sumptuous creations that he delayed picking a winner - or perhaps he was so fond of each character that he just couldnt choose.
Whatever the reason, this means that every reader is free to judge; the question of who wins is up to you.
Spindly trees, rusted gates, crumbling stone, a solitary mourner these things come to mind when we think of cemeteries.
But not so long ago, many burial grounds were lively places, with blooming gardens and crowds of people strolling among the headstones.
How did our cemeteries become what they are today?
Some have been around for centuries, like the worlds largest, Wadi al-Salaam, where more than five million people are buried.
But most of the places wed recognize as cemeteries are much younger.
In fact, for much of human history, we didnt bury our dead at all.
Our ancient ancestors had many other ways of parting with the dead loved ones.
Some were left in caves, others in trees or on mountaintops.
Still others were sunk in lakes, put out to sea, ritually cannibalized, or cremated.
All of these practices, though some may seem strange today, were ways of venerating the dead.
By contrast, the first known burials about 120,000 years ago were likely reserved for transgressors, excluding them from the usual rites intended to honor the dead.
But the first burials revealed some advantages over other practices: they protected bodies from scavengers and the elements, while shielding loved ones from the sight of decay.
These benefits may have shifted ancient peoples thinking toward graves designed to honor the dead, and burial became more common.
Sometimes, these graves contained practical or ritual objects, suggesting belief in an afterlife where the dead might need such tools.
Communal burials first appeared in North Africa and West Asia around 10 to 15,000 years ago, around the same time as the first permanent settlements in these areas.
These burial grounds created permanent places to commemorate the dead.
The nomadic Scythians littered the steppes with grave mounds known as kurgans.
The Etruscans built expansive necropoles, their grid-patterned streets lined with tombs.
In Rome, subterranean catacombs housed both cremation urns and intact remains.
The word cemetery, or sleeping chamber, was first used by ancient Greeks, who built tombs in graveyards at the edges of their cities.
In medieval European cities, Christian churchyards provided rare, open spaces that accommodated the dead, but also hosted markets, fairs, and other events.
Farmers even grazed cattle in them, believing graveyard grass made for sweeter milk.
As cities grew during the industrial revolution, large suburban cemeteries replaced smaller urban churchyards.
Cemeteries like the 110-acre Pre-Lachaise in Paris or the 72-acre Mt. Auburn in Cambridge, Massachusetts were lushly landscaped gardens filled with sculpted stones and ornate tombs.
Once a luxury reserved for the rich and powerful, individually marked graves became available to the middle and working classes.
People visited cemeteries for funerals, but also for anniversaries, holidays, or simply an afternoon outdoors.
By the late 19th century, as more public parks and botanical gardens appeared, cemeteries began to lose visitors.
Today, many old cemeteries are lonely places.
Some are luring visitors back with tours, concerts, and other attractions.
But even as we revive old cemeteries, were rethinking the future of burial.
Cities like London, New York, and Hong Kong are running out of burial space.
Even in places where space isnt so tight, cemeteries permanently occupy land that cant be otherwise cultivated or developed.
Traditional burial consumes materials like metal, stone, and concrete, and can pollute soil and groundwater with toxic chemicals.
With increasing awareness of the environmental costs, people are seeking alternatives.
Many are turning to cremation and related practices.
Along with these more conventional practices, people can now have their remains shot into space, used to fertilize a tree, or made into jewelry, fireworks, and even tattoo ink.
In the future, options like these may replace burial completely.
Cemeteries may be our most familiar monuments to the departed, but theyre just one step in our ever-evolving process of remembering and honoring the dead.
We all go to doctors.
And we do so with trust and blind faith that the test they are ordering and the medications they're prescribing are based upon evidence -- evidence that's designed to help us.
However, the reality is that that hasn't always been the case for everyone.
What if I told you that the medical science discovered over the past century has been based on only half the population?
I'm an emergency medicine doctor.
I was trained to be prepared in a medical emergency.
It's about saving lives. How cool is that?
OK, there's a lot of runny noses and stubbed toes, but no matter who walks through the door to the ER, we order the same tests, we prescribe the same medication, without ever thinking about the sex or gender of our patients.
Why would we?
We were never taught that there were any differences between men and women.
A recent Government Accountability study revealed that 80 percent of the drugs withdrawn from the market are due to side effects on women.
So let's think about that for a minute.
Why are we discovering side effects on women only after a drug has been released to the market?
Do you know that it takes years for a drug to go from an idea to being tested on cells in a laboratory, to animal studies, to then clinical trials on humans, finally to go through a regulatory approval process, to be available for your doctor to prescribe to you?
Not to mention the millions and billions of dollars of funding it takes to go through that process.
So why are we discovering unacceptable side effects on half the population after that has gone through?
What's happening?
Well, it turns out that those cells used in that laboratory, they're male cells, and the animals used in the animal studies were male animals, and the clinical trials have been performed almost exclusively on men.
How is it that the male model became our framework for medical research?
Let's look at an example that has been popularized in the media, and it has to do with the sleep aid Ambien.
Ambien was released on the market over 20 years ago, and since then, hundreds of millions of prescriptions have been written, primarily to women, because women suffer more sleep disorders than men.
But just this past year, the Food and Drug Administration recommended cutting the dose in half for women only, because they just realized that women metabolize the drug at a slower rate than men, causing them to wake up in the morning with more of the active drug in their system.
And then they're drowsy and they're getting behind the wheel of the car, and they're at risk for motor vehicle accidents.
And I can't help but think, as an emergency physician, how many of my patients that I've cared for over the years were involved in a motor vehicle accident that possibly could have been prevented if this type of analysis was performed and acted upon 20 years ago when this drug was first released.
How many other things need to be analyzed by gender?
What else are we missing?
World War II changed a lot of things, and one of them was this need to protect people from becoming victims of medical research without informed consent.
So some much-needed guidelines or rules were set into place, and part of that was this desire to protect women of childbearing age from entering into any medical research studies.
There was fear: what if something happened to the fetus during the study?
Who would be responsible?
And so the scientists at this time actually thought this was a blessing in disguise, because let's face it -- men's bodies are pretty homogeneous.
They don't have the constantly fluctuating levels of hormones that could disrupt clean data they could get if they had only men.
It was easier. It was cheaper.
Not to mention, at this time, there was a general assumption that men and women were alike in every way, apart from their reproductive organs and sex hormones.
So it was decided: medical research was performed on men, and the results were later applied to women.
What did this do to the notion of women's health?
Women's health became synonymous with reproduction: breasts, ovaries, uterus, pregnancy.
It's this term we now refer to as "bikini medicine."
And this stayed this way until about the 1980s, when this concept was challenged by the medical community and by the public health policymakers when they realized that by excluding women from all medical research studies we actually did them a disservice, in that apart from reproductive issues, virtually nothing was known about the unique needs of the female patient.
Since that time, an overwhelming amount of evidence has come to light that shows us just how different men and women are in every way.
You know, we have this saying in medicine: children are not just little adults.
And we say that to remind ourselves that children actually have a different physiology than normal adults.
And it's because of this that the medical specialty of pediatrics came to light.
And we now conduct research on children in order to improve their lives.
And I know the same thing can be said about women.
Women are not just men with boobs and tubes.
But they have their own anatomy and physiology that deserves to be studied with the same intensity.
Let's take the cardiovascular system, for example.
This area in medicine has done the most to try to figure out why it seems men and women have completely different heart attacks.
Heart disease is the number one killer for both men and women, but more women die within the first year of having a heart attack than men.
Men will complain of crushing chest pain -- an elephant is sitting on their chest.
And we call this typical.
Women have chest pain, too.
But more women than men will complain of "just not feeling right," "can't seem to get enough air in," "just so tired lately."
And for some reason we call this atypical, even though, as I mentioned, women do make up half the population.
And so what is some of the evidence to help explain some of these differences?
If we look at the anatomy, the blood vessels that surround the heart are smaller in women compared to men, and the way that those blood vessels develop disease is different in women compared to men.
And the test that we use to determine if someone is at risk for a heart attack, well, they were initially designed and tested and perfected in men, and so aren't as good at determining that in women.
And then if we think about the medications -- common medications that we use, like aspirin.
We give aspirin to healthy men to help prevent them from having a heart attack, but do you know that if you give aspirin to a healthy woman, it's actually harmful?
What this is doing is merely telling us that we are scratching the surface.
Emergency medicine is a fast-paced business.
In how many life-saving areas of medicine, like cancer and stroke, are there important differences between men and women that we could be utilizing?
Or even, why is it that some people get those runny noses more than others, or why the pain medication that we give to those stubbed toes work in some and not in others?
The Institute of Medicine has said every cell has a sex.
What does this mean?
Sex is DNA.
Gender is how someone presents themselves in society.
And these two may not always match up, as we can see with our transgendered population.
But it's important to realize that from the moment of conception, every cell in our bodies -- skin, hair, heart and lungs -- contains our own unique DNA, and that DNA contains the chromosomes that determine whether we become male or female, man or woman.
It used to be thought that those sex-determining chromosomes pictured here -- XY if you're male, XX if you're female -- merely determined whether you would be born with ovaries or testes, and it was the sex hormones that those organs produced that were responsible for the differences we see in the opposite sex.
But we now know that that theory was wrong -- or it's at least a little incomplete.
And thankfully, scientists like Dr. Page from the Whitehead Institute, who works on the Y chromosome, and Doctor Yang from UCLA, they have found evidence that tells us that those sex-determining chromosomes that are in every cell in our bodies continue to remain active for our entire lives and could be what's responsible for the differences we see in the dosing of drugs, or why there are differences between men and women in the susceptibility and severity of diseases.
This new knowledge is the game-changer, and it's up to those scientists that continue to find that evidence, but it's up to the clinicians to start translating this data at the bedside, today.
And to help do this, I'm a co-founder of a national organization called Sex and Gender Women's Health Collaborative, and we collect all of this data so that it's available for teaching and for patient care.
And we're working to bring together the medical educators to the table.
That's a big job.
It's changing the way medical training has been done since its inception.
But I believe in them.
I know they're going to see the value of incorporating the gender lens into the current curriculum.
It's about training the future health care providers correctly.
And regionally, I'm a co-creator of a division within the Department of Emergency Medicine here at Brown University, called Sex and Gender in Emergency Medicine, and we conduct the research to determine the differences between men and women in emergent conditions, like heart disease and stroke and sepsis and substance abuse, but we also believe that education is paramount.
We've created a 360-degree model of education.
We have programs for the doctors, for the nurses, for the students and for the patients.
Because this cannot just be left up to the health care leaders.
We all have a role in making a difference.
But I must warn you: this is not easy.
In fact, it's hard.
It's essentially changing the way we think about medicine and health and research.
It's changing our relationship to the health care system.
But there's no going back.
We now know just enough to know that we weren't doing it right.
Martin Luther King, Jr. has said, "Change does not roll in on the wheels of inevitability, but comes through continuous struggle."
And the first step towards change is awareness.
This is not just about improving medical care for women.
This is about personalized, individualized health care for everyone.
This awareness has the power to transform medical care for men and women.
And from now on, I want you to ask your doctors whether the treatments you are receiving are specific to your sex and gender.
They may not know the answer -- yet.
But the conversation has begun, and together we can all learn.
Remember, for me and my colleagues in this field, your sex and gender matter.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Good morning.
Let's look for a minute at the greatest icon of all, Leonardo da Vinci.
We're all familiar with his fantastic work -- his drawings, his paintings, his inventions, his writings.
But we do not know his face.
Thousands of books have been written about him, but there's controversy, and it remains, about his looks.
Even this well-known portrait is not accepted by many art historians.
So, what do you think?
Is this the face of Leonardo da Vinci or isn't it?
Let's find out.
Leonardo was a man that drew everything around him.
He drew people, anatomy, plants, animals, landscapes, buildings, water, everything.
But no faces?
I find that hard to believe.
His contemporaries made faces, like the ones you see here -- en face or three-quarters.
So, surely a passionate drawer like Leonardo must have made self-portraits from time to time.
So let's try to find them.
I think that if we were to scan all of his work and look for self-portraits, we would find his face looking at us.
So I looked at all of his drawings, more than 700, and looked for male portraits.
There are about 120, you see them here.
Which ones of these could be self-portraits?
Well, for that they have to be done as we just saw, en face or three-quarters.
So we can eliminate all the profiles.
It also has to be sufficiently detailed.
So we can also eliminate the ones that are very vague or very stylized.
And we know from his contemporaries that Leonardo was a very handsome, even beautiful man.
So we can also eliminate the ugly ones or the caricatures.
(Laughter) And look what happens -- only three candidates remain that fit the bill.
And here they are.
Yes, indeed, the old man is there, as is this famous pen drawing of the Homo Vitruvianus.
And lastly, the only portrait of a male that Leonardo painted, "The Musician."
Before we go into these faces, I should explain why I have some right to talk about them.
I've made more than 1,100 portraits myself for newspapers, over the course of 300 -- 30 years, sorry, 30 years only.
(Laughter) But there are 1,100, and very few artists have drawn so many faces.
So I know a little about drawing and analyzing faces.
OK, now let's look at these three portraits.
And hold onto your seats, because if we zoom in on those faces, remark how they have the same broad forehead, the horizontal eyebrows, the long nose, the curved lips and the small, well-developed chin.
I couldn't believe my eyes when I first saw that.
There is no reason why these portraits should look alike.
All we did was look for portraits that had the characteristics of a self-portrait, and look, they are very similar.
Now, are they made in the right order?
The young man should be made first.
And as you see here from the years that they were created, it is indeed the case.
They are made in the right order.
What was the age of Leonardo at the time? Does that fit?
Yes, it does. He was 33, 38 and 63 when these were made.
So we have three pictures, potentially of the same person of the same age as Leonardo at the time.
But how do we know it's him, and not someone else?
Well, we need a reference.
And here's the only picture of Leonardo that's widely accepted.
It's a statue made by Verrocchio, of David, for which Leonardo posed as a boy of 15.
And if we now compare the face of the statue, with the face of the musician, you see the very same features again.
The statue is the reference, and it connects the identity of Leonardo to those three faces.
Ladies and gentlemen, this story has not yet been published.
It's only proper that you here at TED hear and see it first.
The icon of icons finally has a face.
Here he is: Leonardo da Vinci.
(Applause)
As a singer-songwriter, people often ask me about my influences or, as I like to call them, my sonic lineages.
And I could easily tell you that I was shaped by the jazz and hip hop that I grew up with, by the Ethiopian heritage of my ancestors, or by the 1980s pop on my childhood radio stations.
But beyond genre, there is another question: how do the sounds we hear every day influence the music that we make?
I believe that everyday soundscape can be the most unexpected inspiration for songwriting, and to look at this idea a little bit more closely, I'm going to talk today about three things: nature, language and silence -- or rather, the impossibility of true silence.
And through this I hope to give you a sense of a world already alive with musical expression, with each of us serving as active participants, whether we know it or not.
I'm going to start today with nature, but before we do that, let's quickly listen to this snippet of an opera singer warming up.
Here it is.
(Singing) (Singing ends) It's beautiful, isn't it?
Gotcha!
That is actually not the sound of an opera singer warming up.
That is the sound of a bird slowed down to a pace that the human ear mistakenly recognizes as its own.
It was released as part of Peter Szke's 1987 Hungarian recording "The Unknown Music of Birds," where he records many birds and slows down their pitches to reveal what's underneath.
Let's listen to the full-speed recording.
(Bird singing) Now, let's hear the two of them together so your brain can juxtapose them.
(Bird singing at slow then full speed) (Singing ends) It's incredible.
Perhaps the techniques of opera singing were inspired by birdsong.
As humans, we intuitively understand birds to be our musical teachers.
In Ethiopia, birds are considered an integral part of the origin of music itself.
The story goes like this: 1,500 years ago, a young man was born in the Empire of Aksum, a major trading center of the ancient world.
His name was Yared.
When Yared was seven years old his father died, and his mother sent him to go live with an uncle, who was a priest of the Ethiopian Orthodox tradition, one of the oldest churches in the world.
Now, this tradition has an enormous amount of scholarship and learning, and Yared had to study and study and study and study, and one day he was studying under a tree, when three birds came to him.
One by one, these birds became his teachers.
They taught him music -- scales, in fact.
And Yared, eventually recognized as Saint Yared, used these scales to compose five volumes of chants and hymns for worship and celebration.
And he used these scales to compose and to create an indigenous musical notation system.
And these scales evolved into what is known as kiit, the unique, pentatonic, five-note, modal system that is very much alive and thriving and still evolving in Ethiopia today.
Now, I love this story because it's true at multiple levels.
Saint Yared was a real, historical figure, and the natural world can be our musical teacher.
And we have so many examples of this: the Pygmies of the Congo tune their instruments to the pitches of the birds in the forest around them.
Musician and natural soundscape expert Bernie Krause describes how a healthy environment has animals and insects taking up low, medium and high-frequency bands, in exactly the same way as a symphony does.
And countless works of music were inspired by bird and forest song.
Yes, the natural world can be our cultural teacher.
So let's go now to the uniquely human world of language.
Every language communicates with pitch to varying degrees, whether it's Mandarin Chinese, where a shift in melodic inflection gives the same phonetic syllable an entirely different meaning, to a language like English, where a raised pitch at the end of a sentence ...
(Going up in pitch) implies a question?
(Laughter) As an Ethiopian-American woman, I grew up around the language of Amharic, Amharia.
It was my first language, the language of my parents, one of the main languages of Ethiopia.
And there are a million reasons to fall in love with this language: its depth of poetics, its double entendres, its wax and gold, its humor, its proverbs that illuminate the wisdom and follies of life.
But there's also this melodicism, a musicality built right in.
And I find this distilled most clearly in what I like to call emphatic language -- language that's meant to highlight or underline or that springs from surprise.
Take, for example, the word: "indey."
Now, if there are Ethiopians in the audience, they're probably chuckling to themselves, because the word means something like "No!"
or "How could he?" or "No, he didn't."
It kind of depends on the situation.
But when I was a kid, this was my very favorite word, and I think it's because it has a pitch.
It has a melody.
You can almost see the shape as it springs from someone's mouth.
"Indey" -- it dips, and then raises again.
And as a musician and composer, when I hear that word, something like this is floating through my mind.
(Music and singing "Indey") (Music ends) Or take, for example, the phrase for "It is right" or "It is correct" -- "Lickih nehu ... Lickih nehu."
It's an affirmation, an agreement.
"Lickih nehu."
When I hear that phrase, something like this starts rolling through my mind.
(Music and singing "Lickih nehu") (Music ends) And in both of those cases, what I did was I took the melody and the phrasing of those words and phrases and I turned them into musical parts to use in these short compositions.
And I like to write bass lines, so they both ended up kind of as bass lines.
Now, this is based on the work of Jason Moran and others who work intimately with music and language, but it's also something I've had in my head since I was a kid, how musical my parents sounded when they were speaking to each other and to us.
It was from them and from Amharia that I learned that we are awash in musical expression with every word, every sentence that we speak, every word, every sentence that we receive.
Perhaps you can hear it in the words I'm speaking even now.
Finally, we go to the 1950s United States and the most seminal work of 20th century avant-garde composition: John Cage's "4:33," written for any instrument or combination of instruments.
The musician or musicians are invited to walk onto the stage with a stopwatch and open the score, which was actually purchased by the Museum of Modern Art -- the score, that is.
And this score has not a single note written and there is not a single note played for four minutes and 33 seconds.
And, at once enraging and enrapturing, Cage shows us that even when there are no strings being plucked by fingers or hands hammering piano keys, still there is music, still there is music, still there is music.
And what is this music?
It was that sneeze in the back.
(Laughter) It is the everyday soundscape that arises from the audience themselves: their coughs, their sighs, their rustles, their whispers, their sneezes, the room, the wood of the floors and the walls expanding and contracting, creaking and groaning with the heat and the cold, the pipes clanking and contributing.
And controversial though it was, and even controversial though it remains, Cage's point is that there is no such thing as true silence.
Even in the most silent environments, we still hear and feel the sound of our own heartbeats.
The world is alive with musical expression.
We are already immersed.
Now, I had my own moment of, let's say, remixing John Cage a couple of months ago when I was standing in front of the stove cooking lentils.
And it was late one night and it was time to stir, so I lifted the lid off the cooking pot, and I placed it onto the kitchen counter next to me, and it started to roll back and forth making this sound.
(Sound of metal lid clanking against a counter) (Clanking ends) And it stopped me cold.
I thought, "What a weird, cool swing that cooking pan lid has."
So when the lentils were ready and eaten, I hightailed it to my backyard studio, and I made this.
(Music, including the sound of the lid, and singing) (Music ends) Now, John Cage wasn't instructing musicians to mine the soundscape for sonic textures to turn into music.
He was saying that on its own, the environment is musically generative, that it is generous, that it is fertile, that we are already immersed.
Musician, music researcher, surgeon and human hearing expert Charles Limb is a professor at Johns Hopkins University and he studies music and the brain.
And he has a theory that it is possible -- it is possible -- that the human auditory system actually evolved to hear music, because it is so much more complex than it needs to be for language alone.
And if that's true, it means that we're hard-wired for music, that we can find it anywhere, that there is no such thing as a musical desert, that we are permanently hanging out at the oasis, and that is marvelous.
We can add to the soundtrack, but it's already playing.
And it doesn't mean don't study music.
Study music, trace your sonic lineages and enjoy that exploration.
But there is a kind of sonic lineage to which we all belong.
So the next time you are seeking percussion inspiration, look no further than your tires, as they roll over the unusual grooves of the freeway, or the top-right burner of your stove and that strange way that it clicks as it is preparing to light.
When seeking melodic inspiration, look no further than dawn and dusk avian orchestras or to the natural lilt of emphatic language.
We are the audience and we are the composers and we take from these pieces we are given.
We make, we make, we make, we make, knowing that when it comes to nature or language or soundscape, there is no end to the inspiration -- if we are listening.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Father Daniel Berrigan once said that "writing about prisoners is a little like writing about the dead."
I think what he meant is that we treat prisoners as ghosts.
They're unseen and unheard.
It's easy to simply ignore them and it's even easier when the government goes to great lengths to keep them hidden.
As a journalist, I think these stories of what people in power do when no one is watching, are precisely the stories that we need to tell.
That's why I began investigating the most secretive and experimental prison units in the United States, for so-called "second-tier" terrorists.
The government calls these units Communications Management Units or CMUs.
Prisoners and guards call them "Little Guantanamo."
They are islands unto themselves.
But unlike Gitmo they exist right here, at home, floating within larger federal prisons.
There are 2 CMUs.
One was opened inside the prison in Terre Haute, Indiana, and the other is inside this prison, in Marion, Illinois.
Neither of them underwent the formal review process that is required by law when they were opened.
CMU prisoners have all been convicted of crimes.
Some of their cases are questionable and some involve threats and violence.
I'm not here to argue the guilt or innocence of any prisoner.
I'm here because as Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall said, "When the prisons and gates slam shut, prisoners do not lose their human quality."
Every prisoner I've interviewed has said there are three flecks of light in the darkness of prison: phone calls, letters and visits from family.
CMUs aren't solitary confinement, but they radically restrict all of these to levels that meet or exceed the most extreme prisons in the United States.
Their phone calls can be limited to 45 minutes a month, compared to the 300 minutes other prisoners receive.
Their letters can be limited to six pieces of paper.
Their visits can be limited to four hours per month, compared to the 35 hours that people like Olympic Park bomber Eric Rudolph receive in the supermax.
On top of that, CMU visits are non-contact which means prisoners are not allowed to even hug their family.
As one CMU prisoner said, "We're not being tortured here, except psychologically."
The government won't say who is imprisoned here.
But through court documents, open records requests and interviews with current and former prisoners, some small windows into the CMUs have opened.
There's an estimated 60 to 70 prisoners here, and they're overwhelmingly Muslim.
They include people like Dr. Rafil Dhafir, who violated the economic sanctions on Iraq by sending medical supplies for the children there.
They've included people like Yassin Aref.
Aref and his family fled to New York from Saddam Hussein's Iraq as refugees.
He was arrested in 2004 as part of an FBI sting.
Aref is an imam and he was asked to bear witness to a loan, which is a tradition in Islamic culture.
It turned out that one of the people involved in the loan was trying to enlist someone else in a fake attack.
Aref didn't know.
For that, he was convicted of conspiracy to provide material support to a terrorist group.
The CMUs also include some non-Muslim prisoners.
The guards call them "balancers," meaning they help balance out the racial numbers, in hopes of deflecting law suits.
These balancers include animal rights and environmental activists like Daniel McGowan.
McGowan was convicted of participating in two arsons in the name of defending the environment as part of the Earth Liberation Front.
During his sentencing, he was afraid that he would be sent to a rumored secret prison for terrorists.
The judge dismissed all those fears, saying that they weren't supported by any facts.
But that might be because the government hasn't fully explained why some prisoners end up in a CMU, and who is responsible for these decisions.
When McGowan was transferred, he was told it's because he is a "domestic terrorist," a term the FBI uses repeatedly when talking about environmental activists.
Now, keep in mind there are about 400 prisoners in US prisons who are classified as terrorists, and only a handful of them are in the CMUs.
In McGowan's case, he was previously at a low-security prison and he had no communications violations.
So, why was he moved?
Like other CMU prisoners, McGowan repeatedly asked for an answer, a hearing, or some opportunity for an appeal.
This example from another prisoner shows how those requests are viewed.
"Wants a transfer." "Told him no."
At one point, the prison warden himself recommended McGowan's transfer out of the CMU citing his good behavior, but the warden was overruled by the Bureau of Prison's Counterterrorism Unit, working with the Joint Terrorism Task Force of the FBI.
Later I found out that McGowan was really sent to a CMU not because of what he did, but what he has said.
A memo from the Counterterrorism Unit cited McGowan's "anti-government beliefs."
While imprisoned, he continued writing about environmental issues, saying that activists must reflect on their mistakes and listen to each other.
Now, in fairness, if you've spent any time at all in Washington, DC, you know this is really a radical concept for the government.
(Laughter) I actually asked to visit McGowan in the CMU.
And I was approved.
That came as quite a shock.
First, because as I've discussed on this stage before, I learned that the FBI has been monitoring my work.
Second, because it would make me the first and only journalist to visit a CMU.
I had even learned through the Bureau of Prisons Counterterrorism Unit, that they had been monitoring my speeches about CMUs, like this one.
So how could I possibly be approved to visit?
A few days before I went out to the prison, I got an answer.
I was allowed to visit McGowan as a friend, not a journalist.
Journalists are not allowed here.
McGowan was told by CMU officials that if I asked any questions or published any story, that he would be punished for my reporting.
When I arrived for our visit, the guards reminded me that they knew who I was and knew about my work.
And they said that if I attempted to interview McGowan, the visit would be terminated.
The Bureau of Prisons describes CMUs as "self-contained housing units."
But I think that's an Orwellian way of describing black holes.
When you visit a CMU, you go through all the security checkpoints that you would expect.
But then the walk to the visitation room is silent.
When a CMU prisoner has a visit, the rest of the prison is on lockdown.
I was ushered into a small room, so small my outstretched arms could touch each wall.
There was a grapefruit-sized orb in the ceiling for the visit to be live-monitored by the Counterterrorism Unit in West Virginia.
The unit insists that all the visits have to be in English for CMU prisoners, which is an additional hardship for many of the Muslim families.
There is a thick sheet of foggy, bulletproof glass and on the other side was Daniel McGowan.
We spoke through these handsets attached to the wall and talked about books and movies.
We did our best to find reasons to laugh.
To fight boredom and amuse himself while in the CMU, McGowan had been spreading a rumor that I was secretly the president of a Twilight fan club in Washington, DC (Laughter) For the record, I'm not.
(Laughter) But I kind of the hope the FBI now thinks that Bella and Edward are terrorist code names.
(Laughter) During our visit, McGowan spoke most and at length about his niece Lily, his wife Jenny and how torturous it feels to never be able to hug them, to never be able to hold their hands.
Three months after our visit, McGowan was transferred out of the CMU and then, without warning, he was sent back again.
I had published leaked CMU documents on my website and the Counterterrorism Unit said that McGowan had called his wife and asked her to mail them.
He wanted to see what the government was saying about him, and for that he was sent back to the CMU.
When he was finally released at the end of his sentence, his story got even more Kafkaesque.
He wrote an article for the Huffington Post headlined, "Court Documents Prove I was Sent to a CMU for my Political Speech."
The next day he was thrown back in jail for his political speech.
His attorneys quickly secured his release, but the message was very clear: Don't talk about this place.
Today, nine years after they were opened by the Bush administration, the government is codifying how and why CMUs were created.
According to the Bureau of Prisons, they are for prisoners with "inspirational significance."
I think that is very nice way of saying these are political prisons for political prisoners.
Prisoners are sent to a CMU because of their race, their religion or their political beliefs.
Now, if you think that characterization is too strong, just look at some of the government's own documents.
When some of McGowan's mail was rejected by the CMU, the sender was told it's because the letters were intended "for political prisoners."
When another prisoner, animal rights activist Andy Stepanian, was sent to a CMU, it was because of his anti-government and anti-corporate views.
Now, I know all of this may be hard to believe, that it's happening right now, and in the United States.
But the unknown reality is that the US has a dark history of disproportionately punishing people because of their political beliefs.
In the 1960s, before Marion was home to the CMU, it was home to the notorious Control Unit.
Prisoners were locked down in solitary for 22 hours a day.
The warden said the unit was to "control revolutionary attitudes."
In the 1980s, another experiment called the Lexington High Security Unit held women connected to the Weather Underground, Black Liberation and Puerto Rican independent struggles.
The prison radically restricted communication and used sleep deprivation, and constant light for so-called "ideological conversion."
Those prisons were eventually shut down, but only through the campaigning of religious groups and human rights advocates, like Amnesty International.
Today, civil rights lawyers with the Center for Constitutional Rights are challenging CMUs in court for depriving prisoners of their due process rights and for retaliating against them for their protected political and religious speech.
Many of these documents would have never come to light without this lawsuit.
The message of these groups and my message for you today is that we must bear witness to what is being done to these prisoners.
Their treatment is a reflection of the values held beyond prison walls.
This story is not just about prisoners.
It is about us.
It is about our own commitment to human rights.
It is about whether we will choose to stop repeating the mistakes of our past.
If we don't listen to what Father Berrigan described as the stories of the dead, they will soon become the stories of ourselves.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Tom Rielly: I have a couple questions.
When I was in high school, I learned about the Bill of Rights, the Constitution, freedom of speech, due process and about 25 other laws and rights that seem to be violated by this.
How could this possibly be happening?
Will Potter: I think that's the number one question I get throughout all of my work, and the short answer is that people don't know.
I think the solution to any of these types of situations, any rights abuses, are really dependent on two things.
They're dependent on knowledge that it's actually happening and then a means and efficacy to actually make a change.
And unfortunately with these prisoners, one, people don't know what's happening at all and then they're already disenfranchised populations who don't have access to attorneys, not native English speakers.
In some of these cases, they have great representation that I mentioned, but there's just not a public awareness of what's happening.
TR: Isn't it guaranteed in prison that you have right to council or access to council?
WP: There's a tendency in our culture to see when people have been convicted of a crime, no matter if that charge was bogus or legitimate, that whatever happens to them after that is warranted.
And I think that's a really damaging and dangerous narrative that we have, that allows these types of things to happen, as the general public just kind of turns a blind eye to it.
TR: All those documents on screen were all real documents, word for word, unchanged at all, right?
WP: Absolutely. I've actually uploaded all of them to my website.
It's willpotter.com/CMU and it's a footnoted version of the talk, so you can see the documents for yourself without the little snippets.
You can see the full version.
I relied overwhelmingly on primary source documents or on primary interviews with former and current prisoners, with people that are dealing with this situation every day.
And like I said, I've been there myself, as well.
TR: You're doing courageous work.
WP: Thank you very much. Thank you all.
(Applause)
So this right here is the tiny village of Elle, close to Lista.
It's right at the southernmost tip of Norway.
And on January 2 this year, an elderly guy who lives in the village, he went out to see what was cast ashore during a recent storm.
And on a patch of grass right next to the water's edge, he found a wetsuit.
It was grey and black, and he thought it looked cheap.
Out of each leg of the wetsuit there were sticking two white bones.
It was clearly the remains of a human being.
And usually, in Norway, dead people are identified quickly.
So the police started searching through missing reports from the local area, national missing reports, and looked for accidents with a possible connection.
They found nothing.
So they ran a DNA profile, and they started searching internationally through Interpol.
Nothing.
This was a person that nobody seemed to be missing.
It was an invisible life heading for a nameless grave.
But then, after a month, the police in Norway got a message from the police in the Netherlands.
A couple of months earlier, they had found a body, in an identical wetsuit, and they had no idea who this person was.
But the police in the Netherlands managed to trace the wetsuit by an RFID chip that was sewn in the suit.
So they were then able to tell that both wetsuits were bought by the same customer at the same time, October 7, 2014, in the French city of Calais by the English Channel.
But this was all they were able to figure out.
The customer paid cash.
There was no surveillance footage from the shop.
So it became a cold case.
We heard this story, and it triggered me and my colleague, photographer Tomm Christiansen, and we of course had the obvious question: who were these people?
At the time, I'd barely heard about Calais, but it took about two or three seconds to figure out Calais is basically known for two things.
It's the spot in continental Europe closest to Britain, and a lot of migrants and refugees are staying in this camp and are trying desperately to cross over to Britain.
And right there was a plausible theory about the identity of the two people, and the police made this theory as well.
Because if you or I or anybody else with a firm connection to Europe goes missing off the coast of France, people would just know.
Your friends or family would report you missing, the police would come search for you, the media would know, and there would be pictures of you on lampposts.
It's difficult to disappear without a trace.
But if you just fled the war in Syria, and your family, if you have any family left, don't necessarily know where you are, and you're staying here illegally amongst thousands of others who come and go every day.
Well, if you disappear one day, nobody will notice.
The police won't come search for you because nobody knows you're gone.
And this is what happened to Shadi Omar Kataf and Mouaz Al Balkhi from Syria.
Me and Tomm went to Calais for the first time in April this year, and after three months of investigation, we were able to tell the story about how these two young men fled the war in Syria, ended up stuck in Calais, bought wetsuits and drowned in what seems to have been an attempt to swim across the English Channel in order to reach England.
It is a story about the fact that everybody has a name, everybody has a story, everybody is someone.
But it is also a story about what it's like to be a refugee in Europe today.
So this is where we started our search.
This is in Calais.
Right now, between 3,500 and 5,000 people are living here under horrible conditions.
It has been dubbed the worst refugee camp in Europe.
Limited access to food, limited access to water, limited access to health care.
Disease and infections are widespread.
And they're all stuck here because they're trying to get to England in order to claim asylum.
And they do that by hiding in the back of trucks headed for the ferry, or the Eurotunnel, or they sneak inside the tunnel terminal at night to try to hide on the trains.
Most want to go to Britain because they know the language, and so they figure it would be easier to restart their lives from there.
They want to work, they want to study, they want to be able to continue their lives.
A lot of these people are highly educated and skilled workers.
If you go to Calais and talk to refugees, you'll meet lawyers, politicians, engineers, graphic designers, farmers, soldiers.
You've got the whole spectrum.
But who all of these people are usually gets lost in the way we talk about refugees and migrants, because we usually do that in statistics.
So you have 60 million refugees globally.
About half a million have made the crossing over the Mediterranean into Europe so far this year, and roughly 4,000 are staying in Calais.
But these are numbers, and the numbers don't say anything about who these people are, where they came from, or why they're here.
And first, I want to tell you about one of them.
This is 22-year-old Mouaz Al Balkhi from Syria.
We first heard about him after being in Calais the first time looking for answers to the theory of the two dead bodies.
And after a while, we heard this story about a Syrian man who was living in Bradford in England, and had been desperately searching for his nephew Mouaz for months.
And it turned out the last time anybody had heard anything from Mouaz was October 7, 2014.
That was the same date the wetsuits were bought.
So we flew over there and we met the uncle and we did DNA samples of him, and later on got additional DNA samples from Mouaz's closest relative who now lives in Jordan.
The analysis concluded the body who was found in a wetsuit on a beach in the Netherlands was actually Mouaz Al Balkhi.
And while we were doing all this investigation, we got to know Mouaz's story.
He was born in the Syrian capital of Damascus in 1991.
He was raised in a middle class family, and his father in the middle there is a chemical engineer who spent 11 years in prison for belonging to the political opposition in Syria.
While his father was in prison, Mouaz took responsibility and he cared for his three sisters.
They said he was that kind of guy.
Mouaz studied to become an electrical engineer at the University of Damascus.
So a couple of years into the Syrian war, the family fled Damascus and went to the neighboring country, Jordan.
Their father had problems finding work in Jordan, and Mouaz could not continue his studies, so he figured, "OK, the best thing I can do to help my family would be to go somewhere where I can finish my studies and find work."
So he goes to Turkey.
In Turkey, he's not accepted at a university, and once he had left Jordan as a refugee, he was not allowed to reenter.
So then he decides to head for the UK, where his uncle lives.
He makes it into Algeria, walks into Libya, pays a people smuggler to help him with the crossing into Italy by boat, and from there on he heads to Dunkirk, the city right next to Calais by the English Channel.
We know he made at least 12 failed attempts to cross the English Channel by hiding in a truck.
But at some point, he must have given up all hope.
The last night we know he was alive, he spent at a cheap hotel close to the train station in Dunkirk.
We found his name in the records, and he seems to have stayed there alone.
The day after, he went into Calais, entered a sports shop a couple of minutes before 8 o'clock in the evening, along with Shadi Kataf.
They both bought wetsuits, and the woman in the shop was the last person we know of to have seen them alive.
We have tried to figure out where Shadi met Mouaz, but we weren't able to do that.
But they do have a similar story.
We first heard about Shadi after a cousin of his, living in Germany, had read an Arabic translation of the story made of Mouaz on Facebook.
So we got in touch with him.
Shadi, a couple of years older than Mouaz, was also raised in Damascus.
He was a working kind of guy.
He ran a tire repair shop and later worked in a printing company.
He lived with his extended family, but their house got bombed early in the war.
So the family fled to an area of Damascus known as Camp Yarmouk.
Yarmouk is being described as the worst place to live on planet Earth.
They've been bombed by the military, they've been besieged, they've been stormed by ISIS and they've been cut off from supplies for years.
There was a UN official who visited last year, and he said, "They ate all the grass so there was no grass left."
Out of a population of 150,000, only 18,000 are believed to still be left in Yarmouk.
Shadi and his sisters got out.
The parents are still stuck inside.
So Shadi and one of his sisters, they fled to Libya.
This was after the fall of Gaddafi, but before Libya turned into full-blown civil war.
And in this last remaining sort of stability in Libya, Shadi took up scuba diving, and he seemed to spend most of his time underwater.
He fell completely in love with the ocean, so when he finally decided that he could no longer be in Libya, late August 2014, he hoped to find work as a diver when he reached Italy.
Reality was not that easy.
We don't know much about his travels because he had a hard time communicating with his family, but we do know that he struggled.
And by the end of September, he was living on the streets somewhere in France.
On October 7, he calls his cousin in Belgium, and explains his situation.
He said, "I'm in Calais. I need you to come get my backpack and my laptop.
I can't afford to pay the people smugglers to help me with the crossing to Britain, but I will go buy a wetsuit and I will swim."
His cousin, of course, tried to warn him not to, but Shadi's battery on the phone went flat, and his phone was never switched on again.
What was left of Shadi was found nearly three months later, 800 kilometers away in a wetsuit on a beach in Norway.
He's still waiting for his funeral in Norway, and none of his family will be able to attend.
Many may think that the story about Shadi and Mouaz is a story about death, but I don't agree.
To me, this is a story about two questions that I think we all share: what is a better life, and what am I willing to do to achieve it?
And to me, and probably a lot of you, a better life would mean being able to do more of what we think of as meaningful, whether that be spending more time with your family and friends, travel to an exotic place, or just getting money to buy that cool new device or a pair of new sneakers.
And this is all within our reach pretty easily.
But if you are fleeing a war zone, the answers to those two questions are dramatically different.
A better life is a life in safety.
It's a life in dignity.
A better life means not having your house bombed, not fearing being kidnapped.
It means being able to send your children to school, go to university, or just find work to be able to provide for yourself and the ones you love.
A better life would be a future of some possibilities compared to nearly none, and that's a strong motivation.
And I have no trouble imagining that after spending weeks or even months as a second-grade citizen, living on the streets or in a horrible makeshift camp with a stupid, racist name like "The Jungle," most of us would be willing to do just about anything.
If I could ask Shadi and Mouaz the second they stepped into the freezing waters of the English Channel, they would probably say, "This is worth the risk," because they could no longer see any other option.
And that's desperation, but that's the reality of living as a refugee in Western Europe in 2015.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Anders.
This is Tomm Christiansen, who took most of the pictures you have seen and they've done reporting together.
Tomm, you two have been back to Calais recently.
This was the third trip.
It was after the publication of the article.
What has changed? What have you seen there?
Tomm Christiansen: The first time we were in Calais, it was about 1,500 refugees there.
They had a difficult time, but they were positive, they had hope.
The last time, the camp has grown, maybe four or five thousand people.
It seemed more permanent, NGOs have arrived, a small school has opened.
But the thing is that the refugees have stayed for a longer time, and the French government has managed to seal off the borders better, so now The Jungle is growing, along with the despair and hopelessness among the refugees.
BG: Are you planning to go back? And continue the reporting?
TC: Yes.
BG: Anders, I'm a former journalist, and to me, it's amazing that in the current climate of slashing budgets and publishers in crisis, Dagbladet has consented so many resources for this story, which tells a lot about newspapers taking the responsibility, but how did you sell it to your editors?
Anders Fjellberg: It wasn't easy at first, because we weren't able to know what we actually could figure out.
As soon as it became clear that we actually could be able to identify who the first one was, we basically got the message that we could do whatever we wanted, just travel wherever you need to go, do whatever you need to do, just get this done.
BG: That's an editor taking responsibility.
The story, by the way, has been translated and published across several European countries, and certainly will continue to do.
And we want to read the updates from you. Thank you Anders. Thank you Tomm.
(Applause)
A few years ago, with my colleague, Emmanuelle Charpentier, I invented a new technology for editing genomes.
It's called CRISPR-Cas9.
The CRISPR technology allows scientists to make changes to the DNA in cells that could allow us to cure genetic disease.
You might be interested to know that the CRISPR technology came about through a basic research project that was aimed at discovering how bacteria fight viral infections.
Bacteria have to deal with viruses in their environment, and we can think about a viral infection like a ticking time bomb -- a bacterium has only a few minutes to defuse the bomb before it gets destroyed.
So, many bacteria have in their cells an adaptive immune system called CRISPR, that allows them to detect viral DNA and destroy it.
Part of the CRISPR system is a protein called Cas9, that's able to seek out, cut and eventually degrade viral DNA in a specific way.
And it was through our research to understand the activity of this protein, Cas9, that we realized that we could harness its function as a genetic engineering technology -- a way for scientists to delete or insert specific bits of DNA into cells with incredible precision -- that would offer opportunities to do things that really haven't been possible in the past.
The CRISPR technology has already been used to change the DNA in the cells of mice and monkeys, other organisms as well.
Chinese scientists showed recently that they could even use the CRISPR technology to change genes in human embryos.
And scientists in Philadelphia showed they could use CRISPR to remove the DNA of an integrated HIV virus from infected human cells.
The opportunity to do this kind of genome editing also raises various ethical issues that we have to consider, because this technology can be employed not only in adult cells, but also in the embryos of organisms, including our own species.
And so, together with my colleagues, I've called for a global conversation about the technology that I co-invented, so that we can consider all of the ethical and societal implications of a technology like this.
What I want to do now is tell you what the CRISPR technology is, what it can do, where we are today and why I think we need to take a prudent path forward in the way that we employ this technology.
When viruses infect a cell, they inject their DNA.
And in a bacterium, the CRISPR system allows that DNA to be plucked out of the virus, and inserted in little bits into the chromosome -- the DNA of the bacterium.
And these integrated bits of viral DNA get inserted at a site called CRISPR.
CRISPR stands for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats.
(Laughter) A big mouthful -- you can see why we use the acronym CRISPR.
It's a mechanism that allows cells to record, over time, the viruses they have been exposed to.
And importantly, those bits of DNA are passed on to the cells' progeny, so cells are protected from viruses not only in one generation, but over many generations of cells.
This allows the cells to keep a record of infection, and as my colleague, Blake Wiedenheft, likes to say, the CRISPR locus is effectively a genetic vaccination card in cells.
Once those bits of DNA have been inserted into the bacterial chromosome, the cell then makes a little copy of a molecule called RNA, which is orange in this picture, that is an exact replicate of the viral DNA.
RNA is a chemical cousin of DNA, and it allows interaction with DNA molecules that have a matching sequence.
So those little bits of RNA from the CRISPR locus associate -- they bind -- to protein called Cas9, which is white in the picture, and form a complex that functions like a sentinel in the cell.
It searches through all of the DNA in the cell, to find sites that match the sequences in the bound RNAs.
And when those sites are found -- as you can see here, the blue molecule is DNA -- this complex associates with that DNA and allows the Cas9 cleaver to cut up the viral DNA.
It makes a very precise break.
So we can think of the Cas9 RNA sentinel complex like a pair of scissors that can cut DNA -- it makes a double-stranded break in the DNA helix.
And importantly, this complex is programmable, so it can be programmed to recognize particular DNA sequences, and make a break in the DNA at that site.
As I'm going to tell you now, we recognized that that activity could be harnessed for genome engineering, to allow cells to make a very precise change to the DNA at the site where this break was introduced.
That's sort of analogous to the way that we use a word-processing program to fix a typo in a document.
The reason we envisioned using the CRISPR system for genome engineering is because cells have the ability to detect broken DNA and repair it.
So when a plant or an animal cell detects a double-stranded break in its DNA, it can fix that break, either by pasting together the ends of the broken DNA with a little, tiny change in the sequence of that position, or it can repair the break by integrating a new piece of DNA at the site of the cut.
So if we have a way to introduce double-stranded breaks into DNA at precise places, we can trigger cells to repair those breaks, by either the disruption or incorporation of new genetic information.
So if we were able to program the CRISPR technology to make a break in DNA at the position at or near a mutation causing cystic fibrosis, for example, we could trigger cells to repair that mutation.
Genome engineering is actually not new, it's been in development since the 1970s.
We've had technologies for sequencing DNA, for copying DNA, and even for manipulating DNA.
And these technologies were very promising, but the problem was that they were either inefficient, or they were difficult enough to use that most scientists had not adopted them for use in their own laboratories, or certainly for many clinical applications.
So, the opportunity to take a technology like CRISPR and utilize it has appeal, because of its relative simplicity.
We can think of older genome engineering technologies as similar to having to rewire your computer each time you want to run a new piece of software, whereas the CRISPR technology is like software for the genome, we can program it easily, using these little bits of RNA.
So once a double-stranded break is made in DNA, we can induce repair, and thereby potentially achieve astounding things, like being able to correct mutations that cause sickle cell anemia or cause Huntington's Disease.
I actually think that the first applications of the CRISPR technology are going to happen in the blood, where it's relatively easier to deliver this tool into cells, compared to solid tissues.
Right now, a lot of the work that's going on applies to animal models of human disease, such as mice.
The technology is being used to make very precise changes that allow us to study the way that these changes in the cell's DNA affect either a tissue or, in this case, an entire organism.
Now in this example, the CRISPR technology was used to disrupt a gene by making a tiny change in the DNA in a gene that is responsible for the black coat color of these mice.
Imagine that these white mice differ from their pigmented litter-mates by just a tiny change at one gene in the entire genome, and they're otherwise completely normal.
And when we sequence the DNA from these animals, we find that the change in the DNA has occurred at exactly the place where we induced it, using the CRISPR technology.
Additional experiments are going on in other animals that are useful for creating models for human disease, such as monkeys.
And here we find that we can use these systems to test the application of this technology in particular tissues, for example, figuring out how to deliver the CRISPR tool into cells.
We also want to understand better how to control the way that DNA is repaired after it's cut, and also to figure out how to control and limit any kind of off-target, or unintended effects of using the technology.
I think that we will see clinical application of this technology, certainly in adults, within the next 10 years.
I think that it's likely that we will see clinical trials and possibly even approved therapies within that time, which is a very exciting thing to think about.
And because of the excitement around this technology, there's a lot of interest in start-up companies that have been founded to commercialize the CRISPR technology, and lots of venture capitalists that have been investing in these companies.
But we have to also consider that the CRISPR technology can be used for things like enhancement.
Imagine that we could try to engineer humans that have enhanced properties, such as stronger bones, or less susceptibility to cardiovascular disease or even to have properties that we would consider maybe to be desirable, like a different eye color or to be taller, things like that.
"Designer humans," if you will.
Right now, the genetic information to understand what types of genes would give rise to these traits is mostly not known.
But it's important to know that the CRISPR technology gives us a tool to make such changes, once that knowledge becomes available.
This raises a number of ethical questions that we have to carefully consider, and this is why I and my colleagues have called for a global pause in any clinical application of the CRISPR technology in human embryos, to give us time to really consider all of the various implications of doing so.
And actually, there is an important precedent for such a pause from the 1970s, when scientists got together to call for a moratorium on the use of molecular cloning, until the safety of that technology could be tested carefully and validated.
So, genome-engineered humans are not with us yet, but this is no longer science fiction.
Genome-engineered animals and plants are happening right now.
And this puts in front of all of us a huge responsibility, to consider carefully both the unintended consequences as well as the intended impacts of a scientific breakthrough.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Bruno Giussani: Jennifer, this is a technology with huge consequences, as you pointed out.
Your attitude about asking for a pause or a moratorium or a quarantine is incredibly responsible.
There are, of course, the therapeutic results of this, but then there are the un-therapeutic ones and they seem to be the ones gaining traction, particularly in the media.
This is one of the latest issues of The Economist -- "Editing humanity."
It's all about genetic enhancement, it's not about therapeutics.
What kind of reactions did you get back in March from your colleagues in the science world, when you asked or suggested that we should actually pause this for a moment and think about it?
Jennifer Doudna: My colleagues were actually, I think, delighted to have the opportunity to discuss this openly.
It's interesting that as I talk to people, my scientific colleagues as well as others, there's a wide variety of viewpoints about this.
So clearly it's a topic that needs careful consideration and discussion.
BG: There's a big meeting happening in December that you and your colleagues are calling, together with the National Academy of Sciences and others, what do you hope will come out of the meeting, practically?
JD: Well, I hope that we can air the views of many different individuals and stakeholders who want to think about how to use this technology responsibly.
It may not be possible to come up with a consensus point of view, but I think we should at least understand what all the issues are as we go forward.
BG: Now, colleagues of yours, like George Church, for example, at Harvard, they say, "Yeah, ethical issues basically are just a question of safety.
We test and test and test again, in animals and in labs, and then once we feel it's safe enough, we move on to humans."
So that's kind of the other school of thought, that we should actually use this opportunity and really go for it.
Is there a possible split happening in the science community about this?
I mean, are we going to see some people holding back because they have ethical concerns, and some others just going forward because some countries under-regulate or don't regulate at all?
JD: Well, I think with any new technology, especially something like this, there are going to be a variety of viewpoints, and I think that's perfectly understandable.
I think that in the end, this technology will be used for human genome engineering, but I think to do that without careful consideration and discussion of the risks and potential complications would not be responsible.
BG: There are a lot of technologies and other fields of science that are developing exponentially, pretty much like yours.
I'm thinking about artificial intelligence, autonomous robots and so on.
No one seems -- aside from autonomous warfare robots -- nobody seems to have launched a similar discussion in those fields, in calling for a moratorium.
Do you think that your discussion may serve as a blueprint for other fields?
JD: Well, I think it's hard for scientists to get out of the laboratory.
Speaking for myself, it's a little bit uncomfortable to do that.
But I do think that being involved in the genesis of this really puts me and my colleagues in a position of responsibility.
And I would say that I certainly hope that other technologies will be considered in the same way, just as we would want to consider something that could have implications in other fields besides biology.
BG: Jennifer, thanks for coming to TED.
JD: Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to start by asking you all to go to your happy place, please.
Yes, your happy place, I know you've got one even if it's fake.
(Laughter) OK, so, comfortable?
Good.
Now I'd like to you to mentally answer the following questions.
Is there any strip lighting in your happy place?
Any plastic tables?
Polyester flooring?
Mobile phones?
No?
I think we all know that our happy place is meant to be somewhere natural, outdoors -- on a beach, fireside.
We'll be reading or eating or knitting.
And we're surrounded by natural light and organic elements.
Natural things make us happy.
And happiness is a great motivator; we strive for happiness.
Perhaps that's why we're always redesigning everything, in the hopes that our solutions might feel more natural.
So let's start there -- with the idea that good design should feel natural.
Your phone is not very natural.
And you probably think you're addicted to your phone, but you're really not.
We're not addicted to devices, we're addicted to the information that flows through them.
I wonder how long you would be happy in your happy place without any information from the outside world.
I'm interested in how we access that information, how we experience it.
We're moving from a time of static information, held in books and libraries and bus stops, through a period of digital information, towards a period of fluid information, where your children will expect to be able to access anything, anywhere at any time, from quantum physics to medieval viticulture, from gender theory to tomorrow's weather, just like switching on a lightbulb -- Imagine that.
Humans also like simple tools.
Your phone is not a very simple tool.
A fork is a simple tool.
(Laughter) And we don't like them made of plastic, in the same way I don't really like my phone very much -- it's not how I want to experience information.
I think there are better solutions than a world mediated by screens.
I don't hate screens, but I don't feel -- and I don't think any of us feel that good about how much time we spend slouched over them.
Fortunately, the big tech companies seem to agree.
They're actually heavily invested in touch and speech and gesture, and also in senses -- things that can turn dumb objects, like cups, and imbue them with the magic of the Internet, potentially turning this digital cloud into something we might touch and move.
The parents in crisis over screen time need physical digital toys teaching their kids to read, as well as family-safe app stores.
And I think, actually, that's already really happening.
Reality is richer than screens.
For example, I love books.
For me they are time machines -- atoms and molecules bound in space, from the moment of their creation to the moment of my experience.
But frankly, the content's identical on my phone.
So what makes this a richer experience than a screen?
I mean, scientifically.
We need screens, of course.
I'm going to show film, I need the enormous screen.
But there's more than you can do with these magic boxes.
Your phone is not the Internet's door bitch.
(Laughter) We can build things -- physical things, using physics and pixels, that can integrate the Internet into the world around us.
And I'm going to show you a few examples of those.
A while ago, I got to work with a design agency, Berg, on an exploration of what the Internet without screens might actually look like.
And they showed us a range ways that light can work with simple senses and physical objects to really bring the Internet to life, to make it tangible.
Like this wonderfully mechanical YouTube player.
And this was an inspiration to me.
Next I worked with the Japanese agency, AQ, on a research project into mental health.
We wanted to create an object that could capture the subjective data around mood swings that's so essential to diagnosis.
This object captures your touch, so you might press it very hard if you're angry, or stroke it if you're calm.
It's like a digital emoji stick.
And then you might revisit those moments later, and add context to them online.
Most of all, we wanted to create an intimate, beautiful thing that could live in your pocket and be loved.
The binoculars are actually a birthday present for the Sydney Opera House's 40th anniversary.
Our friends at Tellart in Boston brought over a pair of street binoculars, the kind you might find on the Empire State Building, and they fitted them with 360-degree views of other iconic world heritage sights -- (Laughter) using Street View.
And then we stuck them under the steps.
So, they became this very physical, simple reappropriation, or like a portal to these other icons.
So you might see Versailles or Shackleton's Hut.
Basically, it's virtual reality circa 1955.
(Laughter) In our office we use hacky sacks to exchange URLs.
This is incredibly simple, it's like your Opal card.
You basically put a website on the little chip in here, and then you do this and ... bosh! -- the website appears on your phone.
It's about 10 cents.
Treehugger is a project that we're working on with Grumpy Sailor and Finch, here in Sydney.
And I'm very excited about what might happen when you pull the phones apart and you put the bits into trees, and that my children might have an opportunity to visit an enchanted forest guided by a magic wand, where they could talk to digital fairies and ask them questions, and be asked questions in return.
As you can see, we're at the cardboard stage with this one.
(Laughter) But I'm very excited by the possibility of getting kids back outside without screens, but with all the powerful magic of the Internet at their fingertips.
And we hope to have something like this working by the end of the year.
So let's recap.
Humans like natural solutions.
Humans love information.
Humans need simple tools.
These principles should underpin how we design for the future, not just for the Internet.
You may feel uncomfortable about the age of information that we're moving into.
You may feel challenged, rather than simply excited.
Guess what? Me too.
It's a really extraordinary period of human history.
We are the people that actually build our world, there are no artificial intelligences...
yet.
(Laughter) It's us -- designers, architects, artists, engineers.
And if we challenge ourselves, I think that actually we can have a happy place filled with the information we love that feels as natural and as simple as switching on lightbulb.
And although it may seem inevitable, that what the public wants is watches and websites and widgets, maybe we could give a bit of thought to cork and light and hacky sacks.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Interpreter: Piano, "p," is my favorite musical symbol.
It means to play softly.
If you're playing a musical instrument and you notice a "p" in the score, you need to play softer.
Two p's -- even softer.
Four p's -- extremely soft.
This is my drawing of a p-tree, which demonstrates no matter how many thousands upon thousands of p's there may be, you'll never reach complete silence.
That's my current definition of silence: a very obscure sound.
I'd like to share a little bit about the history of American Sign Language, ASL, plus a bit of my own background.
French sign language was brought to America during the early 1800s, and as time went by, mixed with local signs, it evolved into the language we know today as ASL.
So it has a history of about 200 years.
I was born deaf, and I was taught to believe that sound wasn't a part of my life.
And I believed it to be true.
Yet, I realize now that that wasn't the case at all.
Sound was very much a part of my life, really, on my mind every day.
As a Deaf person living in a world of sound, it's as if I was living in a foreign country, blindly following its rules, customs, behaviors and norms without ever questioning them.
So how is it that I understand sound?
Well, I watch how people behave and respond to sound.
You people are like my loudspeakers, and amplify sound.
I learn and mirror that behavior.
At the same time, I've learned that I create sound, and I've seen how people respond to me.
Thus I've learned, for example ...
"Don't slam the door!"
"Don't make too much noise when you're eating from the potato-chip bag!"
(Laughter) "Don't burp, and when you're eating, make sure you don't scrape your utensils on the plate."
All of these things I term "sound etiquette."
Maybe I think about sound etiquette more than the average hearing person does.
I'm hyper-vigilant around sound.
And I'm always waiting in eager nervous anticipation around sound, about what's to come next.
Hence, this drawing.
TBD, to be decided.
TBC, to be continued.
TBA, to be announced.
And you notice the staff -- there are no notes contained in the lines.
That's because the lines already contain sound through the subtle smudges and smears.
In Deaf culture, movement is equivalent to sound.
This is a sign for "staff" in ASL.
A typical staff contains five lines.
Yet for me, signing it with my thumb sticking up like that doesn't feel natural.
That's why you'll notice in my drawings, I stick to four lines on paper.
In the year 2008, I had the opportunity to travel to Berlin, Germany, for an artist residency there.
Prior to this time, I had been working as a painter.
During this summer, I visited different museums and gallery spaces, and as I went from one place to the next, I noticed there was no visual art there.
At that time, sound was trending, and this struck me ...
there was no visual art, everything was auditory.
Now sound has come into my art territory.
Is it going to further distance me from art?
I realized that doesn't have to be the case at all.
I actually know sound.
I know it so well that it doesn't have to be something just experienced through the ears.
It could be felt tactually, or experienced as a visual, or even as an idea.
So I decided to reclaim ownership of sound and to put it into my art practice.
And everything that I had been taught regarding sound, I decided to do away with and unlearn.
I started creating a new body of work.
And when I presented this to the art community, I was blown away with the amount of support and attention I received.
I realized: sound is like money, power, control -- social currency.
In the back of my mind, I've always felt that sound was your thing, a hearing person's thing.
And sound is so powerful that it could either disempower me and my artwork, or it could empower me.
I chose to be empowered.
There's a massive culture around spoken language.
And just because I don't use my literal voice to communicate, in society's eyes it's as if I don't have a voice at all.
So I need to work with individuals who can support me as an equal and become my voice.
And that way, I'm able to maintain relevancy in society today.
So at school, at work and institutions, I work with many different ASL interpreters.
And their voice becomes my voice and identity.
They help me to be heard.
And their voices hold value and currency.
Ironically, by borrowing out their voices, I'm able to maintain a temporary form of currency, kind of like taking out a loan with a very high interest rate.
If I didn't continue this practice, I feel that I could just fade off into oblivion and not maintain any form of social currency.
So with sound as my new art medium, I delved into the world of music.
And I was surprised to see the similarities between music and ASL.
For example, a musical note cannot be fully captured and expressed on paper.
And the same holds true for a concept in ASL.
They're both highly spatial and highly inflected -- meaning that subtle changes can affect the entire meaning of both signs and sounds.
I'd like to share with you a piano metaphor, to have you have a better understanding of how ASL works.
So, envision a piano.
ASL is broken down into many different grammatical parameters.
If you assign a different parameter to each finger as you play the piano -- such as facial expression, body movement, speed, hand shape and so on, as you play the piano -- English is a linear language, as if one key is being pressed at a time.
However, ASL is more like a chord -- all 10 fingers need to come down simultaneously to express a clear concept or idea in ASL.
If just one of those keys were to change the chord, it would create a completely different meaning.
The same applies to music in regards to pitch, tone and volume.
In ASL, by playing around with these different grammatical parameters, you can express different ideas.
For example, take the sign TO-LOOK-AT.
This is the sign TO-LOOK-AT.
I'm looking at you.
Staring at you.
(Laughter) (Laughter) Oh -- busted.
(Laughter) Uh-oh.
What are you looking at?
Aw, stop.
(Laughter) I then started thinking, "What if I was to look at ASL through a musical lens?"
If I was to create a sign and repeat it over and over, it could become like a piece of visual music.
For example, this is the sign for "day," as the sun rises and sets.
This is "all day."
If I was to repeat it and slow it down, visually it looks like a piece of music.
All ... day.
I feel the same holds true for "all night."
"All night."
This is ALL-NIGHT, represented in this drawing.
And this led me to thinking about three different kinds of nights: "last night," "overnight," (Sings) "all night long."
(Laughter) I feel like the third one has a lot more musicality than the other two.
(Laughter) This represents how time is expressed in ASL and how the distance from your body can express the changes in time.
For example, 1H is one hand, 2H is two hand, present tense happens closest and in front of the body, future is in front of the body and the past is to your back.
So, the first example is "a long time ago."
Then "past," "used to" and the last one, which is my favorite, with the very romantic and dramatic notion to it, "once upon a time."
(Laughter) "Common time" is a musical term with a specific time signature of four beats per measure.
Yet when I see the word "common time," what automatically comes to mind for me is "at the same time."
So notice RH: right hand, LH: left hand.
We have the staff across the head and the chest.
[Head: RH, Flash claw] [Common time] [Chest: LH, Flash claw] I'm now going to demonstrate a hand shape called the "flash claw."
Can you please follow along with me?
Everybody, hands up.
Now we're going to do it in both the head and the chest, kind of like "common time" or at the same time.
Yes, got it.
That means "to fall in love" in International [Sign].
(Laughter) International [Sign], as a note, is a visual tool to help communicate across cultures and sign languages around the world.
The second one I'd like to demonstrate is this -- please follow along with me again.
And now this.
This is "colonization" in ASL.
(Laughter) Now the third -- please follow along again.
And again.
This is "enlightenment" in ASL.
So let's do all three together.
"Fall in love," "colonization" and "enlightenment."
Good job, everyone.
(Laughter) Notice how all three signs are very similar, they all happen at the head and the chest, but they convey quite different meanings.
So it's amazing to see how ASL is alive and thriving, just like music is.
However, in this day and age, we live in a very audio-centric world.
And just because ASL has no sound to it, it automatically holds no social currency.
We need to start thinking harder about what defines social currency and allow ASL to develop its own form of currency -- without sound.
And this could possibly be a step to lead to a more inclusive society.
And maybe people will understand that you don't need to be deaf to learn ASL, nor do you have to be hearing to learn music.
ASL is such a rich treasure that I'd like you to have the same experience.
And I'd like to invite you to open your ears, to open your eyes, take part in our culture and experience our visual language.
And you never know, you might just fall in love with us.
(Applause) Thank you.
Denise Kahler-Braaten: Hey, that's me.
(Applause)
Every day, I listen to harrowing stories of people fleeing for their lives, across dangerous borders and unfriendly seas.
But there's one story that keeps me awake at night, and it's about Doaa.
A Syrian refugee, 19 years old, she was living a grinding existence in Egypt working day wages.
Her dad was constantly thinking of his thriving business back in Syria that had been blown to pieces by a bomb.
And the war that drove them there was still raging in its fourth year.
And the community that once welcomed them there had become weary of them.
And one day, men on motorcycles tried to kidnap her.
Once an aspiring student thinking only of her future, now she was scared all the time.
But she was also full of hope, because she was in love with a fellow Syrian refugee named Bassem.
Bassem was also struggling in Egypt, and he said to Doaa, "Let's go to Europe; seek asylum, safety.
I will work, you can study -- the promise of a new life."
And he asked her father for her hand in marriage.
But they knew to get to Europe they had to risk their lives, traveling across the Mediterranean Sea, putting their hands in smugglers', notorious for their cruelty.
And Doaa was terrified of the water.
She always had been. She never learned to swim.
It was August that year, and already 2,000 people had died trying to cross the Mediterranean, but Doaa knew of a friend who had made it all the way to Northern Europe, and she thought, "Maybe we can, too."
So she asked her parents if they could go, and after a painful discussion, they consented, and Bassem paid his entire life savings -- 2,500 dollars each -- to the smugglers.
It was a Saturday morning when the call came, and they were taken by bus to a beach, hundreds of people on the beach.
They were taken then by small boats onto an old fishing boat, 500 of them crammed onto that boat, 300 below, [200] above.
There were Syrians, Palestinians, Africans, Muslims and Christians, 100 children, including Sandra -- little Sandra, six years old -- and Masa, 18 months.
There were families on that boat, crammed together shoulder to shoulder, feet to feet.
Doaa was sitting with her legs crammed up to her chest, Bassem holding her hand.
Day two on the water, they were sick with worry and sick to their stomachs from the rough sea.
Day three, Doaa had a premonition.
And she said to Bassem, "I fear we're not going to make it.
I fear the boat is going to sink."
And Bassem said to her, "Please be patient.
We will make it to Sweden, we will get married and we will have a future."
Day four, the passengers were getting agitated.
They asked the captain, "When will we get there?"
He told them to shut up, and he insulted them.
He said, "In 16 hours we will reach the shores of Italy."
They were weak and weary.
Soon they saw a boat approach -- a smaller boat, 10 men on board, who started shouting at them, hurling insults, throwing sticks, asking them to all disembark and get on this smaller, more unseaworthy boat.
The parents were terrified for their children, and they collectively refused to disembark.
So the boat sped away in anger, and a half an hour later, came back and started deliberately ramming a hole in the side of Doaa's boat, just below where she and Bassem were sitting.
And she heard how they yelled, "Let the fish eat your flesh!"
And they started laughing as the boat capsized and sank.
The 300 people below deck were doomed.
Doaa was holding on to the side of the boat as it sank, and watched in horror as a small child was cut to pieces by the propeller.
Bassem said to her, "Please let go, or you'll be swept in and the propeller will kill you, too."
And remember -- she can't swim.
But she let go and she started moving her arms and her legs, thinking, "This is swimming."
And miraculously, Bassem found a life ring.
It was one of those child's rings that they use to play in swimming pools and on calm seas.
And Doaa climbed onto the ring, her arms and her legs dangling by the side.
Bassem was a good swimmer, so he held her hand and tread water.
Around them there were corpses.
Around 100 people survived initially, and they started coming together in groups, praying for rescue.
But when a day went by and no one came, some people gave up hope, and Doaa and Bassem watched as men in the distance took their life vests off and sank into the water.
One man approached them with a small baby perched on his shoulder, nine months old -- Malek.
He was holding onto a gas canister to stay afloat, and he said to them, "I fear I am not going to survive.
I'm too weak. I don't have the courage anymore."
And he handed little Malek over to Bassem and to Doaa, and they perched her onto the life ring.
So now they were three, Doaa, Bassem and little Malek.
And let me take a pause in this story right here and ask the question: why do refugees like Doaa take these kinds of risks?
Millions of refugees are living in exile, in limbo.
They're living in countries [fleeing] from a war that has been raging for four years.
Even if they wanted to return, they can't.
Their homes, their businesses, their towns and their cities have been completely destroyed.
This is a UNESCO World Heritage City, Homs, in Syria.
So people continue to flee into neighboring countries, and we build refugee camps for them in the desert.
Hundreds of thousands of people live in camps like these, and thousands and thousands more, millions, live in towns and cities.
And the communities, the neighboring countries that once welcomed them with open arms and hearts are overwhelmed.
There are simply not enough schools, water systems, sanitation.
Even rich European countries could never handle such an influx without massive investment.
The Syria war has driven almost four million people over the borders, but over seven million people are on the run inside the country.
That means that over half the Syrian population has been forced to flee.
Back to those neighboring countries hosting so many.
They feel that the richer world has done too little to support them.
And days have turned into months, months into years.
A refugee's stay is supposed to be temporary.
Back to Doaa and Bassem in the water.
It was their second day, and Bassem was getting very weak.
And now it was Doaa's turn to say to Bassem, "My love, please hold on to hope, to our future. We will make it."
And he said to her, "I'm sorry, my love, that I put you in this situation.
I have never loved anyone as much as I love you."
And he released himself into the water, and Doaa watched as the love of her life drowned before her eyes.
Later that day, a mother came up to Doaa with her small 18-month-old daughter, Masa.
This was the little girl I showed you in the picture earlier, with the life vests.
Her older sister Sandra had just drowned, and her mother knew she had to do everything in her power to save her daughter.
And she said to Doaa, "Please take this child.
Let her be part of you. I will not survive."
And then she went away and drowned.
So Doaa, the 19-year-old refugee who was terrified of the water, who couldn't swim, found herself in charge of two little baby kids.
And they were thirsty and they were hungry and they were agitated, and she tried her best to amuse them, to sing to them, to say words to them from the Quran.
Around them, the bodies were bloating and turning black.
The sun was blazing during the day.
At night, there was a cold moon and fog.
It was very frightening.
On the fourth day in the water, this is how Doaa probably looked on the ring with her two children.
A woman came on the fourth day and approached her and asked her to take another child -- a little boy, just four years old.
When Doaa took the little boy and the mother drowned, she said to the sobbing child, "She just went away to find you water and food."
But his heart soon stopped, and Doaa had to release the little boy into the water.
Later that day, she looked up into the sky with hope, because she saw two planes crossing in the sky.
And she waved her arms, hoping they would see her, but the planes were soon gone.
But that afternoon, as the sun was going down, she saw a boat, a merchant vessel.
And she said, "Please, God, let them rescue me."
She waved her arms and she felt like she shouted for about two hours.
And it had become dark, but finally the searchlights found her and they extended a rope, astonished to see a woman clutching onto two babies.
They pulled them onto the boat, they got oxygen and blankets, and a Greek helicopter came to pick them up and take them to the island of Crete.
But Doaa looked down and asked, "What of Malek?"
And they told her the little baby did not survive -- she drew her last breath in the boat's clinic.
But Doaa was sure that as they had been pulled up onto the rescue boat, that little baby girl had been smiling.
Only 11 people survived that wreck, of the 500.
There was never an international investigation into what happened.
There were some media reports about mass murder at sea, a terrible tragedy, but that was only for one day.
And then the news cycle moved on.
Meanwhile, in a pediatric hospital on Crete, little Masa was on the edge of death.
She was really dehydrated. Her kidneys were failing.
Her glucose levels were dangerously low.
The doctors did everything in their medical power to save them, and the Greek nurses never left her side, holding her, hugging her, singing her words.
My colleagues also visited and said pretty words to her in Arabic.
Amazingly, little Masa survived.
And soon the Greek press started reporting about the miracle baby, who had survived four days in the water without food or anything to drink, and offers to adopt her came from all over the country.
And meanwhile, Doaa was in another hospital on Crete, thin, dehydrated.
An Egyptian family took her into their home as soon as she was released.
And soon word went around about Doaa's survival, and a phone number was published on Facebook.
Messages started coming in.
"Doaa, do you know what happened to my brother?
My sister? My parents? My friends? Do you know if they survived?"
One of those messages said, "I believe you saved my little niece, Masa."
And it had this photo.
This was from Masa's uncle, a Syrian refugee who had made it to Sweden with his family and also Masa's older sister.
Soon, we hope, Masa will be reunited with him in Sweden, and until then, she's being cared for in a beautiful orphanage in Athens.
And Doaa? Well, word went around about her survival, too.
And the media wrote about this slight woman, and couldn't imagine how she could survive all this time under such conditions in that sea, and still save another life.
The Academy of Athens, one of Greece's most prestigious institutions, gave her an award of bravery, and she deserves all that praise, and she deserves a second chance.
But she wants to still go to Sweden.
She wants to reunite with her family there.
She wants to bring her mother and her father and her younger siblings away from Egypt there as well, and I believe she will succeed.
She wants to become a lawyer or a politician or something that can help fight injustice.
She is an extraordinary survivor.
But I have to ask: what if she didn't have to take that risk?
Why did she have to go through all that?
Why wasn't there a legal way for her to study in Europe?
Why couldn't Masa have taken an airplane to Sweden?
Why couldn't Bassem have found work?
Why is there no massive resettlement program for Syrian refugees, the victims of the worst war of our times?
The world did this for the Vietnamese in the 1970s. Why not now?
Why is there so little investment in the neighboring countries hosting so many refugees?
And why, the root question, is so little being done to stop the wars, the persecution and the poverty that is driving so many people to the shores of Europe?
Until these issues are resolved, people will continue to take to the seas and to seek safety and asylum.
And what happens next?
Well, that is largely Europe's choice.
And I understand the public fears.
People are worried about their security, their economies, the changes of culture.
But is that more important than saving human lives?
Because there is something fundamental here that I think overrides the rest, and it is about our common humanity.
No person fleeing war or persecution should have to die crossing a sea to reach safety.
(Applause) One thing is for sure, that no refugee would be on those dangerous boats if they could thrive where they are.
And no migrant would take that dangerous journey if they had enough food for themselves and their children.
And no one would put their life savings in the hands of those notorious smugglers if there was a legal way to migrate.
So on behalf of little Masa and on behalf of Doaa and of Bassem and of those 500 people who drowned with them, can we make sure that they did not die in vain?
Could we be inspired by what happened, and take a stand for a world in which every life matters?
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I'm a professional poker player, and today, I want to talk about three things that the game has taught me around decision-making that I find apply to everyday life.
Now the first of these things is about luck.
Now, like poker, life is also a game of skill and luck, and when it comes to the biggest things we care about -- health, wealth and relationships -- these outcomes don't only depend on the quality of our decision-making, but also the roll of life's dice.
For example, we can be perfectly health-conscious and still get unlucky with something like cancer.
Or we can smoke 20 a day and live to a ripe old age, and this kind of ambiguity can make it hard for us to know how good our strategies are, sometimes, especially when we're experiencing a lot of success.
For example, back in 2010, I won a really big poker tournament known as the European Poker Tour.
And because I'd only been playing full-time for about a year, when I won, I assumed I must be rather brilliant.
In fact, I thought I was so brilliant that I not only got rather lazy with studying the game, but I also got more risky, started playing in the biggest tournaments I could against the very best in the world.
And then my profit graph went from a thing of beauty to something kind of sad, with this worrying downhill trend for a long time, until I finally realized that I was overestimating my skill level, and got my act together.
And this kind of reminds me of what we've been seeing in the cryptocurrency space, at least in 2017, where the only thing that's been going up faster than the markets themselves is the number of "senior investment specialists" who have been appearing out of nowhere.
Now I'm not saying it's not possible to have a strategic edge, but at the same time, it's very easy to feel like a genius when you're in a market that's going up so fast that even the worst strategies are making a profit.
So when we're experiencing success, it's important to take a moment to really ask ourselves how much of it is truly down to us, because our egos love to downplay the luck factor when we're winning.
Now, a second thing poker taught me is the importance of quantifying my thinking.
When you're playing, you can't just get away with going, "Eh, they're probably bluffing."
That's just going to lose you a bunch of money, because poker is a game of probabilities and precision, and so you have to train yourself to think in numbers.
So now, whenever I catch myself thinking vaguely about something really important, like, "It's unlikely I'll forget what I want to say in my TED Talk," I now try to estimate it numerically.
(Laughter) Trust me, it helps a lot with the planning process.
And the thing is, almost anything that could possibly happen here today, or at any point in the future, can also be expressed as a probability, too.
(Laughter) So now I also try to speak in numbers as well.
So if someone asks me, "Hey, Liv, do you think you're going to come along to that thing tonight?"
instead of just saying to them, "Yeah, probably," I actually give them my best estimate -- say, 60 percent.
Because -- I know that sounds a little odd -- but the thing is, I ran a poll on Twitter of what people understand the word "probably" to mean, and this was the spread of answers.
Enormous!
So apparently, it's absolutely useless at actually conveying any real information.
So if you guys catch yourselves using these vague words, like "probably" or "sometimes," try, instead, using numbers, because when we speak in numbers, we know what lands in the other person's brain.
Now, the third thing I want to touch on today is intuition.
How often have you seen these kinds of inspirational memes in your Facebook feed?
[Always trust your gut feeling and never second-guess.] They're nice, right?
It's lovely. Yes. "Trust your soul."
