There I am, walking past the guard gate and the guard stops and says, "Pasaporte, pasaporte," and with an M16 pointed at me.
And I looked at him and I said, "Passport, huh?
I don't need to show you my passport. It’s in the back of my pack.
I'm Dr. Francis; I'm a U.N. Ambassador and I'm walking around the world."
And I started walking off.
What possessed me to say this thing?
The road turned into the jungle.
I didn’t get shot.
And I got to -- I start saying, "Free at last -- thank God Almighty, I’m free at last."
"What was that about," I’m saying. What was that about?
It took me 100 miles to figure out that, in my heart, in me, I had become a prisoner.
I was a prisoner and I needed to escape.
The prison that I was in was the fact that I did not drive or use motorized vehicles.
Now how could that be?
Because when I started, it seemed very appropriate to me not to use motorized vehicles.
But the thing that was different was that every birthday, I asked myself about silence, but I never asked myself about my decision to just use my feet.
I had no idea I was going to become a U.N. Ambassador.
I had no idea I would have a Ph.D.
And so I realized that I had a responsibility to more than just me, and that I was going to have to change.
You know, we can do it.
I was going to have to change.
And I was afraid to change, because I was so used to the guy who only just walked.
I was so used to that person that I didn’t want to stop.
I didn’t know who I would be if I changed.
But I know I needed to.
I know I needed to change, because it would be the only way that I could be here today.
And I know that a lot of times we find ourselves in this wonderful place where we’ve gotten to, but there’s another place for us to go.
And we kind of have to leave behind the security of who we’ve become, and go to the place of who we are becoming.
And so, I want to encourage you to go to that next place, to let yourself out of any prison that you might find yourself in, as comfortable as it may be, because we have to do something now.
We have to change now.
As our former Vice President said, we have to become activists.
So if my voice can touch you, if my actions can touch you, if my being here can touch you, please let it be.
And I know that all of you have touched me while I’ve been here.
So, let’s go out into the world and take this caring, this love, this respect that we’ve shown each other right here at TED, and take this out into the world.
Because we are the environment, and how we treat each other is really how we’re going to treat the environment.
So I want to thank you for being here and I want to end this in five seconds of silence.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a guy named Bob McKim.
He was a creativity researcher in the '60s and '70s, and also led the Stanford Design Program.
And in fact, my friend and IDEO founder, David Kelley, who’s out there somewhere, studied under him at Stanford.
And he liked to do an exercise with his students where he got them to take a piece of paper and draw the person who sat next to them, their neighbor, very quickly, just as quickly as they could.
And in fact, we’re going to do that exercise right now.
You all have a piece of cardboard and a piece of paper.
It’s actually got a bunch of circles on it.
I need you to turn that piece of paper over; you should find that it’s blank on the other side.
And there should be a pencil.
And I want you to pick somebody that’s seated next to you, and when I say, go, you’ve got 30 seconds to draw your neighbor, OK?
So, everybody ready? OK. Off you go.
You’ve got 30 seconds, you’d better be fast.
Come on: those masterpieces ...
OK? Stop. All right, now.
(Laughter) Yes, lot’s of laughter. Yeah, exactly.
Lots of laughter, quite a bit of embarrassment.
(Laughter) Am I hearing a few "sorry’s"? I think I’m hearing a few sorry’s.
Yup, yup, I think I probably am.
And that’s exactly what happens every time, every time you do this with adults.
McKim found this every time he did it with his students.
He got exactly the same response: lots and lots of sorry’s.
(Laughter) And he would point this out as evidence that we fear the judgment of our peers, and that we’re embarrassed about showing our ideas to people we think of as our peers, to those around us.
And this fear is what causes us to be conservative in our thinking.
So we might have a wild idea, but we’re afraid to share it with anybody else.
OK, so if you try the same exercise with kids, they have no embarrassment at all.
They just quite happily show their masterpiece to whoever wants to look at it.
But as they learn to become adults, they become much more sensitive to the opinions of others, and they lose that freedom and they do start to become embarrassed.
And in studies of kids playing, it’s been shown time after time that kids who feel secure, who are in a kind of trusted environment -- they’re the ones that feel most free to play.
And if you’re starting a design firm, let’s say, then you probably also want to create a place where people have the same kind of security.
Where they have the same kind of security to take risks.
Maybe have the same kind of security to play.
Before founding IDEO, David said that what he wanted to do was to form a company where all the employees are my best friends.
Now, that wasn’t just self-indulgence.
He knew that friendship is a short cut to play.
And he knew that it gives us a sense of trust, and it allows us then to take the kind of creative risks that we need to take as designers.
And so, that decision to work with his friends -- now he has 550 of them -- was what got IDEO started.
And our studios, like, I think, many creative workplaces today, are designed to help people feel relaxed: familiar with their surroundings, comfortable with the people that they’re working with.
It takes more than decor, but I think we’ve all seen that creative companies do often have symbols in the workplace that remind people to be playful, and that it’s a permissive environment.
So, whether it’s this microbus meeting room that we have in one our buildings at IDEO; or at Pixar, where the animators work in wooden huts and decorated caves; or at the Googleplex, where it’s famous for its [beach] volleyball courts, and even this massive dinosaur skeleton with pink flamingos on it.
Don’t know the reason for the pink flamingos, but anyway, they’re there in the garden.
Or even in the Swiss office of Google, which perhaps has the most wacky ideas of all.
And my theory is, that’s so the Swiss can prove to their Californian colleagues that they’re not boring.
So they have the slide, and they even have a fireman’s pole.
Don’t know what they do with that, but they have one.
So all of these places have these symbols.
Now, our big symbol at IDEO is actually not so much the place, it’s a thing.
And it’s actually something that we invented a few years ago, or created a few years ago.
It’s a toy; it’s called a "finger blaster."
And I forgot to bring one up with me.
So if somebody can reach under the chair that’s next to them, you’ll find something taped underneath it.
That’s great. If you could pass it up. Thanks, David, I appreciate it.
So this is a finger blaster, and you will find that every one of you has got one taped under your chair.
And I’m going to run a little experiment. Another little experiment.
But before we start, I need just to put these on.
Thank you. All right.
Now, what I’m going to do is, I’m going to see how -- I can’t see out of these, OK.
I’m going to see how many of you at the back of the room can actually get those things onto the stage.
So the way they work is, you know, you just put your finger in the thing, pull them back, and off you go.
So, don’t look backwards. That’s my only recommendation here.
I want to see how many of you can get these things on the stage.
So come on! There we go, there we go. Thank you. Thank you. Oh.
I have another idea. I wanted to -- there we go.
(Laughter) There we go.
(Laughter) Thank you, thank you, thank you.
Not bad, not bad. No serious injuries so far.
(Laughter) Well, they’re still coming in from the back there; they’re still coming in.
Some of you haven’t fired them yet.
Can you not figure out how to do it, or something?
It’s not that hard. Most of your kids figure out how to do this in the first 10 seconds, when they pick it up.
All right. This is pretty good; this is pretty good.
Okay, all right. Let’s -- I suppose we'd better...
I'd better clear these up out of the way; otherwise, I’m going to trip over them.
All right. So the rest of you can save them for when I say something particularly boring, and then you can fire at me.
(Laughter) All right. I think I’m going to take these off now, because I can’t see a damn thing when I’ve -- all right, OK.
So, ah, that was fun.
(Laughter) All right, good.
(Applause) So, OK, so why?
So we have the finger blasters. Other people have dinosaurs, you know.
Why do we have them? Well, as I said, we have them because we think maybe playfulness is important.
But why is it important?
We use it in a pretty pragmatic way, to be honest.
We think playfulness helps us get to better creative solutions.
Helps us do our jobs better, and helps us feel better when we do them.
Now, an adult encountering a new situation -- when we encounter a new situation we have a tendency to want to categorize it just as quickly as we can, you know.
And there’s a reason for that: we want to settle on an answer.
Life’s complicated; we want to figure out what’s going on around us very quickly.
I suspect, actually, that the evolutionary biologists probably have lots of reasons [for] why we want to categorize new things very, very quickly.
One of them might be, you know, when we see this funny stripy thing: is that a tiger just about to jump out and kill us?
Or is it just some weird shadows on the tree?
We need to figure that out pretty fast.
Well, at least, we did once.
Most of us don’t need to anymore, I suppose.
This is some aluminum foil, right? You use it in the kitchen.
That’s what it is, isn’t it? Of course it is, of course it is.
Well, not necessarily.
(Laughter) Kids are more engaged with open possibilities.
Now, they’ll certainly -- when they come across something new, they’ll certainly ask, "What is it?"
Of course they will. But they’ll also ask, "What can I do with it?"
And you know, the more creative of them might get to a really interesting example.
And this openness is the beginning of exploratory play.
Any parents of young kids in the audience? There must be some.
Yeah, thought so. So we’ve all seen it, haven’t we?
We’ve all told stories about how, on Christmas morning, our kids end up playing with the boxes far more than they play with the toys that are inside them.
And you know, from an exploration perspective, this behavior makes complete sense.
Because you can do a lot more with boxes than you can do with a toy.
Even one like, say, Tickle Me Elmo -- which, despite its ingenuity, really only does one thing, whereas boxes offer an infinite number of choices.
So again, this is another one of those playful activities that, as we get older, we tend to forget and we have to relearn.
So another one of Bob McKim’s favorite exercises is called the "30 Circles Test."
So we’re back to work. You guys are going to get back to work again.
Turn that piece of paper that you did the sketch on back over, and you’ll find those 30 circles printed on the piece of paper.
So it should look like this. You should be looking at something like this.
So what I’m going to do is, I’m going to give you minute, and I want you to adapt as many of those circles as you can into objects of some form.
So for example, you could turn one into a football, or another one into a sun. All I’m interested in is quantity.
I want you to do as many of them as you can, in the minute that I’m just about to give you.
So, everybody ready? OK? Off you go.
Okay. Put down your pencils, as they say.
So, who got more than five circles figured out?
Hopefully everybody? More than 10?
Keep your hands up if you did 10.
15? 20? Anybody get all 30?
No? Oh! Somebody did. Fantastic.
Did anybody to a variation on a theme? Like a smiley face?
Happy face? Sad face? Sleepy face? Anybody do that?
Anybody use my examples? The sun and the football?
Great. Cool. So I was really interested in quantity.
I wasn’t actually very interested in whether they were all different.
I just wanted you to fill in as many circles as possible.
And one of the things we tend to do as adults, again, is we edit things.
We stop ourselves from doing things.
We self-edit as we’re having ideas.
And in some cases, our desire to be original is actually a form of editing.
And that actually isn’t necessarily really playful.
So that ability just to go for it and explore lots of things, even if they don’t seem that different from each other, is actually something that kids do well, and it is a form of play.
So now, Bob McKim did another version of this test in a rather famous experiment that was done in the 1960s.
Anybody know what this is? It’s the peyote cactus.
It’s the plant from which you can create mescaline, one of the psychedelic drugs.
For those of you around in the '60s, you probably know it well.
McKim published a paper in 1966, describing an experiment that he and his colleagues conducted to test the effects of psychedelic drugs on creativity.
So he picked 27 professionals -- they were engineers, physicists, mathematicians, architects, furniture designers even, artists -- and he asked them to come along one evening, and to bring a problem with them that they were working on.
He gave each of them some mescaline, and had them listen to some nice, relaxing music for a while.
And then he did what’s called the Purdue Creativity Test.
You might know it as, "How many uses can you find for a paper clip?"
It’s basically the same thing as the 30 circles thing that I just had you do.
Now, actually, he gave the test before the drugs and after the drugs, to see what the difference was in people’s facility and speed with coming up with ideas.
And then he asked them to go away and work on those problems that they’d brought.
And they’d come up with a bunch of interesting solutions -- and actually, quite valid solutions -- to the things that they’d been working on.
And so, some of the things that they figured out, some of these individuals figured out; in one case, a new commercial building and designs for houses that were accepted by clients; a design of a solar space probe experiment; a redesign of the linear electron accelerator; an engineering improvement to a magnetic tape recorder -- you can tell this is a while ago; the completion of a line of furniture; and even a new conceptual model of the photon.
So it was a pretty successful evening.
In fact, maybe this experiment was the reason that Silicon Valley got off to its great start with innovation.
We don’t know, but it may be.
We need to ask some of the CEOs whether they were involved in this mescaline experiment.
But really, it wasn’t the drugs that were important; it was this idea that what the drugs did would help shock people out of their normal way of thinking, and getting them to forget the adult behaviors that were getting in the way of their ideas.
But it’s hard to break our habits, our adult habits.
At IDEO we have brainstorming rules written on the walls.
Edicts like, "Defer judgment," or "Go for quantity."
And somehow that seems wrong.
I mean, can you have rules about creativity?
Well, it sort of turns out that we need rules to help us break the old rules and norms that otherwise we might bring to the creative process.
And we’ve certainly learnt that over time, you get much better brainstorming, much more creative outcomes when everybody does play by the rules.
Now, of course, many designers, many individual designers, achieve this is in a much more organic way.
I think the Eameses are wonderful examples of experimentation.
And they experimented with plywood for many years without necessarily having one single goal in mind.
They were exploring following what was interesting to them.
They went from designing splints for wounded soldiers coming out of World War II and the Korean War, I think, and from this experiment they moved on to chairs.
Through constant experimentation with materials, they developed a wide range of iconic solutions that we know today, eventually resulting in, of course, the legendary lounge chair.
Now, if the Eameses had stopped with that first great solution, then we wouldn’t be the beneficiaries of so many wonderful designs today.
And of course, they used experimentation in all aspects of their work, from films to buildings, from games to graphics.
So, they’re great examples, I think, of exploration and experimentation in design.
Now, while the Eameses were exploring those possibilities, they were also exploring physical objects.
And they were doing that through building prototypes.
And building is the next of the behaviors that I thought I’d talk about.
So the average Western first-grader spends as much as 50 percent of their play time taking part in what’s called "construction play."
Construction play -- it’s playful, obviously, but also a powerful way to learn.
When play is about building a tower out of blocks, the kid begins to learn a lot about towers.
And as they repeatedly knock it down and start again, learning is happening as a sort of by-product of play.
It’s classically learning by doing.
Now, David Kelley calls this behavior, when it’s carried out by designers, "thinking with your hands."
And it typically involves making multiple, low-resolution prototypes very quickly, often by bringing lots of found elements together in order to get to a solution.
On one of his earliest projects, the team was kind of stuck, and they came up with a mechanism by hacking together a prototype made from a roll-on deodorant.
Now, that became the first commercial computer mouse for the Apple Lisa and the Macintosh.
So, they learned their way to that by building prototypes.
Another example is a group of designers who were working on a surgical instrument with some surgeons.
They were meeting with them; they were talking to the surgeons about what it was they needed with this device.
And one of the designers ran out of the room and grabbed a white board marker and a film canister -- which is now becoming a very precious prototyping medium -- and a clothespin. He taped them all together, ran back into the room and said, "You mean, something like this?"
And the surgeons grabbed hold of it and said, well, I want to hold it like this, or like that.
And all of a sudden a productive conversation was happening about design around a tangible object.
And in the end it turned into a real device.
And so this behavior is all about quickly getting something into the real world, and having your thinking advanced as a result.
At IDEO there’s a kind of a back-to-preschool feel sometimes about the environment.
The prototyping carts, filled with colored paper and Play-Doh and glue sticks and stuff -- I mean, they do have a bit of a kindergarten feel to them.
But the important idea is that everything’s at hand, everything’s around.
So when designers are working on ideas, they can start building stuff whenever they want.
They don’t necessarily even have to go into some kind of formal workshop to do it.
And we think that’s pretty important.
And then the sad thing is, although preschools are full of this kind of stuff, as kids go through the school system it all gets taken away.
They lose this stuff that facilitates this sort of playful and building mode of thinking.
And of course, by the time you get to the average workplace, maybe the best construction tool we have might be the Post-it notes. It’s pretty barren.
But by giving project teams and the clients who they’re working with permission to think with their hands, quite complex ideas can spring into life and go right through to execution much more easily.
This is a nurse using a very simple -- as you can see -- plasticine prototype, explaining what she wants out of a portable information system to a team of technologists and designers that are working with her in a hospital.
And just having this very simple prototype allows her to talk about what she wants in a much more powerful way.
And of course, by building quick prototypes, we can get out and test our ideas with consumers and users much more quickly than if we’re trying to describe them through words.
But what about designing something that isn’t physical?
Something like a service or an experience?
Something that exists as a series of interactions over time?
Instead of building play, this can be approached with role-play.
So, if you’re designing an interaction between two people -- such as, I don’t know -- ordering food at a fast food joint or something, you need to be able to imagine how that experience might feel over a period of time.
And I think the best way to achieve that, and get a feeling for any flaws in your design, is to act it out.
So we do quite a lot of work at IDEO trying to convince our clients of this.
They can be a little skeptical; I’ll come back to that.
But a place, I think, where the effort is really worthwhile is where people are wrestling with quite serious problems -- things like education or security or finance or health.
And this is another example in a healthcare environment of some doctors and some nurses and designers acting out a service scenario around patient care.
But you know, many adults are pretty reluctant to engage with role-play.
Some of it’s embarrassment and some of it is because they just don’t believe that what emerges is necessarily valid.
They dismiss an interesting interaction by saying, you know, "That’s just happening because they’re acting it out."
Research into kids' behavior actually suggests that it’s worth taking role-playing seriously.
Because when children play a role, they actually follow social scripts quite closely that they’ve learnt from us as adults.
If one kid plays "store," and another one’s playing "house," then the whole kind of play falls down.
So they get used to quite quickly to understanding the rules for social interactions, and are actually quite quick to point out when they’re broken.
So when, as adults, we role-play, then we have a huge set of these scripts already internalized.
We’ve gone through lots of experiences in life, and they provide a strong intuition as to whether an interaction is going to work.
So we’re very good, when acting out a solution, at spotting whether something lacks authenticity.
So role-play is actually, I think, quite valuable when it comes to thinking about experiences.
Another way for us, as designers, to explore role-play is to put ourselves through an experience which we’re designing for, and project ourselves into an experience.
So here are some designers who are trying to understand what it might feel like to sleep in a confined space on an airplane.
And so they grabbed some very simple materials, you can see, and did this role-play, this kind of very crude role-play, just to get a sense of what it would be like for passengers if they were stuck in quite small places on airplanes.
This is one of our designers, Kristian Simsarian, and he’s putting himself through the experience of being an ER patient.
Now, this is a real hospital, in a real emergency room.
One of the reasons he chose to take this rather large video camera with him was because he didn’t want the doctors and nurses thinking he was actually sick, and sticking something into him that he was going to regret later.
So anyhow, he went there with his video camera, and it’s kind of interesting to see what he brought back.
Because when we looked at the video when he got back, we saw 20 minutes of this.
(Laughter) And also, the amazing thing about this video -- as soon as you see it you immediately project yourself into that experience.
And you know what it feels like: all of that uncertainty while you’re left out in the hallway while the docs are dealing with some more urgent case in one of the emergency rooms, wondering what the heck’s going on.
And so this notion of using role-play -- or in this case, living through the experience as a way of creating empathy -- particularly when you use video, is really powerful.
Or another one of our designers, Altay Sendil: he’s here having his chest waxed, not because he’s very vain, although actually he is -- no, I’m kidding -- but in order to empathize with the pain that chronic care patients go through when they’re having dressings removed.
And so sometimes these analogous experiences, analogous role-play, can also be quite valuable.
So when a kid dresses up as a firefighter, you know, he’s beginning to try on that identity.
He wants to know what it feels like to be a firefighter.
We’re doing the same thing as designers.
We’re trying on these experiences.
And so the idea of role-play is both as an empathy tool, as well as a tool for prototyping experiences.
And you know, we kind of admire people who do this at IDEO anyway.
Not just because they lead to insights about the experience, but also because of their willingness to explore and their ability to unselfconsciously surrender themselves to the experience.
In short, we admire their willingness to play.
Playful exploration, playful building and role-play: those are some of the ways that designers use play in their work.
And so far, I admit, this might feel like it’s a message just to go out and play like a kid.
And to certain extent it is, but I want to stress a couple of points.
The first thing to remember is that play is not anarchy.
Play has rules, especially when it’s group play.
When kids play tea party, or they play cops and robbers, they’re following a script that they’ve agreed to.
And it’s this code negotiation that leads to productive play.
So, remember the sketching task we did at the beginning?
The kind of little face, the portrait you did?
Well, imagine if you did the same task with friends while you were drinking in a pub.
But everybody agreed to play a game where the worst sketch artist bought the next round of drinks.
That framework of rules would have turned an embarrassing, difficult situation into a fun game.
As a result, we’d all feel perfectly secure and have a good time -- but because we all understood the rules and we agreed on them together.
But there aren’t just rules about how to play; there are rules about when to play.
Kids don’t play all the time, obviously.
They transition in and out of it, and good teachers spend a lot of time thinking about how to move kids through these experiences.
As designers, we need to be able to transition in and out of play also.
And if we’re running design studios we need to be able to figure out, how can we transition designers through these different experiences?
I think this is particularly true if we think about the sort of -- I think what’s very different about design is that we go through these two very distinctive modes of operation.
We go through a sort of generative mode, where we’re exploring many ideas; and then we come back together again, and come back looking for that solution, and developing that solution.
I think they’re two quite different modes: divergence and convergence.
And I think it’s probably in the divergent mode that we most need playfulness.
Perhaps in convergent mode we need to be more serious.
And so being able to move between those modes is really quite important. So, it’s where there’s a more nuanced version view of play, I think, is required.
Because it’s very easy to fall into the trap that these states are absolute.
You’re either playful or you’re serious, and you can’t be both.
But that’s not really true: you can be a serious professional adult and, at times, be playful.
It’s not an either/or; it’s an "and."
You can be serious and play.
So to sum it up, we need trust to play, and we need trust to be creative. So, there’s a connection.
And there are a series of behaviors that we’ve learnt as kids, and that turn out to be quite useful to us as designers.
They include exploration, which is about going for quantity; building, and thinking with your hands; and role-play, where acting it out helps us both to have more empathy for the situations in which we’re designing, and to create services and experiences that are seamless and authentic.
Thank you very much. (Applause)
The fragrance that you will smell, you will never be able to smell this way again.
It’s a fragrance called Beyond Paradise, which you can find in any store in the nation.
Except here it’s been split up in parts by Estée Lauder and by the perfumer who did it, Calice Becker, and I'm most grateful to them for this.
And it’s been split up in successive bits and a chord.
So what you’re smelling now is the top note.
And then will come what they call the heart, the lush heart note.
I will show it to you.
The Eden top note is named after the Eden Project in the U.K.
The lush heart note, Melaleuca bark note -- which does not contain any Melaleuca bark, because it’s totally forbidden.
And after that, the complete fragrance.
Now what you are smelling is a combination of -- I asked how many molecules there were in there, and nobody would tell me.
So I put it through a G.C., a Gas Chromatograph that I have in my office, and it’s about 400.
So what you’re smelling is several hundred molecules floating through the air, hitting your nose.
And do not get the impression that this is very subjective.
You are all smelling pretty much the same thing, OK?
Smell has this reputation of being somewhat different for each person.
It’s not really true.
And perfumery shows you that can’t be true, because if it were like that it wouldn’t be an art, OK?
Now, while the smell wafts over you, let me tell you the history of an idea.
Everything that you’re smelling in here is made up of atoms that come from what I call the Upper East Side of the periodic table -- a nice, safe neighborhood.
(Laughter) You really don’t want to leave it if you want to have a career in perfumery.
Some people have tried in the 1920s to add things from the bad parts, and it didn’t really work.
These are the five atoms from which just about everything that you’re going to smell in real life, from coffee to fragrance, are made of.
The top note that you smelled at the very beginning, the cut-grass green, what we call in perfumery -- they’re weird terms -- and this would be called a green note, because it smells of something green, like cut grass.
This is cis-3-hexene-1-ol. And I had to learn chemistry on the fly in the last three years. A very expensive high school chemistry education.
This has six carbon atoms, so "hexa," hexene-1-ol.
It has one double bond, it has an alcohol on the end, so it’s "ol," and that’s why they call it cis-3-hexene-1-ol.
Once you figure this out, you can really impress people at parties.
This smells of cut grass. Now, this is the skeleton of the molecule.
If you dress it up with atoms, hydrogen atoms -- that’s what it looks like when you have it on your computer -- but actually it’s sort of more like this, in the sense that the atoms have a certain sphere that you cannot penetrate. They repel.
OK, now. Why does this thing smell of cut grass, OK?
Why doesn’t it smell of potatoes or violets? Well, there are really two theories.
But the first theory is: it must be the shape.
And that’s a perfectly reasonable theory in the sense that almost everything else in biology works by shape.
Enzymes that chew things up, antibodies, it’s all, you know, the fit between a protein and whatever it is grabbing, in this case a smell.
And I will try and explain to you what’s wrong with this notion.
And the other theory is that we smell molecular vibrations.
Now, this is a totally insane idea.
And when I first came across it in the early '90s, I thought my predecessor, Malcolm Dyson and Bob Wright, had really taken leave of their senses, and I’ll explain to you why this was the case.
However, I came to realize gradually that they may be right -- and I have to convince all my colleagues that this is so, but I’m working on it.
Here’s how shape works in normal receptors.
You have a molecule coming in, it gets into the protein, which is schematic here, and it causes this thing to switch, to turn, to move in some way by binding in certain parts.
And the attraction, the forces, between the molecule and the protein cause the motion. This is a shape-based idea.
Now, what’s wrong with shape is summarized in this slide.
The way --I expect everybody to memorize these compounds.
This is one page of work from a chemist’s workbook, OK?
Working for a fragrance company.
He’s making 45 molecules, and he’s looking for a sandalwood, something that smells of sandalwood.
Because there’s a lot of money in sandalwoods.
And of these 45 molecules, only 4629 actually smells of sandalwood.
And he puts an exclamation mark, OK? This is an awful lot of work.
This actually is roughly, in man-years of work, 200,000 dollars roughly, if you keep them on the low salaries with no benefits.
So this is a profoundly inefficient process.
And my definition of a theory is, it’s not just something that you teach people; it’s labor saving.
A theory is something that enables you to do less work.
I love the idea of doing less work. So let me explain to you why -- a very simple fact that tells you why this shape theory really does not work very well.
This is cis-3-hexene-1-ol. It smells of cut grass.
This is cis-3-hexene-1-thiol, and this smells of rotten eggs, OK?
Now, you will have noticed that vodka never smells of rotten eggs.
If it does, you put the glass down, you go to a different bar.
This is -- in other words, we never get the O-H -- we never mistake it for an S-H, OK?
Like, at no concentration, even pure, you know, if you smelt pure ethanol, it doesn’t smell of rotten eggs.
Conversely, there is no concentration at which the sulfur compound will smell like vodka.
It’s very hard to explain this by molecular recognition.
Now, I showed this to a physicist friend of mine who has a profound distaste for biology, and he says, "That’s easy! The things are a different color!"
(Laughter) We have to go a little beyond that. Now let me explain why vibrational theory has some sort of interest in it. These molecules, as you saw in the beginning, the building blocks had springs connecting them to each other.
In fact, molecules are able to vibrate at a set of frequencies which are very specific for each molecule and for the bonds connecting them.
So this is the sound of the O-H stretch, translated into the audible range.
S-H, quite a different frequency.
Now, this is kind of interesting, because it tells you that you should be looking for a particular fact, which is this: nothing in the world smells like rotten eggs except S-H, OK?
Now, Fact B: nothing in the world has that frequency except S-H.
If you look on this, imagine a piano keyboard.
The S-H stretch is in the middle of a part of the keyboard that has been, so to speak, damaged, and there are no neighboring notes, nothing is close to it.
You have a unique smell, a unique vibration.
So I went searching when I started in this game to convince myself that there was any degree of plausibility to this whole crazy story.
I went searching for a type of molecule, any molecule, that would have that vibration and that -- the obvious prediction was that it should absolutely smell of sulfur.
If it didn’t, the whole idea was toast, and I might as well move on to other things.
Now, after searching high and low for several months, I discovered that there was a type of molecule called a Borane which has exactly the same vibration.
Now the good news is, Boranes you can get hold of.
The bad news is they’re rocket fuels.
Most of them explode spontaneously in contact with air, and when you call up the companies, they only give you minimum ten tons, OK?
(Laughter) So this was not what they call a laboratory-scale experiment, and they wouldn’t have liked it at my college.
However, I managed to get a hold of a Borane eventually, and here is the beast.
And it really does have the same -- if you calculate, if you measure the vibrational frequencies, they are the same as S-H.
Now, does it smell of sulfur? Well, if you go back in the literature, there’s a man who knew more about Boranes than anyone alive then or since, Alfred Stock, he synthesized all of them.
And in an enormous 40-page paper in German he says, at one point -- my wife is German and she translated it for me -- and at one point he says, "ganz widerlich Geruch," an "absolutely repulsive smell," which is good. Reminiscent of hydrogen sulfide.
So this fact that Boranes smell of sulfur had been known since 1910, and utterly forgotten until 1997, 1998.
Now, the slight fly in the ointment is this: that if we smell molecular vibrations, we must have a spectroscope in our nose.
Now, this is a spectroscope, OK, on my laboratory bench.
And it’s fair to say that if you look up somebody’s nose, you’re unlikely to see anything resembling this.
And this is the main objection to the theory.
OK, great, we smell vibrations. How? All right?
Now when people ask this kind of question, they neglect something, which is that physicists are really clever, unlike biologists.
(Laughter) This is a joke. I’m a biologist, OK?
So it’s a joke against myself.
Bob Jacklovich and John Lamb at Ford Motor Company, in the days when Ford Motor was spending vast amounts of money on fundamental research, discovered a way to build a spectroscope that was intrinsically nano-scale.
In other words, no mirrors, no lasers, no prisms, no nonsense, just a tiny device, and he built this device. And this device uses electron tunneling.
Now, I could do the dance of electron tunneling, but I’ve done a video instead, which is much more interesting. Here’s how it works.
Electrons are fuzzy creatures, and they can jump across gaps, but only at equal energy. If the energy differs, they can’t jump.
Unlike us, they won’t fall off the cliff.
OK. Now. If something absorbs the energy, the electron can travel.
So here you have a system, you have something -- and there’s plenty of that stuff in biology -- some substance giving an electron, and the electron tries to jump, and only when a molecule comes along that has the right vibration does the reaction happen, OK?
This is the basis for the device that these two guys at Ford built.
And every single part of this mechanism is actually plausible in biology.
In other words, I’ve taken off-the-shelf components, and I’ve made a spectroscope.
What’s nice about this idea, if you have a philosophical bent of mind, is that then it tells you that the nose, the ear and the eye are all vibrational senses.
Of course, it doesn’t matter, because it could also be that they’re not.
But it has a certain -- (Laughter) -- it has a certain ring to it which is attractive to people who read too much 19th-century German literature.
And then a magnificent thing happened: I left academia and joined the real world of business, and a company was created around my ideas to make new molecules using my method, along the lines of, let’s put someone else’s money where your mouth is.
And one of the first things that happened was we started going around to fragrance companies asking for what they needed, because, of course, if you could calculate smell, you don’t need chemists.
You need a computer, a Mac will do it, if you know how to program the thing right, OK? So you can try a thousand molecules, you can try ten thousand molecules in a weekend, and then you only tell the chemists to make the right one.
And so that’s a direct path to making new odorants.
And one of the first things that happened was we went to see some perfumers in France -- and here’s where I do my Charles Fleischer impression -- and one of them says, "You cannot make a coumarin."
He says to me, "I bet you cannot make a coumarin."
Now, coumarin is a very common thing, a material, in fragrance which is derived from a bean that comes from South America.
And it is the classic synthetic aroma chemical, OK?
It’s the molecule that has made men’s fragrances smell the way they do since 1881, to be exact.
And the problem is it’s a carcinogen.
So nobody likes particularly to -- you know, aftershave with carcinogens.
(Laughter) There are some reckless people, but it’s not worth it, OK?
So they asked us to make a new coumarin. And so we started doing calculations.
And the first thing you do is you calculate the vibrational spectrum of coumarin, and you smooth it out, so that you have a nice picture of what the sort of chord, so to speak, of coumarin is.
And then you start cranking the computer to find other molecules, related or unrelated, that have the same vibrations.
And we actually, in this case, I’m sorry to say, it happened -- it was serendipitous.
Because I got a phone call from our chief chemist and he said, look, I’ve just found this such a beautiful reaction, that even if this compound doesn’t smell of coumarin, I want to do it, it’s just such a nifty, one step -- I mean, chemists have weird minds -- one step, 90 percent yield, you know, and you get this lovely crystalline compound. Let us try it.
And I said, first of all, let me do the calculation on that compound, bottom right, which is related to coumarin, but has an extra pentagon inserted into the molecule.
Calculate the vibrations, the purple spectrum is that new fellow, the white one is the old one.
And the prediction is it should smell of coumarin.
They made it ... and it smelled exactly like coumarin.
And this is our new baby, called tonkene.
You see, when you’re a scientist, you’re always selling ideas.
And people are very resistant to ideas, and rightly so.
Why should new ideas be accepted?
But when you put a little 10-gram vial on the table in front of perfumers and it smells like coumarin, and it isn’t coumarin, and you’ve found it in three weeks, this focuses everybody’s mind wonderfully.
(Laughter) (Applause) And people often ask me, is your theory accepted?
And I said, well, by whom? I mean most, you know -- there’s three attitudes: You’re right, and I don’t know why, which is the most rational one at this point.
You’re right, and I don’t care how you do it, in a sense; you bring me the molecules, you know.
And: You’re completely wrong, and I’m sure you’re completely wrong.
OK? Now, we’re dealing with people who only want results, and this is the commercial world.
And they tell us that even if we do it by astrology, they’re happy.
But we’re not actually doing it by astrology.
But for the last three years, I’ve had what I consider to be the best job in the entire universe, which is to put my hobby -- which is, you know, fragrance and all the magnificent things -- plus a little bit of biophysics, a small amount of self-taught chemistry at the service of something that actually works.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, on the day after the Brexit vote, in June 2016, when Britain woke up to the shock of discovering that we're leaving the European Union, my editor at the "Observer" newspaper in the UK asked me to go back to South Wales, where I grew up, and to write a report.
And so I went to a town called Ebbw Vale.
Here it is.
It's in the South Wales Valleys, which is this quite special place.
So it's had this very, sort of rich, working-class culture, and it's famous for its Welsh male voice choirs and rugby and its coal.
But when I was a teenager, the coal mines and the steelworks closed, and the entire area was devastated.
And I went there because it had one of the highest "Leave" votes in the country.
Sixty-two percent of the people here voted to leave the European Union.
And I wanted to know why.
When I got there, I was just a bit taken aback, because the last time I went to Ebbw Vale, it looked like this.
And now, it looks like this.
This is a new 33-million-pound college of further education that was mostly funded by the European Union.
And this is the new sports center that's at the middle of 350-million-pound regeneration project that's being funded by the European Union.
And this is the new 77-million-pound road-improvement scheme, and there's a new train line, a new railway station, and they're all being funded by the European Union.
And it's not as if any of this is a secret, because there's big signs like this everywhere.
[EU Funds: Investing in Wales] (Laughter) I had this sort of weird sense of unreality, walking around the town.
And it came to a head when I met this young man in front of the sports center.
And he told me that he had voted to leave, because the European Union had done nothing for him.
He was fed up with it.
And all around town, people told me the same thing.
They said that they wanted to take back control, which was one of the slogans in the campaign.
And they told me that they were most fed up with the immigrants and with the refugees.
They'd had enough.
Which was odd.
Because walking around, I didn't meet any immigrants or refugees.
I met one Polish woman who told me she was practically the only foreigner in town.
And when I checked the figures, I discovered that Ebbw Vale actually has one of the lowest rates of immigration in the country.
And so I was just a bit baffled, because I couldn't really understand where people were getting their information from.
Because it was the right-wing tabloid newspapers which printed all these stories about immigration.
But then after the article came out, this woman got in touch with me.
And she was from Ebbw Vale, and she told me about all this stuff that she'd seen on Facebook.
I was like, "What stuff?"
And she said it was all this quite scary stuff about immigration, and especially about Turkey.
So I tried to find it.
But there was nothing there.
Because there's no archive of ads that people had seen or what had been pushed into their news feeds.
No trace of anything, gone completely dark.
And this referendum that will have this profound effect forever on Britain -- it's already had a profound effect: the Japanese car manufacturers that came to Wales and the north east to replace the mining jobs -- they are already going because of Brexit.
And this entire referendum took place in darkness, because it took place on Facebook.
And what happens on Facebook stays on Facebook, because only you see your news feed, and then it vanishes, so it's impossible to research anything.
So we have no idea who saw what ads or what impact they had, or what data was used to target these people.
Or even who placed the ads, or how much money was spent, or even what nationality they were.
But Facebook does.
Facebook has these answers, and it's refused to give them to us.
Our parliament has asked Mark Zuckerberg multiple times to come to Britain and to give us these answers.
And every single time, he's refused.
And you have to wonder why.
Because what I and other journalists have uncovered is that multiple crimes took place during the referendum.
And they took place on Facebook.
It's because in Britain, we limit the amount of money that you can spend in an election.
And it's because in the 19th century, people would walk around with literally wheelbarrows of cash and just buy voters.
So we passed these strict laws to stop that from happening.
But those laws don't work anymore.
This referendum took place almost entirely online.
And you can spend any amount of money on Facebook or on Google or on YouTube ads and nobody will know, because they're black boxes.
And this is what happened.
We've actually got no idea of the full extent of it.
But we do know that in the last days before the Brexit vote, the official "Vote Leave" campaign laundered nearly three quarters of a million pounds through another campaign entity that our electoral commission has ruled was illegal, and it's referred it to the police.
And with this illegal cash, "Vote Leave" unleashed a fire hose of disinformation.
Ads like this.
[Turkey's 76m people joining the EU] This is a lie, it's a total lie.
Turkey is not joining the European Union.
There's not even any discussions of it joining the European Union.
And most of us, we never saw these ads, because we were not the target of them.
"Vote Leave" identified a tiny sliver of people who it identified as persuadable, and they saw them.
And the only reason we are seeing these now is because parliament forced Facebook to hand them over.
And maybe you think, "Well, it was just a bit of overspending.
It's a few lies."
But this was the biggest electoral fraud in Britain for 100 years.
In a once-in-a-generation vote that hinged upon just one percent of the electorate.
And it was just one of the crimes that took place in the referendum.
There was another group, which was headed by this man, Nigel Farage, the one to the right of Trump.
And his group, "Leave.EU" -- it also broke the law.
It broke British electoral laws and British data laws, and it's also being referred to the police.
And this man, Arron Banks, he funded this campaign.
And in a completely separate case, he's being referred to our National Crime Agency, our equivalent of the FBI, because our electoral commission has concluded they don't know where his money came from.
Or if it was even British.
And I'm not even going to go into the lies that Arron Banks has told about his covert relationship with the Russian government.
Or the weird timing of Nigel Farage's meetings with Julian Assange and with Trump's buddy, Roger Stone, now indicted, immediately before two massive WikiLeaks dumps, both of which happened to benefit Donald Trump.
But I will tell you that Brexit and Trump were intimately entwined.
This man told me that Brexit was the petri dish for Trump.
And we know it's the same people, the same companies, the same data, the same techniques, the same use of hate and fear.
This is what they were posting on Facebook.
And I don't even want to call this a lie, [Immigration without assimilation equals invasion] because it feels more like a hate crime to me.
I don't have to tell you that hate and fear are being sown online all across the world.
Not just in Britain and America, but in France and in Hungary and Brazil and Myanmar and New Zealand.
And we know there is this dark undertow which is connecting us all globally.
And it is flowing via the technology platforms.
But we only see a tiny amount of what's going on on the surface.
And I only found out anything about this dark underbelly because I started looking into Trump's relationship to Farage, into a company called Cambridge Analytica.
And I spent months tracking down an ex-employee, Christopher Wiley.
And he told me how this company, that worked for both Trump and Brexit, had profiled people politically in order to understand their individual fears, to better target them with Facebook ads.
And it did this by illicitly harvesting the profiles of 87 million people from Facebook.
It took an entire year's work to get Christopher on the record.
And I had to turn myself from a feature writer into an investigative reporter to do it.
And he was extraordinarily brave, because the company is owned by Robert Mercer, the billionaire who bankrolled Trump, and he threatened to sue us multiple times, to stop us from publishing.
But we finally got there, and we were one day ahead of publication.
We got another legal threat.
Not from Cambridge Analytica this time, but from Facebook.
It told us that if we publish, they would sue us.
We did it anyway.
(Applause) Facebook, you were on the wrong side of history in that.
And you were on the wrong side of history in this -- in refusing to give us the answers that we need.
And that is why I am here.
To address you directly, the gods of Silicon Valley.
(Applause) Mark Zuckerberg ...
(Applause) and Sheryl Sandberg and Larry Page and Sergey Brin and Jack Dorsey, and your employees and your investors, too.
Because 100 years ago, the biggest danger in the South Wales coal mines was gas.
Silent and deadly and invisible.
It's why they sent the canaries down first to check the air.
And in this massive, global, online experiment that we are all living through, we in Britain are the canary.
We are what happens to a western democracy when a hundred years of electoral laws are disrupted by technology.
Our democracy is broken, our laws don't work anymore, and it's not me saying this, it's our parliament published a report saying this.
This technology that you have invented has been amazing.
But now, it's a crime scene.
And you have the evidence.
And it is not enough to say that you will do better in the future.
Because to have any hope of stopping this from happening again, we have to know the truth.
And maybe you think, "Well, it was just a few ads.
And people are smarter than that, right?"
To which I would say, "Good luck with that."
Because what the Brexit vote demonstrates is that liberal democracy is broken.
And you broke it.
This is not democracy -- spreading lies in darkness, paid for with illegal cash, from God knows where.
It's subversion, and you are accessories to it.
(Applause) Our parliament has been the first in the world to try to hold you to account, and it's failed.
You are literally beyond the reach of British law -- not just British laws, this is nine parliaments, nine countries are represented here, who Mark Zuckerberg refused to come and give evidence to.
And what you don't seem to understand is that this is bigger than you.
And it's bigger than any of us.
And it is not about left or right or "Leave" or "Remain" or Trump or not.
It's about whether it's actually possible to have a free and fair election ever again.
Because as it stands, I don't think it is.
And so my question to you is, is this what you want?
Is this how you want history to remember you: as the handmaidens to authoritarianism that is on the rise all across the world?
Because you set out to connect people.
And you are refusing to acknowledge that the same technology is now driving us apart.
And my question to everybody else is, is this what we want: to let them get away with it, and to sit back and play with our phones, as this darkness falls?
The history of the South Wales Valleys is of a fight for rights.
And this is not a drill -- it's a point of inflection.
Democracy is not guaranteed, and it is not inevitable, and we have to fight and we have to win and we cannot let these tech companies have this unchecked power.
It's up to us -- you, me and all of us.
We are the ones who have to take back control.
(Applause) (Cheers) (Applause)
So, about three years ago I was in London, and somebody called Howard Burton came to me and said, I represent a group of people, and we want to start an institute in theoretical physics.
We have about 120 million dollars, and we want to do it well.
We want to be in the forefront fields, and we want to do it differently.
We want to get out of this thing where the young people have all the ideas, and the old people have all the power and decide what science gets done.
It took me about 25 seconds to decide that that was a good idea.
Three years later, we have the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Ontario. It’s the most exciting job I’ve ever had.
And it’s the first time I’ve had a job where I’m afraid to go away because of everything that’s going to happen in this week when I’m here.
(Laughter) But in any case, what I’m going to do in my little bit of time is take you on a quick tour of some of the things that we talk about and we think about.
So, we think a lot about what really makes science work?
The first thing that anybody who knows science, and has been around science, is that the stuff you learn in school as a scientific method is wrong. There is no method.
On the other hand, somehow we manage to reason together as a community, from incomplete evidence to conclusions that we all agree about.
And this is, by the way, something that a democratic society also has to do.
So how does it work?
Well, my belief is that it works because scientists are a community bound together by an ethics.
And here are some of the ethical principles.
I’m not going to read them all to you because I’m not in teacher mode.
I’m in entertain, amaze mode.
(Laughter) But one of the principles is that everybody who is part of the community gets to fight and argue as hard as they can for what they believe.
But we’re all disciplined by the understanding that the only people who are going to decide, you know, whether I’m right or somebody else is right, are the people in our community in the next generation, in 30 and 50 years.
So it’s this combination of respect for the tradition and community we’re in, and rebellion that the community requires to get anywhere, that makes science work.
And being in this process of being in a community that reasons from shared evidence to conclusions, I believe, teaches us about democracy.
Not only is there a relationship between the ethics of science and the ethics of being a citizen in democracy, but there has been, historically, a relationship between how people think about space and time, and what the cosmos is, and how people think about the society that they live in.
And I want to talk about three stages in that evolution.
The first science of cosmology that was anything like science was Aristotelian science, and that was hierarchical.
The earth is in the center, then there are these crystal spheres, the sun, the moon, the planets and finally the celestial sphere, where the stars are. And everything in this universe has a place.
And Aristotle’s law of motion was that everything goes to its natural place, which was of course, the rule of the society that Aristotle lived in, and more importantly, the medieval society that, through Christianity, embraced Aristotle and blessed it.
And the idea is that everything is defined.
Where something is, is defined with respect to this last sphere, the celestial sphere, outside of which is this eternal, perfect realm, where lives God, who is the ultimate judge of everything.
So that is both Aristotelian cosmology, and in a certain sense, medieval society.
Now, in the 17th century there was a revolution in thinking about space and time and motion and so forth of Newton.
And at the same time there was a revolution in social thought of John Locke and his collaborators.
And they were very closely associated.
In fact, Newton and Locke were friends.
Their way of thinking about space and time and motion on the one hand, and a society on the other hand, were closely related.
And let me show you.
In a Newtonian universe, there’s no center -- thank you.
There are particles and they move around with respect to a fixed, absolute framework of space and time.
It’s meaningful to say absolutely where something is in space, because that’s defined, not with respect to say, where other things are, but with respect to this absolute notion of space, which for Newton was God.
Now, similarly, in Locke’s society there are individuals who have certain rights, properties in a formal sense, and those are defined with respect to some absolute, abstract notions of rights and justice, and so forth, which are independent of what else has happened in the society.
Of who else there is, of the history and so forth.
There is also an omniscient observer who knows everything, who is God, who is in a certain sense outside the universe, because he has no role in anything that happens, but is in a certain sense everywhere, because space is just the way that God knows where everything is, according to Newton, OK?
So this is the foundations of what’s called, traditionally, liberal political theory and Newtonian physics.
Now, in the 20th century we had a revolution that was initiated at the beginning of the 20th century, and which is still going on.
It was begun with the invention of relativity theory and quantum theory.
And merging them together to make the final quantum theory of space and time and gravity, is the culmination of that, something that’s going on right now.
And in this universe there’s nothing fixed and absolute. Zilch, OK.
This universe is described by being a network of relationships.
Space is just one aspect, so there’s no meaning to say absolutely where something is.
There’s only where it is relative to everything else that is.
And this network of relations is ever-evolving.
So we call it a relational universe.
All properties of things are about these kinds of relationships.
And also, if you’re embedded in such a network of relationships, your view of the world has to do with what information comes to you through the network of relations.
And there’s no place for an omniscient observer or an outside intelligence knowing everything and making everything.
So this is general relativity, this is quantum theory.
This is also, if you talk to legal scholars, the foundations of new ideas in legal thought.
They’re thinking about the same things.
And not only that, they make the analogy to relativity theory and cosmology often.
So there’s an interesting discussion going on there.
This last view of cosmology is called the relational view.
So the main slogan here is that there’s nothing outside the universe, which means that there’s no place to put an explanation for something outside.
So in such a relational universe, if you come upon something that’s ordered and structured, like this device here, or that device there, or something beautiful, like all the living things, all of you guys in the room -- "guys" in physics, by the way, is a generic term: men and women.
(Laughter) Then you want to know, you’re a person, you want to know how is it made.
And in a relational universe the only possible explanation was, somehow it made itself.
There must be mechanisms of self-organization inside the universe that make things.
Because there’s no place to put a maker outside, as there was in the Aristotelian and the Newtonian universe.
So in a relational universe we must have processes of self-organization.
Now, Darwin taught us that there are processes of self-organization that suffice to explain all of us and everything we see.
So it works. But not only that, if you think about how natural selection works, then it turns out that natural selection would only make sense in such a relational universe.
That is, natural selection works on properties, like fitness, which are about relationships of some species to some other species.
Darwin wouldn’t make sense in an Aristotelian universe, and wouldn’t really make sense in a Newtonian universe.
So a theory of biology based on natural selection requires a relational notion of what are the properties of biological systems.
And if you push that all the way down, really, it makes the best sense in a relational universe where all properties are relational.
Now, not only that, but Einstein taught us that gravity is the result of the world being relational.
If it wasn’t for gravity, there wouldn’t be life, because gravity causes stars to form and live for a very long time, keeping pieces of the world, like the surface of the Earth, out of thermal equilibrium for billions of years so life can evolve.
In the 20th century, we saw the independent development of two big themes in science.
In the biological sciences, they explored the implications of the notion that order and complexity and structure arise in a self-organized way.
That was the triumph of Neo-Darwinism and so forth.
And slowly, that idea is leaking out to the cognitive sciences, the human sciences, economics, et cetera.
At the same time, we physicists have been busy trying to make sense of and build on and integrate the discoveries of quantum theory and relativity.
And what we’ve been working out is the implications, really, of the idea that the universe is made up of relations.
21st-century science is going to be driven by the integration of these two ideas: the triumph of relational ways of thinking about the world, on the one hand, and self-organization or Darwinian ways of thinking about the world, on the other hand.
And also, is that in the 21st century our thinking about space and time and cosmology, and our thinking about society are both going to continue to evolve.
And what they’re evolving towards is the union of these two big ideas, Darwinism and relationalism.
Now, if you think about democracy from this perspective, a new pluralistic notion of democracy would be one that recognizes that there are many different interests, many different agendas, many different individuals, many different points of view.
Each one is incomplete, because you’re embedded in a network of relationships.
Any actor in a democracy is embedded in a network of relationships.
And you understand some things better than other things, and because of that there’s a continual jostling and give and take, which is politics.
And politics is, in the ideal sense, the way in which we continually address our network of relations in order to achieve a better life and a better society.
And I also think that science will never go away and -- I’m finishing on this line.
(Laughter) In fact, I’m finished. Science will never go away.
Chris Anderson: What worries you right now?
You've been very open about lots of issues on Twitter.
What would be your top worry about where things are right now?
Jack Dorsey: Right now, the health of the conversation.
So, our purpose is to serve the public conversation, and we have seen a number of attacks on it.
We've seen abuse, we've seen harassment, we've seen manipulation, automation, human coordination, misinformation.
So these are all dynamics that we were not expecting 13 years ago when we were starting the company.
But we do now see them at scale, and what worries me most is just our ability to address it in a systemic way that is scalable, that has a rigorous understanding of how we're taking action, a transparent understanding of how we're taking action and a rigorous appeals process for when we're wrong, because we will be wrong.
Whitney Pennington Rodgers: I'm really glad to hear that that's something that concerns you, because I think there's been a lot written about people who feel they've been abused and harassed on Twitter, and I think no one more so than women and women of color and black women.
And there's been data that's come out -- Amnesty International put out a report a few months ago where they showed that a subset of active black female Twitter users were receiving, on average, one in 10 of their tweets were some form of harassment.
And so when you think about health for the community on Twitter, I'm interested to hear, "health for everyone," but specifically: How are you looking to make Twitter a safe space for that subset, for women, for women of color and black women?
JD: Yeah.
So it's a pretty terrible situation when you're coming to a service that, ideally, you want to learn something about the world, and you spend the majority of your time reporting abuse, receiving abuse, receiving harassment.
So what we're looking most deeply at is just the incentives that the platform naturally provides and the service provides.
Right now, the dynamic of the system makes it super-easy to harass and to abuse others through the service, and unfortunately, the majority of our system in the past worked entirely based on people reporting harassment and abuse.
So about midway last year, we decided that we were going to apply a lot more machine learning, a lot more deep learning to the problem, and try to be a lot more proactive around where abuse is happening, so that we can take the burden off the victim completely.
And we've made some progress recently.
About 38 percent of abusive tweets are now proactively identified by machine learning algorithms so that people don't actually have to report them.
But those that are identified are still reviewed by humans, so we do not take down content or accounts without a human actually reviewing it.
But that was from zero percent just a year ago.
So that meant, at that zero percent, every single person who received abuse had to actually report it, which was a lot of work for them, a lot of work for us and just ultimately unfair.
The other thing that we're doing is making sure that we, as a company, have representation of all the communities that we're trying to serve.
We can't build a business that is successful unless we have a diversity of perspective inside of our walls that actually feel these issues every single day.
And that's not just with the team that's doing the work, it's also within our leadership as well.
So we need to continue to build empathy for what people are experiencing and give them better tools to act on it and also give our customers a much better and easier approach to handle some of the things that they're seeing.
So a lot of what we're doing is around technology, but we're also looking at the incentives on the service: What does Twitter incentivize you to do when you first open it up?
And in the past, it's incented a lot of outrage, it's incented a lot of mob behavior, it's incented a lot of group harassment.
And we have to look a lot deeper at some of the fundamentals of what the service is doing to make the bigger shifts.
We can make a bunch of small shifts around technology, as I just described, but ultimately, we have to look deeply at the dynamics in the network itself, and that's what we're doing.
CA: But what's your sense -- what is the kind of thing that you might be able to change that would actually fundamentally shift behavior?
JD: Well, one of the things -- we started the service with this concept of following an account, as an example, and I don't believe that's why people actually come to Twitter.
I believe Twitter is best as an interest-based network.
People come with a particular interest.
They have to do a ton of work to find and follow the related accounts around those interests.
What we could do instead is allow you to follow an interest, follow a hashtag, follow a trend, follow a community, which gives us the opportunity to show all of the accounts, all the topics, all the moments, all the hashtags that are associated with that particular topic and interest, which really opens up the perspective that you see.
But that is a huge fundamental shift to bias the entire network away from just an account bias towards a topics and interest bias.
CA: Because isn't it the case that one reason why you have so much content on there is a result of putting millions of people around the world in this kind of gladiatorial contest with each other for followers, for attention?
Like, from the point of view of people who just read Twitter, that's not an issue, but for the people who actually create it, everyone's out there saying, "You know, I wish I had a few more 'likes,' followers, retweets."
And so they're constantly experimenting, trying to find the path to do that.
And what we've all discovered is that the number one path to do that is to be some form of provocative, obnoxious, eloquently obnoxious, like, eloquent insults are a dream on Twitter, where you rapidly pile up -- and it becomes this self-fueling process of driving outrage.
How do you defuse that?
JD: Yeah, I mean, I think you're spot on, but that goes back to the incentives.
Like, one of the choices we made in the early days was we had this number that showed how many people follow you.
We decided that number should be big and bold, and anything that's on the page that's big and bold has importance, and those are the things that you want to drive.
Was that the right decision at the time?
Probably not.
If I had to start the service again, I would not emphasize the follower count as much.
I would not emphasize the "like" count as much.
I don't think I would even create "like" in the first place, because it doesn't actually push what we believe now to be the most important thing, which is healthy contribution back to the network and conversation to the network, participation within conversation, learning something from the conversation.
Those are not things that we thought of 13 years ago, and we believe are extremely important right now.
So we have to look at how we display the follower count, how we display retweet count, how we display "likes," and just ask the deep question: Is this really the number that we want people to drive up?
Is this the thing that, when you open Twitter, you see, "That's the thing I need to increase?"
And I don't believe that's the case right now.
(Applause) WPR: I think we should look at some of the tweets that are coming in from the audience as well.
CA: Let's see what you guys are asking.
I mean, this is -- generally, one of the amazing things about Twitter is how you can use it for crowd wisdom, you know, that more knowledge, more questions, more points of view than you can imagine, and sometimes, many of them are really healthy.
WPR: I think one I saw that passed already quickly down here, "What's Twitter's plan to combat foreign meddling in the 2020 US election?"
I think that's something that's an issue we're seeing on the internet in general, that we have a lot of malicious automated activity happening.
And on Twitter, for example, in fact, we have some work that's come from our friends at Zignal Labs, and maybe we can even see that to give us an example of what exactly I'm talking about, where you have these bots, if you will, or coordinated automated malicious account activity, that is being used to influence things like elections.
And in this example we have from Zignal which they've shared with us using the data that they have from Twitter, you actually see that in this case, white represents the humans -- human accounts, each dot is an account.
The pinker it is, the more automated the activity is.
And you can see how you have a few humans interacting with bots.
In this case, it's related to the election in Israel and spreading misinformation about Benny Gantz, and as we know, in the end, that was an election that Netanyahu won by a slim margin, and that may have been in some case influenced by this.
And when you think about that happening on Twitter, what are the things that you're doing, specifically, to ensure you don't have misinformation like this spreading in this way, influencing people in ways that could affect democracy?
JD: Just to back up a bit, we asked ourselves a question: Can we actually measure the health of a conversation, and what does that mean?
And in the same way that you have indicators and we have indicators as humans in terms of are we healthy or not, such as temperature, the flushness of your face, we believe that we could find the indicators of conversational health.
And we worked with a lab called Cortico at MIT to propose four starter indicators that we believe we could ultimately measure on the system.
And the first one is what we're calling shared attention.
It's a measure of how much of the conversation is attentive on the same topic versus disparate.
The second one is called shared reality, and this is what percentage of the conversation shares the same facts -- not whether those facts are truthful or not, but are we sharing the same facts as we converse?
The third is receptivity: How much of the conversation is receptive or civil or the inverse, toxic?
And then the fourth is variety of perspective.
So, are we seeing filter bubbles or echo chambers, or are we actually getting a variety of opinions within the conversation?
And implicit in all four of these is the understanding that, as they increase, the conversation gets healthier and healthier.
So our first step is to see if we can measure these online, which we believe we can.
We have the most momentum around receptivity.
We have a toxicity score, a toxicity model, on our system that can actually measure whether you are likely to walk away from a conversation that you're having on Twitter because you feel it's toxic, with some pretty high degree.
We're working to measure the rest, and the next step is, as we build up solutions, to watch how these measurements trend over time and continue to experiment.
And our goal is to make sure that these are balanced, because if you increase one, you might decrease another.
If you increase variety of perspective, you might actually decrease shared reality.
CA: Just picking up on some of the questions flooding in here.
JD: Constant questioning.
CA: A lot of people are puzzled why, like, how hard is it to get rid of Nazis from Twitter?
JD: (Laughs) So we have policies around violent extremist groups, and the majority of our work and our terms of service works on conduct, not content.
So we're actually looking for conduct.
Conduct being using the service to repeatedly or episodically harass someone, using hateful imagery that might be associated with the KKK or the American Nazi Party.
Those are all things that we act on immediately.
We're in a situation right now where that term is used fairly loosely, and we just cannot take any one mention of that word accusing someone else as a factual indication that they should be removed from the platform.
So a lot of our models are based around, number one: Is this account associated with a violent extremist group?
And if so, we can take action.
And we have done so on the KKK and the American Nazi Party and others.
And number two: Are they using imagery or conduct that would associate them as such as well?
CA: How many people do you have working on content moderation to look at this?
JD: It varies.
We want to be flexible on this, because we want to make sure that we're, number one, building algorithms instead of just hiring massive amounts of people, because we need to make sure that this is scalable, and there are no amount of people that can actually scale this.
So this is why we've done so much work around proactive detection of abuse that humans can then review.
We want to have a situation where algorithms are constantly scouring every single tweet and bringing the most interesting ones to the top so that humans can bring their judgment to whether we should take action or not, based on our terms of service.
WPR: But there's not an amount of people that are scalable, but how many people do you currently have monitoring these accounts, and how do you figure out what's enough?
JD: They're completely flexible.
Sometimes we associate folks with spam.
Sometimes we associate folks with abuse and harassment.
We're going to make sure that we have flexibility in our people so that we can direct them at what is most needed.
Sometimes, the elections.
We've had a string of elections in Mexico, one coming up in India, obviously, the election last year, the midterm election, so we just want to be flexible with our resources.
So when people -- just as an example, if you go to our current terms of service and you bring the page up, and you're wondering about abuse and harassment that you just received and whether it was against our terms of service to report it, the first thing you see when you open that page is around intellectual property protection.
You scroll down and you get to abuse, harassment and everything else that you might be experiencing.
So I don't know how that happened over the company's history, but we put that above the thing that people want the most information on and to actually act on.
And just our ordering shows the world what we believed was important.
So we're changing all that.
We're ordering it the right way, but we're also simplifying the rules so that they're human-readable so that people can actually understand themselves when something is against our terms and when something is not.
And then we're making -- again, our big focus is on removing the burden of work from the victims.
So that means push more towards technology, rather than humans doing the work -- that means the humans receiving the abuse and also the humans having to review that work.
So we want to make sure that we're not just encouraging more work around something that's super, super negative, and we want to have a good balance between the technology and where humans can actually be creative, which is the judgment of the rules, and not just all the mechanical stuff of finding and reporting them.
So that's how we think about it.
CA: I'm curious to dig in more about what you said.
I mean, I love that you said you are looking for ways to re-tweak the fundamental design of the system to discourage some of the reactive behavior, and perhaps -- to use Tristan Harris-type language -- engage people's more reflective thinking.
How far advanced is that?
What would alternatives to that "like" button be?
JD: Well, first and foremost, my personal goal with the service is that I believe fundamentally that public conversation is critical.
There are existential problems facing the world that are facing the entire world, not any one particular nation-state, that global public conversation benefits.
And that is one of the unique dynamics of Twitter, that it is completely open, it is completely public, it is completely fluid, and anyone can see any other conversation and participate in it.
So there are conversations like climate change.
There are conversations like the displacement in the work through artificial intelligence.
There are conversations like economic disparity.
No matter what any one nation-state does, they will not be able to solve the problem alone.
It takes coordination around the world, and that's where I think Twitter can play a part.
The second thing is that Twitter, right now, when you go to it, you don't necessarily walk away feeling like you learned something.
Some people do.
Some people have a very, very rich network, a very rich community that they learn from every single day.
But it takes a lot of work and a lot of time to build up to that.
So we want to get people to those topics and those interests much, much faster and make sure that they're finding something that, no matter how much time they spend on Twitter -- and I don't want to maximize the time on Twitter, I want to maximize what they actually take away from it and what they learn from it, and -- CA: Well, do you, though?
Because that's the core question that a lot of people want to know.
Surely, Jack, you're constrained, to a huge extent, by the fact that you're a public company, you've got investors pressing on you, the number one way you make your money is from advertising -- that depends on user engagement.
Are you willing to sacrifice user time, if need be, to go for a more reflective conversation?
JD: Yeah; more relevance means less time on the service, and that's perfectly fine, because we want to make sure that, like, you're coming to Twitter, and you see something immediately that you learn from and that you push.
We can still serve an ad against that.
That doesn't mean you need to spend any more time to see more.
The second thing we're looking at -- CA: But just -- on that goal, daily active usage, if you're measuring that, that doesn't necessarily mean things that people value every day.
It may well mean things that people are drawn to like a moth to the flame, every day.
We are addicted, because we see something that pisses us off, so we go in and add fuel to the fire, and the daily active usage goes up, and there's more ad revenue there, but we all get angrier with each other.
How do you define ...
"Daily active usage" seems like a really dangerous term to be optimizing.
(Applause) JD: Taken alone, it is, but you didn't let me finish the other metric, which is, we're watching for conversations and conversation chains.
So we want to incentivize healthy contribution back to the network, and what we believe that is is actually participating in conversation that is healthy, as defined by those four indicators I articulated earlier.
So you can't just optimize around one metric.
You have to balance and look constantly at what is actually going to create a healthy contribution to the network and a healthy experience for people.
Ultimately, we want to get to a metric where people can tell us, "Hey, I learned something from Twitter, and I'm walking away with something valuable."
That is our goal ultimately over time, but that's going to take some time.
CA: You come over to many, I think to me, as this enigma.
This is possibly unfair, but I woke up the other night with this picture of how I found I was thinking about you and the situation, that we're on this great voyage with you on this ship called the "Twittanic" -- (Laughter) and there are people on board in steerage who are expressing discomfort, and you, unlike many other captains, are saying, "Well, tell me, talk to me, listen to me, I want to hear."
And they talk to you, and they say, "We're worried about the iceberg ahead."
And you go, "You know, that is a powerful point, and our ship, frankly, hasn't been built properly for steering as well as it might."
And we say, "Please do something."
And you go to the bridge, and we're waiting, and we look, and then you're showing this extraordinary calm, but we're all standing outside, saying, "Jack, turn the fucking wheel!"
You know?
(Laughter) (Applause) I mean -- (Applause) It's democracy at stake.
It's our culture at stake. It's our world at stake.
And Twitter is amazing and shapes so much.
It's not as big as some of the other platforms, but the people of influence use it to set the agenda, and it's just hard to imagine a more important role in the world than to ...
I mean, you're doing a brilliant job of listening, Jack, and hearing people, but to actually dial up the urgency and move on this stuff -- will you do that?
JD: Yes, and we have been moving substantially.
I mean, there's been a few dynamics in Twitter's history.
One, when I came back to the company, we were in a pretty dire state in terms of our future, and not just from how people were using the platform, but from a corporate narrative as well.
So we had to fix a bunch of the foundation, turn the company around, go through two crazy layoffs, because we just got too big for what we were doing, and we focused all of our energy on this concept of serving the public conversation.
And that took some work.
And as we dived into that, we realized some of the issues with the fundamentals.
We could do a bunch of superficial things to address what you're talking about, but we need the changes to last, and that means going really, really deep and paying attention to what we started 13 years ago and really questioning how the system works and how the framework works and what is needed for the world today, given how quickly everything is moving and how people are using it.
So we are working as quickly as we can, but quickness will not get the job done.
It's focus, it's prioritization, it's understanding the fundamentals of the network and building a framework that scales and that is resilient to change, and being open about where we are and being transparent about where are so that we can continue to earn trust.
So I'm proud of all the frameworks that we've put in place.
I'm proud of our direction.
We obviously can move faster, but that required just stopping a bunch of stupid stuff we were doing in the past.
CA: All right.
Well, I suspect there are many people here who, if given the chance, would love to help you on this change-making agenda you're on, and I don't know if Whitney -- Jack, thank you for coming here and speaking so openly.
It took courage.
I really appreciate what you said, and good luck with your mission.
JD: Thank you so much. Thanks for having me.
(Applause) Thank you.
I spent the better part of a decade looking at American responses to mass atrocity and genocide.
And I'd like to start by sharing with you one moment that to me sums up what there is to know about American and democratic responses to mass atrocity.
And that moment came on April 21, 1994.
So 14 years ago, almost, in the middle of the Rwandan genocide, in which 800,000 people would be systematically exterminated by the Rwandan government and some extremist militia.
On April 21, in the New York Times, the paper reported that somewhere between 200,000 and 300,000 people had already been killed in the genocide.
It was in the paper -- not on the front page.
It was a lot like the Holocaust coverage, it was buried in the paper.
Rwanda itself was not seen as newsworthy, and amazingly, genocide itself was not seen as newsworthy.
But on April 21, a wonderfully honest moment occurred.
And that was that an American congresswoman named Patricia Schroeder from Colorado met with a group of journalists.
And one of the journalists said to her, what's up?
What's going on in the U.S. government?
Two to 300,000 people have just been exterminated in the last couple of weeks in Rwanda.
It's two weeks into the genocide at that time, but of course, at that time you don't know how long it's going to last.
And the journalist said, why is there so little response out of Washington?
Why no hearings, no denunciations, no people getting arrested in front of the Rwandan embassy or in front of the White House? What's the deal?
And she said -- she was so honest -- she said, "It's a great question.
All I can tell you is that in my congressional office in Colorado and my office in Washington, we're getting hundreds and hundreds of calls about the endangered ape and gorilla population in Rwanda, but nobody is calling about the people.
The phones just aren't ringing about the people."
And the reason I give you this moment is there's a deep truth in it.
And that truth is, or was, in the 20th century, that while we were beginning to develop endangered species movements, we didn't have an endangered people's movement.
We had Holocaust education in the schools.
Most of us were groomed not only on images of nuclear catastrophe, but also on images and knowledge of the Holocaust.
There's a museum, of course, on the Mall in Washington, right next to Lincoln and Jefferson.
I mean, we have owned Never Again culturally, appropriately, interestingly.
And yet the politicization of Never Again, the operationalization of Never Again, had never occurred in the 20th century.
And that's what that moment with Patricia Schroeder I think shows: that if we are to bring about an end to the world's worst atrocities, we have to make it such.
There has to be a role -- there has to be the creation of political noise and political costs in response to massive crimes against humanity, and so forth.
So that was the 20th century.
Now here -- and this will be a relief to you at this point in the afternoon -- there is good news, amazing news, in the 21st century, and that is that, almost out of nowhere, there has come into being an anti-genocide movement, an anti-genocide constituency, and one that looks destined, in fact, to be permanent.
It grew up in response to the atrocities in Darfur.
It is comprised of students. There are something like 300 anti-genocide chapters on college campuses around the country.
It's bigger than the anti-apartheid movement.
There are something like 500 high school chapters devoted to stopping the genocide in Darfur.
Evangelicals have joined it. Jewish groups have joined it.
"Hotel Rwanda" watchers have joined it. It is a cacophonous movement.
To call it a movement, as with all movements, perhaps, is a little misleading.
It's diverse. It's got a lot of different approaches.
It's got all the ups and the downs of movements.
But it has been amazingly successful in one regard, in that it has become, it has congealed into this endangered people's movement that was missing in the 20th century.
It sees itself, such as it is, the it, as something that will create the impression that there will be political cost, there will be a political price to be paid, for allowing genocide, for not having an heroic imagination, for not being an upstander but for being, in fact, a bystander.
Now because it's student-driven, there's some amazing things that the movement has done.
They have launched a divestment campaign that has now convinced, I think, 55 universities in 22 states to divest their holdings of stocks with regard to companies doing business in Sudan.
They have a 1-800-GENOCIDE number -- this is going to sound very kitsch, but for those of you who may not be, I mean, may be apolitical, but interested in doing something about genocide, you dial 1-800-GENOCIDE and you type in your zip code, and you don't even have to know who your congressperson is.
It will refer you directly to your congressperson, to your U.S. senator, to your governor where divestment legislation is pending.
They've lowered the transaction costs of stopping genocide.
I think the most innovative thing they've introduced recently are genocide grades.
And it takes students to introduce genocide grades.
So what you now have when a Congress is in session is members of Congress calling up these 19-year-olds or 24-year-olds and saying, I'm just told I have a D minus on genocide; what do I do to get a C? I just want to get a C. Help me.
And the students and the others who are part of this incredibly energized base are there to answer that, and there's always something to do.
Now, what this movement has done is it has extracted from the Bush administration from the United States, at a time of massive over-stretch -- military, financial, diplomatic -- a whole series of commitments to Darfur that no other country in the world is making.
For instance, the referral of the crimes in Darfur to the International Criminal Court, which the Bush administration doesn't like.
The expenditure of 3 billion dollars in refugee camps to try to keep, basically, the people who've been displaced from their homes by the Sudanese government, by the so-called Janjaweed, the militia, to keep those people alive until something more durable can be achieved.
And recently, or now not that recently, about six months ago, the authorization of a peacekeeping force of 26,000 that will go.
And that's all the Bush administration's leadership, and it's all because of this bottom-up pressure and the fact that the phones haven't stopped ringing from the beginning of this crisis.
The bad news, however, to this question of will evil prevail, is that evil lives on.
The people in those camps are surrounded on all sides by so-called Janjaweed, these men on horseback with spears and Kalashnikovs.
Women who go to get firewood in order to heat the humanitarian aid in order to feed their families -- humanitarian aid, the dirty secret of it is it has to be heated, really, to be edible -- are themselves subjected to rape, which is a tool of the genocide that is being used.
And the peacekeepers I've mentioned, the force has been authorized, but almost no country on Earth has stepped forward since the authorization to actually put its troops or its police in harm's way.
So we have achieved an awful lot relative to the 20th century, and yet far too little relative to the gravity of the crime that is unfolding as we sit here, as we speak.
Why the limits to the movement?
Why is what has been achieved, or what the movement has done, been necessary but not sufficient to the crime?
I think there are a couple -- there are many reasons -- but a couple just to focus on briefly.
The first is that the movement, such as it is, stops at America's borders. It is not a global movement.
It does not have too many compatriots abroad who themselves are asking their governments to do more to stop genocide.
And the Holocaust culture that we have in this country makes Americans, sort of, more prone to, I think, want to bring Never Again to life.
The guilt that the Clinton administration expressed, that Bill Clinton expressed over Rwanda, created a space in our society for a consensus that Rwanda was bad and wrong and we wish we had done more, and that is something that the movement has taken advantage of.
European governments, for the most part, haven't acknowledged responsibility, and there's nothing to kind of to push back and up against.
So this movement, if it's to be durable and global, will have to cross borders, and you will have to see other citizens in democracies, not simply resting on the assumption that their government would do something in the face of genocide, but actually making it such.
Governments will never gravitate towards crimes of this magnitude naturally or eagerly.
As we saw, they haven't even gravitated towards protecting our ports or reigning in loose nukes.
Why would we expect in a bureaucracy that it would orient itself towards distant suffering?
So one reason is it hasn't gone global.
The second is, of course, that at this time in particular in America's history, we have a credibility problem, a legitimacy problem in international institutions.
It is structurally really, really hard to do, as the Bush administration rightly does, which is to denounce genocide on a Monday and then describe water boarding on a Tuesday as a no-brainer and then turn up on Wednesday and look for troop commitments.
Now, other countries have their own reasons for not wanting to get involved.
Let me be clear.
They're in some ways using the Bush administration as an alibi.
But it is essential for us to be a leader in this sphere, of course to restore our standing and our leadership in the world.
The recovery's going to take some time.
We have to ask ourselves, what now? What do we do going forward as a country and as citizens in relationship to the world's worst places, the world's worst suffering, killers, and the kinds of killers that could come home to roost sometime in the future?
The place that I turned to answer that question was to a man that many of you may not have ever heard of, and that is a Brazilian named Sergio Vieira de Mello who, as Chris said, was blown up in Iraq in 2003.
He was the victim of the first-ever suicide bomb in Iraq.
It's hard to remember, but there was actually a time in the summer of 2003, even after the U.S. invasion, where, apart from looting, civilians were relatively safe in Iraq.
Now, who was Sergio? Sergio Vieira de Mello was his name.
In addition to being Brazilian, he was described to me before I met him in 1994 as someone who was a cross between James Bond on the one hand and Bobby Kennedy on the other.
And in the U.N., you don't get that many people who actually manage to merge those qualities.
He was James Bond-like in that he was ingenious.
He was drawn to the flames, he chased the flames, he was like a moth to the flames. Something of an adrenalin junkie.
He was successful with women.
He was Bobby Kennedy-like because in some ways one could never tell if he was a realist masquerading as an idealist or an idealist masquerading as a realist, as people always wondered about Bobby Kennedy and John Kennedy in that way.
What he was was a decathlete of nation-building, of problem-solving, of troubleshooting in the world's worst places and in the world's most broken places.
In failing states, genocidal states, under-governed states, precisely the kinds of places that threats to this country exist on the horizon, and precisely the kinds of places where most of the world's suffering tends to get concentrated.
These are the places he was drawn to.
He moved with the headlines.
He was in the U.N. for 34 years. He joined at the age of 21.
Started off when the causes in the wars du jour in the '70s were wars of independence and decolonization.
He was there in Bangladesh dealing with the outflow of millions of refugees -- the largest refugee flow in history up to that point.
He was in Sudan when the civil war broke out there.
He was in Cyprus right after the Turkish invasion.
He was in Mozambique for the War of Independence.
He was in Lebanon. Amazingly, he was in Lebanon -- the U.N. base was used -- Palestinians staged attacks out from behind the U.N. base.
Israel then invaded and overran the U.N. base.
Sergio was in Beirut when the U.S. Embassy was hit by the first-ever suicide attack against the United States.
People date the beginning of this new era to 9/11, but surely 1983, with the attack on the US Embassy and the Marine barracks -- which Sergio witnessed -- those are, in fact, in some ways, the dawning of the era that we find ourselves in today.
From Lebanon he went to Bosnia in the '90s.
The issues were, of course, ethnic sectarian violence.
He was the first person to negotiate with the Khmer Rouge.
Talk about evil prevailing. I mean, here he was in the room with the embodiment of evil in Cambodia.
He negotiates with the Serbs.
He actually crosses so far into this realm of talking to evil and trying to convince evil that it doesn't need to prevail that he earns the nickname -- not Sergio but Serbio while he's living in the Balkans and conducting these kinds of negotiations.
He then goes to Rwanda and to Congo in the aftermath of the genocide, and he's the guy who has to decide -- huh, OK, the genocide is over; 800,000 people have been killed; the people responsible are fleeing into neighboring countries -- into Congo, into Tanzania.
I'm Sergio, I'm a humanitarian, and I want to feed those -- well, I don't want to feed the killers but I want to feed the two million people who are with them, so we're going to go, we're going to set up camps, and we're going to supply humanitarian aid.
But, uh-oh, the killers are within the camps.
Well, I'd like to separate the sheep from the wolves.
Let me go door-to-door to the international community and see if anybody will give me police or troops to do the separation.
And their response, of course, was no more than we wanted to stop the genocide and put our troops in harm's way to do that, nor do we now want to get in the way and pluck genocidaires from camps.
So then you have to make the decision.
Do you turn off the international spigot of life support and risk two million civilian lives?
Or do you continue feeding the civilians, knowing that the genocidaires are in the camps, literally sharpening their knives for future battle?
What do you do?
It's all lesser-evil terrain in these broken places.
Late '90s: nation-building is the cause du jour.
He's the guy put in charge. He's the Paul Bremer or the Jerry Bremer of first Kosovo and then East Timor. He governs the places.
He's the viceroy. He has to decide on tax policy, on currency, on border patrol, on policing. He has to make all these judgments.
He's a Brazilian in these places. He speaks seven languages.
He's been up to that point in 14 war zones so he's positioned to make better judgments, perhaps, than people who have never done that kind of work.
But nonetheless, he is the cutting edge of our experimentation with doing good with very few resources being brought to bear in, again, the world's worst places.
And then after Timor, 9/11 has happened, he's named U.N. Human Rights Commissioner, and he has to balance liberty and security and figure out, what do you do when the most powerful country in the United Nations is bowing out of the Geneva Conventions, bowing out of international law? Do you denounce?
Well, if you denounce, you're probably never going to get back in the room.
Maybe you stay reticent. Maybe you try to charm President Bush -- and that's what he did. And in so doing he earned himself, unfortunately, his final and tragic appointment to Iraq -- the one that resulted in his death.
One note on his death, which is so devastating, is that despite predicating the war on Iraq on a link between Saddam Hussein and terrorism in 9/11, believe it or not, the Bush administration or the invaders did no planning, no pre-war planning, to respond to terrorism.
So Sergio -- this receptacle of all of this learning on how to deal with evil and how to deal with brokenness, lay under the rubble for three and a half hours without rescue.
Stateless. The guy who tried to help the stateless people his whole career.
Like a refugee. Because he represents the U.N.
If you represent everyone, in some ways you represent no one.
You're un-owned.
And what the American -- the most powerful military in the history of mankind was able to muster for his rescue, believe it or not, was literally these heroic two American soldiers went into the shaft. Building was shaking.
One of them had been at 9/11 and lost his buddies on September 11th, and yet went in and risked his life in order to save Sergio.
But all they had was a woman's handbag -- literally one of those basket handbags -- and they tied it to a curtain rope from one of the offices at U.N. headquarters, and created a pulley system into this shaft in this quivering building in the interests of rescuing this person, the person we most need to turn to now, this shepherd, at a time when so many of us feel like we're lacking guidance.
And this was the pulley system. This was what we were able to muster for Sergio.
The good news, for what it's worth, is after Sergio and 21 others were killed that day in the attack on the U.N., the military created a search and rescue unit that had the cutting equipment, the shoring wood, the cranes, the things that you would have needed to do the rescue.
But it was too late for Sergio.
I want to wrap up, but I want to close with what I take to be the four lessons from Sergio's life on this question of how do we prevent evil from prevailing, which is how I would have framed the question.
Here's this guy who got a 34-year head start thinking about the kinds of questions we as a country are grappling with, we as citizens are grappling with now. What do we take away?
First, I think, is his relationship to, in fact, evil is something to learn from.
He, over the course of his career, changed a great deal.
He had a lot of flaws, but he was very adaptive.
I think that was his greatest quality.
He started as somebody who would denounce harmdoers, he would charge up to people who were violating international law, and he would say, you're violating, this is the U.N. Charter.
Don't you see it's unacceptable what you're doing?
And they would laugh at him because he didn't have the power of states, the power of any military or police.
He just had the rules, he had the norms, and he tried to use them.
And in Lebanon, Southern Lebanon in '82, he said to himself and to everybody else, I will never use the word "unacceptable" again.
I will never use it. I will try to make it such, but I will never use that word again.
But he lunged in the opposite direction.
He started, as I mentioned, to get in the room with evil, to not denounce, and became almost obsequious when he won the nickname Serbio, for instance, and even when he negotiated with the Khmer Rouge would black-box what had occurred prior to entering the room.
But by the end of his life, I think he had struck a balance that we as a country can learn from.
Be in the room, don't be afraid of talking to your adversaries, but don't bracket what happened before you entered the room.
Don't black-box history. Don't check your principles at the door.
And I think that's something that we have to be in the room, whether it's Nixon going to China or Khrushchev and Kennedy or Reagan and Gorbachev.
All the great progress in this country with relation to our adversaries has come by going into the room.
And it doesn't have to be an act of weakness.
You can actually do far more to build an international coalition against a harmdoer or a wrongdoer by being in the room and showing to the rest of the world that that person, that regime, is the problem and that you, the United States, are not the problem.
Second take-away from Sergio's life, briefly.
What I take away, and this in some ways is the most important, he espoused and exhibited a reverence for dignity that was really, really unusual.
At a micro level, the individuals around him were visible.
He saw them.
At a macro level, he thought, you know, we talk about democracy promotion, but we do it in a way sometimes that's an affront to people's dignity.
We put people on humanitarian aid and we boast about it because we've spent three billion.
It's incredibly important, those people would no longer be alive if the United States, for instance, hadn't spent that money in Darfur, but it's not a way to live.
If we think about dignity in our conduct as citizens and as individuals with relation to the people around us, and as a country, if we could inject a regard for dignity into our dealings with other countries, it would be something of a revolution.
Third point, very briefly. He talked a lot about freedom from fear.
And I recognize there is so much to be afraid of.
There are so many genuine threats in the world.
But what Sergio was talking about is, let's calibrate our relationship to the threat.
Let's not hype the threat; let's actually see it clearly.
We have reason to be afraid of melting ice caps.
We have reason to be afraid that we haven't secured loose nuclear material in the former Soviet Union.
Let's focus on what are the legitimate challenges and threats, but not lunge into bad decisions because of a panic, of a fear.
In times of fear, for instance, one of the things Sergio used to say is, fear is a bad advisor.
We lunge towards the extremes when we aren't operating and trying to, again, calibrate our relationship to the world around us.
Fourth and final point: he somehow, because he was working in all the world's worst places and all lesser evils, had a humility, of course, and an awareness of the complexity of the world around him.
I mean, such an acute awareness of how hard it was.
How Sisyphean this task was of mending, and yet aware of that complexity, humbled by it, he wasn't paralyzed by it.
And we as citizens, as we go through this experience of the kind of, the crisis of confidence, crisis of competence, crisis of legitimacy, I think there's a temptation to pull back from the world and say, ah, Katrina, Iraq -- we don't know what we're doing.
We can't afford to pull back from the world.
It's a question of how to be in the world.
And the lesson, I think, of the anti-genocide movement that I mentioned, that is a partial success but by no means has it achieved what it has set out to do -- it'll be many decades, probably, before that happens -- but is that if we want to see change, we have to become the change.
We can't rely upon our institutions to do the work of necessarily talking to adversaries on their own without us creating a space for that to happen, for having respect for dignity, and for bringing that combination of humility and a sort of emboldened sense of responsibility to our dealings with the rest of the world.
So will evil prevail? Is that the question?
I think the short answer is: no, not unless we let it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: Shep, thank you so much for coming.
I think your plane landed literally two hours ago in Vancouver.
Such a treat to have you.
So, talk us through how do you get from Einstein's equation to a black hole?
Sheperd Doeleman: Over 100 years ago, Einstein came up with this geometric theory of gravity which deforms space-time.
So, matter deforms space-time, and then space-time tells matter in turn how to move around it.
And you can get enough matter into a small enough region that it punctures space-time, and that even light can't escape, the force of gravity keeps even light inside.
CA: And so, before that, the reason the Earth moves around the Sun is not because the Sun is pulling the Earth as we think, but it's literally changed the shape of space so that we just sort of fall around the Sun.
SD: Exactly, the geometry of space-time tells the Earth how to move around the Sun.
You're almost seeing a black hole puncture through space-time, and when it goes so deeply in, then there's a point at which light orbits the black hole.
CA: And so that's, I guess, is what's happening here.
This is not an image, this is a computer simulation of what we always thought, like, the event horizon around the black hole.
SD: Until last week, we had no idea what a black hole really looked like.
The best we could do were simulations like this in supercomputers, but even here you see this ring of light, which is the orbit of photons.
That's where photons literally move around the black hole, and around that is this hot gas that's drawn to the black hole, and it's hot because of friction.
All this gas is trying to get into a very small volume, so it heats up.
CA: A few years ago, you embarked on this mission to try and actually image one of these things.
And I guess you took -- you focused on this galaxy way out there.
Tell us about this galaxy.
SD: This is the galaxy -- we're going to zoom into the galaxy M87, it's 55 million light-years away.
CA: Fifty-five million.
SD: Which is a long way.
And at its heart, there's a six-and-a-half-billion- solar-mass black hole.
That's hard for us to really fathom, right?
Six and a half billion suns compressed into a single point.
And it's governing some of the energetics of the center of this galaxy.
CA: But even though that thing is so huge, because it's so far away, to actually dream of getting an image of it, that's incredibly hard.
The resolution would be incredible that you need.
SD: Black holes are the smallest objects in the known universe.
But they have these outsize effects on whole galaxies.
But to see one, you would need to build a telescope as large as the Earth, because the black hole that we're looking at gives off copious radio waves.
It's emitting all the time.
CA: And that's exactly what you did.
SD: Exactly. What you're seeing here is we used telescopes all around the world, we synchronized them perfectly with atomic clocks, so they received the light waves from this black hole, and then we stitched all of that data together to make an image.
CA: To do that the weather had to be right in all of those locations at the same time, so you could actually get a clear view.
SD: We had to get lucky in a lot of different ways.
And sometimes, it's better to be lucky than good.
In this case, we were both, I like to think.
But light had to come from the black hole.
It had to come through intergalactic space, through the Earth's atmosphere, where water vapor can absorb it, and everything worked out perfectly, the size of the Earth at that wavelength of light, one millimeter wavelength, was just right to resolve that black hole, 55 million light-years away.
The universe was telling us what to do.
CA: So you started capturing huge amounts of data.
I think this is like half the data from just one telescope.
SD: Yeah, this is one of the members of our team, Lindy Blackburn, and he's sitting with half the data recorded at the Large Millimeter Telescope, which is atop a 15,000-foot mountain in Mexico.
And what he's holding there is about half a petabyte.
Which, to put it in terms that we might understand, it's about 5,000 people's lifetime selfie budget.
(Laughter) CA: It's a lot of data.
So this was all shipped, you couldn't send this over the internet.
All this data was shipped to one place and the massive computer effort began to try and analyze it.
And you didn't really know what you were going to see coming out of this.
SD: The way this technique works that we used -- imagine taking an optical mirror and smashing it and putting all the shards in different places.
The way a normal mirror works is the light rays bounce off the surface, which is perfect, and they focus in a certain point at the same time.
We take all these recordings, and with atomic clock precision we align them perfectly, later in a supercomputer.
And we recreate kind of an Earth-sized lens.
And the only way to do that is to bring the data back by plane.
You can't beat the bandwidth of a 747 filled with hard discs.
(Laughter) CA: And so, I guess a few weeks or a few months ago, on a computer screen somewhere, this started to come into view.
This moment.
SD: Well, it took a long time.
CA: I mean, look at this.
That was it.
That was the first image.
(Applause) So tell us what we're really looking at there.
SD: I still love it.
(Laughter) So what you're seeing is that last orbit of photons.
You're seeing Einstein's geometry laid bare.
The puncture in space-time is so deep that light moves around in orbit, so that light behind the black hole, as I think we'll see soon, moves around and comes to us on these parallel lines at exactly that orbit.
It turns out, that orbit is the square root of 27 times just a handful of fundamental constants.
It's extraordinary when you think about it.
CA: When ...
In my head, initially, when I thought of black holes, I'm thinking that is the event horizon, there's lots of matter and light whirling around in that shape.
But it's actually more complicated than that.
Well, talk us through this animation, because it's light being lensed around it.
SD: You'll see here that some light from behind it gets lensed, and some light does a loop-the-loop around the entire orbit of the black hole.
But when you get enough light from all this hot gas swirling around the black hole, then you wind up seeing all of these light rays come together on this screen, which is a stand-in for where you and I are.
And you see the definition of this ring begin to come into shape.
And that's what Einstein predicted over 100 years ago.
CA: Yeah, that is amazing.
So tell us more about what we're actually looking at here.
First of all, why is part of it brighter than the rest?
SD: So what's happening is that the black hole is spinning.
And you wind up with some of the gas moving towards us below and receding from us on the top.
And just as the train whistle has a higher pitch when it's coming towards you, there's more energy from the gas coming towards us than going away from us.
You see the bottom part brighter because the light is actually being boosted in our direction.
CA: And how physically big is that?
SD: Our entire solar system would fit well within that dark region.
And if I may, that dark region is the signature of the event horizon.
The reason we don't see light from there, is that the light that would come to us from that place was swallowed by the event horizon.
So that -- that's it.
CA: And so when we think of a black hole, you think of these huge rays jetting out of it, which are pointed directly in our direction.
Why don't we see them?
SD: This is a very powerful black hole.
Not by universal standards, it's still powerful, and from the north and south poles of this black hole we think that jets are coming.
Now, we're too close to really see all the jet structure, but it's the base of those jets that are illuminating the space-time.
And that's what's being bent around the black hole.
CA: And if you were in a spaceship whirling around that thing somehow, how long would it take to actually go around it?
SD: First, I would give anything to be in that spaceship.
(Laughter) Sign me up.
There’s something called the -- if I can get wonky for one moment -- the innermost stable circular orbit, that's the innermost orbit at which matter can move around a black hole before it spirals in.
And for this black hole, it's going to be between three days and about a month.
CA: It's so powerful, it's weirdly slow at one level.
I mean, you wouldn't even notice falling into that event horizon if you were there.
SD: So you may have heard of "spaghettification," where you fall into a black hole and the gravitational field on your feet is much stronger than on your head, so you're ripped apart.
This black hole is so big that you're not going to become a spaghetti noodle.
You're just going to drift right through that event horizon.
CA: So, it's like a giant tornado.
When Dorothy was whipped by a tornado, she ended up in Oz.
Where do you end up if you fall into a black hole?
(Laughter) SD: Vancouver.
(Laughter) CA: Oh, my God.
(Applause) It's the red circle, that's terrifying.
No, really.
SD: Black holes really are the central mystery of our age, because that's where the quantum world and the gravitational world come together.
What's inside is a singularity.
And that's where all the forces become unified, because gravity finally is strong enough to compete with all the other forces.
But it's hidden from us, the universe has cloaked it in the ultimate invisibility cloak.
So we don't know what happens in there.
CA: So there's a smaller one of these in our own galaxy.
Can we go back to our own beautiful galaxy?
This is the Milky Way, this is home.
And somewhere in the middle of that there's another one, which you're trying to find as well.
SD: We already know it's there, and we've already taken data on it.
And we're working on those data right now.
So we hope to have something in the near future, I can't say when.
CA: It's way closer but also a lot smaller, maybe the similar kind of size to what we saw?
SD: Right. So it turns out that the black hole in M87, that we saw before, is six and a half billion solar masses.
But it's so far away that it appears a certain size.
The black hole in the center of our galaxy is a thousand times less massive, but also a thousand times closer.
So it looks the same angular size on the sky.
CA: Finally, I guess, a nod to a remarkable group of people.
Who are these guys?
SD: So these are only some of the team.
We marveled at the resonance that this image has had.
If you told me that it would be above the fold in all of these newspapers, I'm not sure I would have believed you, but it was.
Because this is a great mystery, and it's inspiring for us, and I hope it's inspiring to everyone.
But the more important thing is that this is just a small number of the team.
We're 200 people strong with 60 institutes and 20 countries and regions.
If you want to build a global telescope you need a global team.
And this technique that we use of linking telescopes around the world kind of effortlessly sidesteps some of the issues that divide us.
And as scientists, we naturally come together to do something like this.
CA: Wow, boy, that's inspiring for our whole team this week.
Shep, thank you so much for what you did and for coming here.
SD: Thank you.
(Applause)
Arcane books of forbidden lore, disturbing secrets in the family bloodline, and terrors so unspeakable the very thought of them might drive you mad.
By now, these have become standard elements in many modern horror stories.
But they were largely popularized by a single author– one whose name has become an adjective for the particular type of terror he inspired.
Born in Providence, Rhode Island in 1890, Howard Phillips Lovecraft grew up admiring the Gothic horror stories written by Edgar Allan Poe and Robert Chambers.
But by the time he began writing in 1917, World War I had cast a long shadow over the arts.
People had seen real horrors, and were no longer frightened of fantastical folklore.
Lovecraft sought to invent a new kind of terror, one that responded to the rapid scientific progress of his era.
His stories often used scientific elements to lend eerie plausibility.
In "The Colour out of Space," a strange meteorite falls near a farmhouse, mutating the farm into a nightmarish hellscape.
Others incorporated scientific methodology into their form.
"At the Mountains of Madness" is written as a report of an Antarctic expedition that unearths things better left undiscovered.
In others, mathematics themselves become a source of horror, as impossible geometric configurations wreak havoc on the minds of any who behold them.
Like then-recent discoveries of subatomic particles or X-rays, the forces in Lovecraft’s fiction were powerful, yet often invisible and indescribable.
Rather than recognizable monsters, graphic violence, or startling shocks, the terror of “Lovecraftian” horror lies in what’s not directly portrayed– but left instead to the dark depths of our imagination.
Lovecraft’s dozens of short stories, novellas, and poems often take place in the same fictional continuity, with recurring characters, locations, and mythologies.
At first glance, they appear to be set within Lovecraft’s contemporary New England.
But beneath the surface of this seemingly similar reality lie dark masters, for whom Earth’s inhabitants are mere playthings.
More like primordial forces than mere deities, Lovecraft’s Great Old Ones lurk at the corners of our reality.
Beings such as Yog-Sothoth, “who froths as primal slime in nuclear chaos beyond the nethermost outposts of space and time.” Or the blind, idiot god Azathoth, whose destructive impulses are stalled only by the “maddening beating of vile drums and the thin monotonous whine of accursed flutes.” These beings exist beyond our conceptions of reality, their true forms as inscrutable as their motives.
Lovecraft’s protagonists– often researchers, anthropologists, or antiquarians– stumble onto hints of their existence.
But even these indirect glimpses are enough to drive them insane.
And if they survive, the reader is left with no feeling of triumph, only cosmic indifference– the terrible sense that we are but insignificant specks at the mercy of unfathomable forces.
But perhaps the greatest power these creatures had was their appeal to Lovecraft’s contemporaries.
During his lifetime, Lovecraft corresponded with other writers, encouraging them to employ elements and characters from his stories in their own.
References to Lovecraftian gods or arcane tomes can be found in many stories by his pen pals, such as Robert E. Howard and Robert Bloch.
Today, this shared universe is called the Cthulhu Mythos, named after Lovecraft’s infamous blend of dragon and octopus.
Unfortunately, Lovecraft’s fear of the unknown found a less savory expression in his personal views.
The author held strong racist views, and some of his works include crude stereotypes and slurs.
But the rich world he created would outlive his personal prejudices.
And after Lovecraft’s death, the Cthulhu Mythos was adopted by a wide variety of authors, often reimagining them from diverse perspectives that transcend the author’s prejudices.
Despite his literary legacy, Lovecraft was never able to find financial success.
He died unknown and penniless at the age of 46– a victim of the universe’s cosmic indifference.
But his work has inspired numerous short stories, novels, tabletop games, and cultural icons.
And as long as humans feel a sense of dread about our unknown future, Lovecraftian horror will have a place in the darkest corners of our imagination.
I have, like, a thing about sleeping.
I don't sleep that much, and I've come to this thing about, like, not sleeping much as being a great virtue, after years of kind of battling it as being a terrible detriment or something.
And now I really like sort of sitting up.
You know, but for years, I've been sitting up, and I think my creativity is greatly motivated by this kind of insomnia.
I lie awake. I think thoughts. I walk aimlessly sometimes.
I used to walk more at night.
I walk during the day, and I follow people who I think look interesting.
(Laughter) And sometimes -- actually, once it was on "Page Six" in the "Post" that I was cruising this guy, like, sort of, whatever, but I was actually just following because he had these great shoes on -- (Laughter) so I was following this guy.
And I took a picture of his shoes, and we thanked each other and just went on our way.
But I do that all the time.
As a matter of fact, I think a lot of my design ideas come from mistakes and tricks of the eye.
Because I feel like, you know, there are so many images out there, so many clothes out there.
And the only ones that look interesting to me are the ones that look slightly mistaken, of course, or very, very surprising.
And often, I'm driving in a taxi, and I see a hole in a shirt or something that looks very interesting or pretty or functional in some way that I'd never seen happen before.
And so I'd make the car stop, and I'd get out of the car and walk and see that, in fact, there wasn't a hole, but it was a trick of my eye; it was a shadow, you know.
Or if there was a hole, I'd think like, "Oh, damn.
Actually, someone thought of that thought already.
Someone made that mistake already, so I can't do it anymore."
I don't know where inspiration comes from.
It does not come, for me, from research.
I don't get necessarily inspired by research.
As a matter of fact, one of the most fun things I've ever done in my whole life was this Christmas season at the Guggenheim in New York.
I read "Peter and the Wolf" with this beautiful band from Juilliard, and I did, like, you know, the narrator, and I read it.
And I saw this really smart critic who I love, this woman Joan Acocella, who's a friend of mine.
And she came backstage and said, "Oh, Isaac, did you know that -- talk to me about Stalinism and talk to me about, you know, like, the '30s in Russia."
And I thought, "How do I know about Stalinism?"
I know about a wolf and a bird, and, you know, he ate the bird, and then in the end, you know, you hear the bird squeaking or something.
(Laughter) So I don't really know that, I don't really -- actually, I do my own kind of research, you know?
If I'm commissioned to do the costumes for an 18th-century opera or something like that, I will do a lot of research, because it's interesting, not because it's what I'm supposed to do.
I'm very, very, very inspired by movies.
The color of movies and the way light makes the colors.
Light from behind the projection or light from the projection makes the colors look so impossible.
Anyway, roll this little clip. I'll just show you.
I sit up at night, and I watch movies, and I watch women in movies a lot.
And I think about, you know, their roles and about how you have to, like, watch what your daughters look at.
Because I look at the way women are portrayed all the time, whether they're kind of glorified in this way, or whether they're kind of, you know, ironically glorified, or whether they're sort of denigrated or ironically denigrated.
I go back to color all the time.
Color is something that motivates me a lot.
It's rarely color that I find in nature, although, you know, juxtaposed next to artificial color, natural color is so beautiful.
So that's what I do. I study color a lot.
But for the most part, I think, like, how can I ever make anything that is as beautiful as that image of Natalie Wood?
How can I ever make anything as beautiful as Greta Garbo?
I mean, that's just not possible. You know?
And so that's what makes me lie awake at night, I guess.
I'm also like a big -- I go to astrologers and tarot card readers often, and that's another thing that motivates me a lot.
People say, "Do that" -- an astrologer tells me to do something, so I do it.
(Laughter) When I was about 21, an astrologer told me that I was going to meet the man of my dreams, and that his name was going to be Eric, right?
So, you know, for years I would go to bars and, sort of, anyone I met whose name was Eric, I was humping immediately or something.
(Laughter) There were times when I was so desperate, I would just walk into a room and go, "Eric?"
And anybody who would turn around, I would make a beeline for.
(Laughter) And I had this really interesting tarot reading a long time ago.
The last card he pulled, which was representing my destiny, was this guy in, like, a straw boater with a cane and, you know, sort of spats and this, you know, a minstrel singer, right?
I want to show you this clip, because I do this kind of crazy thing where I do a cabaret act.
So actually, check this out.
Very embarrassing.
(Video) (Applause) Thank you. We'll do anything you ask.
The name of the show is based on this story that I have to tell you, about my mother.
I was dating this guy, right?
And this has to do with being happy, I swear.
I was dating this guy, and it was going on for about a year, and we were getting serious, so we decided to invite them all to dinner, our parents.
We introduced them to each other.
My mother was, sort of, very sensitive to his mother, who, it seemed, was a little bit skeptical about the whole "alternative lifestyle" thing -- you know, homosexuality.
So my mother was a little offended, and turned to her and said, "Are you kidding? They have the greatest life together.
They eat out, they see shows ..."
They eat out, they see shows.
(Laughter) That's the name of the show, "They eat out, they --" That's on my tombstone when I die: "He ate out, he saw shows." Right?
(Laughter) So in editing these clips, I didn't have the audacity to edit a clip of me singing at Joe's Pub.
So you'll have to go check it out and come see me or something, because it's mortifying.
And yet, it feels -- I don't know how to put this.
I feel as little comfort as possible is a good thing. You know?
And at least, you know, in my case, because if I just do one thing all the time, I don't know, I get very, very bored. I bore very easily.
And you know, I don't say that I do everything well.
I just say that I do a lot of things, that's all.
And I kind of try not to look back, you know?
Except, I guess that's what staying up every night is about -- like, looking back and thinking, "What a fool you made of yourself."
You know?
(Laughter) Because if you do many things, you get to feel lousy about everything, and not just one, you know?
You don't master feeling lousy about one thing.
Yeah, exactly.
I will show you this next thing, speaking of costumes for operas.
I do work with different choreographers.
I work with Twyla Tharp a lot and I work with Mark Morris a lot, who is one of my best friends.
And I designed three operas with him -- the most recent one, "King Arthur."
I've been very ingrained in the dance world since I was a teenager.
I went to a performing arts high school, where I was an actor, and many of my friends were ballet dancers.
Again, I don't know where inspiration comes from.
I don't know where it comes from.
I started making puppets when I was a kid.
Maybe that's where the whole inspiration thing started from: puppets.
(Laughter) And then performing arts high school.
There I was in high school, meeting dancers and acting.
And somehow, from there, I got interested in design.
I went to Parsons School of Design, and then I began my career as a designer.
I don't really think of myself as a designer, and I don't really think of myself necessarily as a fashion designer.
And frankly, I don't really know what to call myself.
I think of myself as ...
That's just that.
(Laughter) But I must say, this whole thing about being slightly bored all the time, I think that is a very important thing for a fashion designer.
You always have to be, like, slightly bored with everything.
And if you're not, you have to pretend to be slightly bored with everything.
(Laughter) But I am really a little bored with everything.
I always say to my partner, Marisa Gardini, who books everything -- books everything and makes everything happen and makes all the deals.
And I always tell her that I find myself with a lot of time on the computer bridge program.
Too much time on computer bridge, which is, you know, like, that's -- So, somehow, like, about 10 years ago, I thought that the most unboring place in the world would be, like, a TV studio, like for a day show, some kind of day talk show, because it's all of these things that I love kind of in one place.
And if you ever get bored, you can look at another thing and do another thing and talk about it, right?
And so I had this TV show.
And that was a very, very, very big part of my process.
Actually, could you roll the clip, please?
This is one of my favorite clips of Rosie O'Donnell.
(Video) Isaac Mizrahi: We're back on the set. Hi, Ben!
Rosie O'Donnell: Hello, Ben.
IM: Look how cute she looks with just a slick back.
Ben: As my grandmother says, "Delish!"
I want to stay out of the way. I don't want to be -- OK, here we go.
RO: Do you get nervous, Ashley?
Ashley: Doing what? RO: Cutting hair.
A: Never. I don't think there was ever a day when I cut hair I was nervous.
IM: You look so cute already. RO: You like it? All right.
IM: Do you have a problem looking cute? RO: Of course I want to look cute.
IM: Just checking, because some people want to look, you know, aggressively ugly.
RO: No, not me, no.
IM: You read about people who have a lot of money and they have kids and the kids always end up somehow, really messed up, you know?
And there's got to be some way to do that, Rosie.
Just because you're fabulously rich and fabulously famous, does that mean you shouldn't have kids, because you know they're going to end up messed up?
RO: No, but it means your priority has to be their well-being first, I think.
But you have to make the decision for yourself.
My kids are seven, who the hell knows?
They're going to be like 14 and in rehab.
And they're going to be playing this clip. "I'm such a good mother."
My God, this is the shortest I've ever had!
IM: It looks good, yeah?
A: Has your hair ever been this short? RO: No! But it's all right -- go crazy.
IM: I feel like it needs to be closer down here.
A: It's just a stage. RO: We're just staging it.
IM: Are you freaking out? It's so cute.
RO: No, I love it. It's the new me. IM: It's so fabulous!
RO: Flock of Rosie. Wooo!
(Laughter) IM: By the way, of all the most unboring things in the world, right?
I mean, like, making someone who's already cute look terrible like that -- (Laughter) That is not boring. That is nothing if it's not boring.
(Laughter) Actually, I read this great quote the other day, which was, "Style makes you feel great, because it takes your mind off the fact that you're going to die."
Right?
(Laughter) And then I realized that was on my website, and it said, you know, the quote was attributed to me.
And I thought, "Oh, I said something in an interview. I forgot I said that."
I want to show you this last clip because it's going to be my last goodbye.
I'll tell you that I cook a lot also.
And I often look at things as though they're food.
Like, I say, "Would you serve a rotten chicken?
Then how could you serve a beat-up old dress or something?
How could you show a beat-up old dress?"
(Laughter) And so I think that's what it all boils down to.
Everything boils down to that.
So check this out.
This is what I've been doing, because I think it's the most fun thing in the world.
It's, like, this website with a lot of different things on it.
It's a polymathematical website.
We actually shoot segments, like TV show segments.
And it's kind of my favorite thing in the world.
And it just began, like, in the beginning of February. So who knows?
Again, I don't say it's good, I just think it's not boring, right?
And here's the last bit.
(Music) IM: I make buttermilk pancakes or buttermilk waffles all the time.
Sara Moulton: Do you?
IM: Yeah, but I can never find buttermilk, ever.
You can't find it at Citarella, you can't find it.
SM: You can't? IM: It's always low-fat.
SM: But that's all it is. IM: It is? OK.
SM: You don't know? Let me tell you something interesting.
IM: You know what? Stop laughing! It's not funny.
Sorry. What?
SM: Here's the deal: in the old days, when they used to make butter -- You know how you make butter?
IM: Churn. SM: From cream.
IM: Yeah, exactly.
SM: So you take heavy, high-fat milk, which is cream, and you churn it until it separates into these curds and water.
The liquid is actually -- if you've ever overbeaten your whipped cream, it's actually buttermilk.
That's what it was in the early days.
And that's what people used for baking and all sorts of things.
Now the buttermilk that you get is actually low-fat or skim milk.
IM: Excuse me, I didn't know. Alright?
SM: The reason he thought that is because buttermilk is so wonderfully thick and delicious.
IM: Yeah, it is. Exactly.
SM: So who would think that it was low-fat?
IM: Well, that's it. Thank you very much.
Happy TED. It's so wonderful here. I love it. I love it. I love it.
Thanks. Bye.
The most important gift your mother and father ever gave you was the two sets of three billion letters of DNA that make up your genome.
But like anything with three billion components, that gift is fragile.
Sunlight, smoking, unhealthy eating, even spontaneous mistakes made by your cells, all cause changes to your genome.
The most common kind of change in DNA is the simple swap of one letter, or base, such as C, with a different letter, such as T, G or A.
In any day, the cells in your body will collectively accumulate billions of these single-letter swaps, which are also called "point mutations."
Now, most of these point mutations are harmless.
But every now and then, a point mutation disrupts an important capability in a cell or causes a cell to misbehave in harmful ways.
If that mutation were inherited from your parents or occurred early enough in your development, then the result would be that many or all of your cells contain this harmful mutation.
And then you would be one of hundreds of millions of people with a genetic disease, such as sickle cell anemia or progeria or muscular dystrophy or Tay-Sachs disease.
Grievous genetic diseases caused by point mutations are especially frustrating, because we often know the exact single-letter change that causes the disease and, in theory, could cure the disease.
Millions suffer from sickle cell anemia because they have a single A to T point mutations in both copies of their hemoglobin gene.
And children with progeria are born with a T at a single position in their genome where you have a C, with the devastating consequence that these wonderful, bright kids age very rapidly and pass away by about age 14.
Throughout the history of medicine, we have not had a way to efficiently correct point mutations in living systems, to change that disease-causing T back into a C.
Perhaps until now.
Because my laboratory recently succeeded in developing such a capability, which we call "base editing."
The story of how we developed base editing actually begins three billion years ago.
We think of bacteria as sources of infection, but bacteria themselves are also prone to being infected, in particular, by viruses.
So about three billion years ago, bacteria evolved a defense mechanism to fight viral infection.
That defense mechanism is now better known as CRISPR.
And the warhead in CRISPR is this purple protein that acts like molecular scissors to cut DNA, breaking the double helix into two pieces.
If CRISPR couldn't distinguish between bacterial and viral DNA, it wouldn't be a very useful defense system.
But the most amazing feature of CRISPR is that the scissors can be programmed to search for, bind to and cut only a specific DNA sequence.
So when a bacterium encounters a virus for the first time, it can store a small snippet of that virus's DNA for use as a program to direct the CRISPR scissors to cut that viral DNA sequence during a future infection.
Cutting a virus's DNA messes up the function of the cut viral gene, and therefore disrupts the virus's life cycle.
Remarkable researchers including Emmanuelle Charpentier, George Church, Jennifer Doudna and Feng Zhang showed six years ago how CRISPR scissors could be programmed to cut DNA sequences of our choosing, including sequences in your genome, instead of the viral DNA sequences chosen by bacteria.
But the outcomes are actually similar.
Cutting a DNA sequence in your genome also disrupts the function of the cut gene, typically, by causing the insertion and deletion of random mixtures of DNA letters at the cut site.
Now, disrupting genes can be very useful for some applications.
But for most point mutations that cause genetic diseases, simply cutting the already-mutated gene won't benefit patients, because the function of the mutated gene needs to be restored, not further disrupted.
So cutting this already-mutated hemoglobin gene that causes sickle cell anemia won't restore the ability of patients to make healthy red blood cells.
And while we can sometimes introduce new DNA sequences into cells to replace the DNA sequences surrounding a cut site, that process, unfortunately, doesn't work in most types of cells, and the disrupted gene outcomes still predominate.
Like many scientists, I've dreamed of a future in which we might be able to treat or maybe even cure human genetic diseases.
But I saw the lack of a way to fix point mutations, which cause most human genetic diseases, as a major problem standing in the way.
Being a chemist, I began working with my students to develop ways on performing chemistry directly on an individual DNA base, to truly fix, rather than disrupt, the mutations that cause genetic diseases.
The results of our efforts are molecular machines called "base editors."
Base editors use the programmable searching mechanism of CRISPR scissors, but instead of cutting the DNA, they directly convert one base to another base without disrupting the rest of the gene.
So if you think of naturally occurring CRISPR proteins as molecular scissors, you can think of base editors as pencils, capable of directly rewriting one DNA letter into another by actually rearranging the atoms of one DNA base to instead become a different base.
Now, base editors don't exist in nature.
In fact, we engineered the first base editor, shown here, from three separate proteins that don't even come from the same organism.
We started by taking CRISPR scissors and disabling the ability to cut DNA while retaining its ability to search for and bind a target DNA sequence in a programmed manner.
To those disabled CRISPR scissors, shown in blue, we attached a second protein in red, which performs a chemical reaction on the DNA base C, converting it into a base that behaves like T.
Third, we had to attach to the first two proteins the protein shown in purple, which protects the edited base from being removed by the cell.
The net result is an engineered three-part protein that for the first time allows us to convert Cs into Ts at specified locations in the genome.
But even at this point, our work was only half done.
Because in order to be stable in cells, the two strands of a DNA double helix have to form base pairs.
And because C only pairs with G, and T only pairs with A, simply changing a C to a T on one DNA strand creates a mismatch, a disagreement between the two DNA strands that the cell has to resolve by deciding which strand to replace.
We realized that we could further engineer this three-part protein to flag the nonedited strand as the one to be replaced by nicking that strand.
This little nick tricks the cell into replacing the nonedited G with an A as it remakes the nicked strand, thereby completing the conversion of what used to be a C-G base pair into a stable T-A base pair.
After several years of hard work led by a former post doc in the lab, Alexis Komor, we succeeded in developing this first class of base editor, which converts Cs into Ts and Gs into As at targeted positions of our choosing.
Among the more than 35,000 known disease-associated point mutations, the two kinds of mutations that this first base editor can reverse collectively account for about 14 percent or 5,000 or so pathogenic point mutations.
But correcting the largest fraction of disease-causing point mutations would require developing a second class of base editor, one that could convert As into Gs or Ts into Cs.
Led by Nicole Gaudelli, a former post doc in the lab, we set out to develop this second class of base editor, which, in theory, could correct up to almost half of pathogenic point mutations, including that mutation that causes the rapid-aging disease progeria.
We realized that we could borrow, once again, the targeting mechanism of CRISPR scissors to bring the new base editor to the right site in a genome.
But we quickly encountered an incredible problem; namely, there is no protein that's known to convert A into G or T into C in DNA.
Faced with such a serious stumbling block, most students would probably look for another project, if not another research advisor.
(Laughter) But Nicole agreed to proceed with a plan that seemed wildly ambitious at the time.
Given the absence of a naturally occurring protein that performs the necessary chemistry, we decided we would evolve our own protein in the laboratory to convert A into a base that behaves like G, starting from a protein that performs related chemistry on RNA.
We set up a Darwinian survival-of-the-fittest selection system that explored tens of millions of protein variants and only allowed those rare variants that could perform the necessary chemistry to survive.
We ended up with a protein shown here, the first that can convert A in DNA into a base that resembles G.
And when we attached that protein to the disabled CRISPR scissors, shown in blue, we produced the second base editor, which converts As into Gs, and then uses the same strand-nicking strategy that we used in the first base editor to trick the cell into replacing the nonedited T with a C as it remakes that nicked strand, thereby completing the conversion of an A-T base pair to a G-C base pair.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) As an academic scientist in the US, I'm not used to being interrupted by applause.
(Laughter) We developed these first two classes of base editors only three years ago and one and a half years ago.
But even in that short time, base editing has become widely used by the biomedical research community.
Base editors have been sent more than 6,000 times at the request of more than 1,000 researchers around the globe.
A hundred scientific research papers have been published already, using base editors in organisms ranging from bacteria to plants to mice to primates.
While base editors are too new to have already entered human clinical trials, scientists have succeeded in achieving a critical milestone towards that goal by using base editors in animals to correct point mutations that cause human genetic diseases.
For example, a collaborative team of scientists led by Luke Koblan and Jon Levy, two additional students in my lab, recently used a virus to deliver that second base editor into a mouse with progeria, changing that disease-causing T back into a C and reversing its consequences at the DNA, RNA and protein levels.
Base editors have also been used in animals to reverse the consequence of tyrosinemia, beta thalassemia, muscular dystrophy, phenylketonuria, a congenital deafness and a type of cardiovascular disease -- in each case, by directly correcting a point mutation that causes or contributes to the disease.
In plants, base editors have been used to introduce individual single DNA letter changes that could lead to better crops.
And biologists have used base editors to probe the role of individual letters in genes associated with diseases such as cancer.
Two companies I cofounded, Beam Therapeutics and Pairwise Plants, are using base editing to treat human genetic diseases and to improve agriculture.
All of these applications of base editing have taken place in less than the past three years: on the historical timescale of science, the blink of an eye.
Additional work lies ahead before base editing can realize its full potential to improve the lives of patients with genetic diseases.
While many of these diseases are thought to be treatable by correcting the underlying mutation in even a modest fraction of cells in an organ, delivering molecular machines like base editors into cells in a human being can be challenging.
Co-opting nature's viruses to deliver base editors instead of the molecules that give you a cold is one of several promising delivery strategies that's been successfully used.
Continuing to develop new molecular machines that can make all of the remaining ways to convert one base pair to another base pair and that minimize unwanted editing at off-target locations in cells is very important.
And engaging with other scientists, doctors, ethicists and governments to maximize the likelihood that base editing is applied thoughtfully, safely and ethically, remains a critical obligation.
These challenges notwithstanding, if you had told me even just five years ago that researchers around the globe would be using laboratory-evolved molecular machines to directly convert an individual base pair to another base pair at a specified location in the human genome efficiently and with a minimum of other outcomes, I would have asked you, "What science-fiction novel are you reading?"
Thanks to a relentlessly dedicated group of students who were creative enough to engineer what we could design ourselves and brave enough to evolve what we couldn't, base editing has begun to transform that science-fiction-like aspiration into an exciting new reality, one in which the most important gift we give our children may not only be three billion letters of DNA, but also the means to protect and repair them.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
I thought I'd start with telling you or showing you the people who started [Jet Propulsion Lab].
When they were a bunch of kids, they were kind of very imaginative, very adventurous, as they were trying at Caltech to mix chemicals and see which one blows up more.
Well, I don't recommend that you try to do that now.
Naturally, they blew up a shack, and Caltech, well, then, hey, you go to the Arroyo and really do all your tests in there.
So, that's what we call our first five employees during the tea break, you know, in here.
As I said, they were adventurous people.
As a matter of fact, one of them, who was, kind of, part of a cult which was not too far from here on Orange Grove, and unfortunately he blew up himself because he kept mixing chemicals and trying to figure out which ones were the best chemicals.
So, that gives you a kind of flavor of the kind of people we have there.
We try to avoid blowing ourselves up.
This one I thought I'd show you.
Guess which one is a JPL employee in the heart of this crowd.
I tried to come like him this morning, but as I walked out, then it was too cold, and I said, I'd better put my shirt back on.
But more importantly, the reason I wanted to show this picture: look where the other people are looking, and look where he is looking.
Wherever anybody else looks, look somewhere else, and go do something different, you know, and doing that.
And that's kind of what has been the spirit of what we are doing.
And I want to tell you a quote from Ralph Emerson that one of my colleagues, you know, put on my wall in my office, and it says, "Do not go where the path may lead.
Go instead where there is no path, and leave a trail."
And that's my recommendation to all of you: look what everybody is doing, what they are doing; go do something completely different.
Don't try to improve a little bit on what somebody else is doing, because that doesn't get you very far.
In our early days we used to work a lot on rockets, but we also used to have a lot of parties, you know.
As you can see, one of our parties, you know, a few years ago.
But then a big difference happened about 50 years ago, after Sputnik was launched. We launched the first American satellite, and that's the one you see on the left in there.
And here we made 180 degrees change: we changed from a rocket house to be an exploration house.
And that was done over a period of a couple of years, and now we are the leading organization, you know, exploring space on all of your behalf.
But even when we did that, we had to remind ourselves, sometimes there are setbacks.
So you see, on the bottom, that rocket was supposed to go upward; somehow it ended going sideways.
So that's what we call the misguided missile.
But then also, just to celebrate that, we started an event at JPL for "Miss Guided Missile."
So, we used to have a celebration every year and select -- there used to be competition and parades and so on.
It's not very appropriate to do it now. Some people tell me to do it; I think, well, that's not really proper, you know, these days.
So, we do something a little bit more serious.
And that's what you see in the last Rose Bowl, you know, when we entered one of the floats.
That's more on the play side. And on the right side, that's the Rover just before we finished its testing to take it to the Cape to launch it.
These are the Rovers up here that you have on Mars now.
So that kind of tells you about, kind of, the fun things, you know, and the serious things that we try to do.
But I said I'm going to show you a short clip of one of our employees to kind of give you an idea about some of the talent that we have.
Video: Morgan Hendry: Beware of Safety is an instrumental rock band.
It branches on more the experimental side.
There's the improvisational side of jazz.
There's the heavy-hitting sound of rock.
Being able to treat sound as an instrument, and be able to dig for more abstract sounds and things to play live, mixing electronics and acoustics.
The music's half of me, but the other half -- I landed probably the best gig of all.
I work for the Jet Propulsion Lab. I'm building the next Mars Rover.
Some of the most brilliant engineers I know are the ones who have that sort of artistic quality about them.
You've got to do what you want to do.
And anyone who tells you you can't, you don't listen to them.
Maybe they're right - I doubt it.
Tell them where to put it, and then just do what you want to do.
I'm Morgan Hendry. I am NASA.
Charles Elachi: Now, moving from the play stuff to the serious stuff, always people ask, why do we explore?
Why are we doing all of these missions and why are we exploring them?
Well, the way I think about it is fairly simple.
Somehow, 13 billion years ago there was a Big Bang, and you've heard a little bit about, you know, the origin of the universe.
But somehow what strikes everybody's imagination -- or lots of people's imagination -- somehow from that original Big Bang we have this beautiful world that we live in today.
You look outside: you have all that beauty that you see, all that life that you see around you, and here we have intelligent people like you and I who are having a conversation here.
All that started from that Big Bang. So, the question is: How did that happen? How did that evolve? How did the universe form?
How did the galaxies form? How did the planets form?
Why is there a planet on which there is life which have evolved?
Is that very common?
Is there life on every planet that you can see around the stars?
So we literally are all made out of stardust.
We started from those stars; we are made of stardust.
So, next time you are really depressed, look in the mirror and you can look and say, hi, I'm looking at a star here.
You can skip the dust part.
But literally, we are all made of stardust.
So, what we are trying to do in our exploration is effectively write the book of how things have came about as they are today.
And one of the first, or the easiest, places we can go and explore that is to go towards Mars.
And the reason Mars takes particular attention: it's not very far from us.
You know, it'll take us only six months to get there.
Six to nine months at the right time of the year.
It's a planet somewhat similar to Earth. It's a little bit smaller, but the land mass on Mars is about the same as the land mass on Earth, you know, if you don't take the oceans into account.
It has polar caps. It has an atmosphere somewhat thinner than ours, so it has weather. So, it's very similar to some extent, and you can see some of the features on it, like the Grand Canyon on Mars, or what we call the Grand Canyon on Mars.
It is like the Grand Canyon on Earth, except a hell of a lot larger.
So it's about the size, you know, of the United States.
It has volcanoes on it. And that's Mount Olympus on Mars, which is a kind of huge volcanic shield on that planet.
And if you look at the height of it and you compare it to Mount Everest, you see, it'll give you an idea of how large that Mount Olympus, you know, is, relative to Mount Everest.
So, it basically dwarfs, you know, Mount Everest here on Earth.
So, that gives you an idea of the tectonic events or volcanic events which have happened on that planet.
Recently from one of our satellites, this shows that it's Earth-like -- we caught a landslide occurring as it was happening.
So it is a dynamic planet, and activity is going on as we speak today.
And these Rovers, people wonder now, what are they doing today, so I thought I would show you a little bit what they are doing.
This is one very large crater. Geologists love craters, because craters are like digging a big hole in the ground without really working at it, and you can see what's below the surface.
So, this is called Victoria Crater, which is about a few football fields in size.
And if you look at the top left, you see a little teeny dark dot.
This picture was taken from an orbiting satellite.
If I zoom on it, you can see: that's the Rover on the surface.
So, that was taken from orbit; we had the camera zoom on the surface, and we actually saw the Rover on the surface.
And we actually used the combination of the satellite images and the Rover to actually conduct science, because we can observe large areas and then you can get those Rovers to move around and basically go to a certain location.
So, specifically what we are doing now is that Rover is going down in that crater.
As I told you, geologists love craters.
And the reason is, many of you went to the Grand Canyon, and you see in the wall of the Grand Canyon, you see these layers.
And what these layers -- that's what the surface used to be a million years ago, 10 million years ago, 100 million years ago, and you get deposits on top of them.
So if you can read the layers it's like reading your book, and you can learn the history of what happened in the past in that location.
So what you are seeing here are the layers on the wall of that crater, and the Rover is going down now, measuring, you know, the properties and analyzing the rocks as it's going down, you know, that canyon.
Now, it's kind of a little bit of a challenge driving down a slope like this.
If you were there you wouldn't do it yourself.
But we really made sure we tested those Rovers before we got them down -- or that Rover -- and made sure that it's all working well.
Now, when I came last time, shortly after the landing -- I think it was, like, a hundred days after the landing -- I told you I was surprised that those Rovers are lasting even a hundred days.
Well, here we are four years later, and they're still working.
Now you say, Charles, you are really lying to us, and so on, but that's not true. We really believed they were going to last 90 days or 100 days, because they are solar powered, and Mars is a dusty planet, so we expected the dust would start accumulating on the surface, and after a while we wouldn't have enough power, you know, to keep them warm.
Well, I always say it's important that you are smart, but every once in a while it's good to be lucky.
And that's what we found out. It turned out that every once in a while there are dust devils which come by on Mars, as you are seeing here, and when the dust devil comes over the Rover, it just cleans it up.
It is like a brand new car that you have, and that's literally why they have lasted so long.
And now we designed them reasonably well, but that's exactly why they are lasting that long and still providing all the science data.
Now, the two Rovers, each one of them is, kind of, getting old.
You know, one of them, one of the wheels is stuck, is not working, one of the front wheels, so what we are doing, we are driving it backwards.
And the other one has arthritis of the shoulder joint, you know, it's not working very well, so it's walking like this, and we can move the arm, you know, that way.
But still they are producing a lot of scientific data.
Now, during that whole period, a number of people got excited, you know, outside the science community about these Rovers, so I thought I'd show you a video just to give you a reflection about how these Rovers are being viewed by people other than the science community.
So let me go on the next short video.
By the way, this video is pretty accurate of how the landing took place, you know, about four years ago.
Video: Okay, we have parachute aligned.
Okay, deploy the airbags. Open.
Camera. We have a picture right now.
Yeah!
CE: That's about what happened in the Houston operation room. It's exactly like this.
Video: Now, if there is life, the Dutch will find it.
What is he doing?
What is that?
CE: Not too bad.
So anyway, let me continue on showing you a little bit about the beauty of that planet.
As I said earlier, it looked very much like Earth, so you see sand dunes.
It looks like I could have told you these are pictures taken from the Sahara Desert or somewhere, and you'd have believed me, but these are pictures taken from Mars.
But one area which is particularly intriguing for us is the northern region, you know, of Mars, close to the North Pole, because we see ice caps, and we see the ice caps shrinking and expanding, so it's very much like you have in northern Canada.
And we wanted to find out -- and we see all kinds of glacial features on it.
So, we wanted to find out, actually, what is that ice made of, and could that have embedded in it some organic, you know, material.
So we have a spacecraft which is heading towards Mars, called Phoenix, and that spacecraft will land 17 days, seven hours and 20 seconds from now, so you can adjust your watch.
So it's on May 25 around just before five o'clock our time here on the West Coast, actually we will be landing on another planet.
And as you can see, this is a picture of the spacecraft put on Mars, but I thought that just in case you're going to miss that show, you know, in 17 days, I'll show you, kind of, a little bit of what's going to happen.
Video: That's what we call the seven minutes of terror.
So the plan is to dig in the soil and take samples that we put them in an oven and actually heat them and look what gases will come from it.
So this was launched about nine months ago.
We'll be coming in at 12,000 miles per hour, and in seven minutes we have to stop and touch the surface very softly so we don't break that lander.
Ben Cichy: Phoenix is the first Mars Scout mission.
It's the first mission that's going to try to land near the North Pole of Mars, and it's the first mission that's actually going to try and reach out and touch water on the surface of another planet.
Lynn Craig: Where there tends to be water, at least on Earth, there tends to be life, and so it's potentially a place where life could have existed on the planet in the past.
Erik Bailey: The main purpose of EDL is to take a spacecraft that is traveling at 12,500 miles an hour and bring it to a screeching halt in a soft way in a very short amount of time.
BC: We enter the Martian atmosphere.
We're 70 miles above the surface of Mars.
And our lander is safely tucked inside what we call an aeroshell.
EB: Looks kind of like an ice cream cone, more or less.
BC: And on the front of it is this heat shield, this saucer-looking thing that has about a half-inch of essentially what's cork on the front of it, which is our heat shield.
Now, this is really special cork, and this cork is what's going to protect us from the violent atmospheric entry that we're about to experience.
Rob Grover: Friction really starts to build up on the spacecraft, and we use the friction when it's flying through the atmosphere to our advantage to slow us down.
BC: From this point, we're going to decelerate from 12,500 miles an hour down to 900 miles an hour.
EB: The outside can get almost as hot as the surface of the Sun.
RG: The temperature of the heat shield can reach 2,600 degrees Fahrenheit.
EB: The inside doesn't get very hot.
It probably gets about room temperature.
Richard Kornfeld: There is this window of opportunity within which we can deploy the parachute.
EB: If you fire the 'chute too early, the parachute itself could fail.
The fabric and the stitching could just pull apart.
And that would be bad.
BC: In the first 15 seconds after we deploy the parachute, we'll decelerate from 900 miles an hour to a relatively slow 250 miles an hour.
We no longer need the heat shield to protect us from the force of atmospheric entry, so we jettison the heat shield, exposing for the first time our lander to the atmosphere of Mars.
LC: After the heat shield has been jettisoned and the legs are deployed, the next step is to have the radar system begin to detect how far Phoenix really is from the ground.
BC: We've lost 99 percent of our entry velocity.
So, we're 99 percent of the way to where we want to be.
But that last one percent, as it always seems to be, is the tricky part.
EB: Now the spacecraft actually has to decide when it's going to get rid of its parachute.
BC: We separate from the lander going 125 miles an hour at roughly a kilometer above the surface of Mars: 3,200 feet.
That's like taking two Empire State Buildings and stacking them on top of one another.
EB: That's when we separate from the back shell, and we're now in free-fall.
It's a very scary moment; a lot has to happen in a very short amount of time.
LC: So it's in a free-fall, but it's also trying to use all of its actuators to make sure that it's in the right position to land.
EB: And then it has to light up its engines, right itself, and then slowly slow itself down and touch down on the ground safely.
BC: Earth and Mars are so far apart that it takes over ten minutes for a signal from Mars to get to Earth.
And EDL itself is all over in a matter of seven minutes.
So by the time you even hear from the lander that EDL has started it'll already be over.
EB: We have to build large amounts of autonomy into the spacecraft so that it can land itself safely.
BC: EDL is this immense, technically challenging problem.
It's about getting a spacecraft that's hurtling through deep space and using all this bag of tricks to somehow figure out how to get it down to the surface of Mars at zero miles an hour.
It's this immensely exciting and challenging problem.
CE: Hopefully it all will happen the way you saw it in here.
So it will be a very tense moment, you know, as we are watching that spacecraft landing on another planet.
So now let me talk about the next things that we are doing.
So we are in the process, as we speak, of actually designing the next Rover that we are going to be sending to Mars.
So I thought I would go a little bit and tell you, kind of, the steps we go through.
It's very similar to what you do when you design your product.
As you saw a little bit earlier, when we were doing the Phoenix one, we have to take into account the heat that we are going to be facing.
So we have to study all kinds of different materials, the shape that we want to do.
In general we don't try to please the customer here.
What we want to do is to make sure we have an effective, you know, an efficient kind of machine.
First we start by we want to have our employees to be as imaginative as they can.
And we really love being close to the art center, because we have, as a matter of fact, one of the alumni from the art center, Eric Nyquist, had put a series of displays, far-out displays, you know, in our what we call mission design or spacecraft design room, just to get people to think wildly about things.
We have a bunch of Legos. So, as I said, this is a playground for adults, where they sit down and try to play with different shapes and different designs.
Then we get a little bit more serious, so we have what we call our CAD/CAMs and all the engineers who are involved, or scientists who are involved, who know about thermal properties, know about design, know about atmospheric interaction, parachutes, all of these things, which they work in a team effort and actually design a spacecraft in a computer to some extent, so to see, does that meet the requirement that we need.
On the right, also, we have to take into account the environment of the planet where we are going.
If you are going to Jupiter, you have a very high-radiation, you know, environment. It's about the same radiation environment close by Jupiter as inside a nuclear reactor.
So just imagine: you take your P.C. and throw it into a nuclear reactor and it still has to work.
So these are kind of some of the little challenges, you know, that we have to face.
If we are doing entry, we have to do tests of parachutes.
You saw in the video a parachute breaking. That would be a bad day, you know, if that happened, so we have to test, because we are deploying this parachute at supersonic speeds.
We are coming at extremely high speeds, and we are deploying them to slow us down. So we have to do all kinds of tests.
To give you an idea of the size, you know, of that parachute relative to the people standing there.
Next step, we go and actually build some kind of test models and actually test them, you know, in the lab at JPL, in what we call our Mars Yard.
We kick them, we hit them, we drop them, just to make sure we understand how, where would they break.
And then we back off, you know, from that point.
And then we actually do the actual building and the flight.
And this next Rover that we're flying is about the size of a car.
That big shield that you see outside, that's a heat shield which is going to protect it.
And that will be basically built over the next year, and it will be launched June a year from now.
Now, in that case, because it was a very big Rover, we couldn't use airbags.
And I know many of you, kind of, last time afterwards said well, that was a cool thing to have -- those airbags.
Unfortunately this Rover is, like, ten times the size of the, you know, mass-wise, of the other Rover, or three times the mass.
So we can't use airbags. So we have to come up with another ingenious idea of how do we land it.
And we didn't want to take it propulsively all the way to the surface because we didn't want to contaminate the surface; we wanted the Rover to immediately land on its legs.
So we came up with this ingenious idea, which is used here on Earth for helicopters.
Actually, the lander will come down to about 100 feet and hover above that surface for 100 feet, and then we have a sky crane which will take that Rover and land it down on the surface.
Hopefully it all will work, you know, it will work that way.
And that Rover will be more kind of like a chemist.
What we are going to be doing with that Rover as it drives around, it's going to go and analyze the chemical composition of rocks.
So it will have an arm which will take samples, put them in an oven, crush and analyze them.
But also, if there is something that we cannot reach because it is too high on a cliff, we have a little laser system which will actually zap the rock, evaporate some of it, and actually analyze what's coming from that rock.
So it's a little bit like "Star Wars," you know, but it's real.
It's real stuff.
And also to help you, to help the community so you can do ads on that Rover, we are going to train that Rover to actually in addition to do this, to actually serve cocktails, you know, also on Mars.
So that's kind of giving you an idea of the kind of, you know, fun things we are doing on Mars.
I thought I'd go to "The Lord of the Rings" now and show you some of the things we have there.
Now, "The Lord of the Rings" has two things played through it.
One, it's a very attractive planet -- it just has the beauty of the rings and so on.
But for scientists, also the rings have a special meaning, because we believe they represent, on a small scale, how the Solar System actually formed.
Some of the scientists believe that the way the Solar System formed, that the Sun when it collapsed and actually created the Sun, a lot of the dust around it created rings and then the particles in those rings accumulated together, and they formed bigger rocks, and then that's how the planets, you know, were formed.
So, the idea is, by watching Saturn we're actually watching our solar system in real time being formed on a smaller scale, so it's like a test bed for it.
So, let me show you a little bit on what that Saturnian system looks like.
First, I'm going to fly you over the rings.
By the way, all of this is real stuff.
This is not animation or anything like this.
This is actually taken from the satellite that we have in orbit around Saturn, the Cassini.
And you see the amount of detail that is in those rings, which are the particles.
Some of them are agglomerating together to form larger particles.
So that's why you have these gaps, is because a small satellite, you know, is being formed in that location.
Now, you think that those rings are very large objects.
Yes, they are very large in one dimension; in the other dimension they are paper thin. Very, very thin.
What you are seeing here is the shadow of the ring on Saturn itself.
And that's one of the satellites which was actually formed on that one.
So, think about it as a paper-thin, huge area of many hundreds of thousands of miles, which is rotating.
And we have a wide variety of kind of satellites which will form, each one looking very different and very odd, and that keeps scientists busy for tens of years trying to explain this, and telling NASA we need more money so we can explain what these things look like, or why they formed that way.
Well, there were two satellites which were particularly interesting.
One of them is called Enceladus.
It's a satellite which was all made of ice, and we measured it from orbit. Made of ice.
But there was something bizarre about it.
If you look at these stripes in here, what we call tiger stripes, when we flew over them, all of a sudden we saw an increase in the temperature, which said that those stripes are warmer than the rest of the planet.
So as we flew by away from it, we looked back. And guess what?
We saw geysers coming out.
So this is a Yellowstone, you know, of Saturn.
We are seeing geysers of ice which are coming out of that planet, which indicate that most likely there is an ocean, you know, below the surface.
And somehow, through some dynamic effect, we're having these geysers which are being, you know, emitted from it.
And the reason I showed the little arrow there, I think that should say 30 miles, we decided a few months ago to actually fly the spacecraft through the plume of that geyser so we can actually measure the material that it is made of.
That was [unclear] also -- you know, because we were worried about the risk of it, but it worked pretty well.
We flew at the top of it, and we found that there is a fair amount of organic material which is being emitted in combination with the ice.
And over the next few years, as we keep orbiting, you know, Saturn, we are planning to get closer and closer down to the surface and make more accurate measurements.
Now, another satellite also attracted a lot of attention, and that's Titan. And the reason Titan is particularly interesting, it's a satellite bigger than our moon, and it has an atmosphere.
And that atmosphere is very -- as dense as our own atmosphere.
So if you were on Titan, you would feel the same pressure that you feel in here. Except it's a lot colder, and that atmosphere is heavily made of methane.
Now, methane gets people all excited, because it's organic material, so immediately people start thinking, could life have evolved in that location, when you have a lot of organic material.
So people believe now that Titan is most likely what we call a pre-biotic planet, because it's so cold organic material did not get to the stage of becoming biological material, and therefore life could have evolved on it.
So it could be Earth, frozen three billion years ago before life actually started on it.
So that's getting a lot of interest, and to show you some example of what we did in there, we actually dropped a probe, which was developed by our colleagues in Europe, we dropped a probe as we were orbiting Saturn.
We dropped a probe in the atmosphere of Titan.
And this is a picture of an area as we were coming down.
Just looked like the coast of California for me.
You see the rivers which are coming along the coast, and you see that white area which looks like Catalina Island, and that looks like an ocean.
And then with an instrument we have on board, a radar instrument, we found there are lakes like the Great Lakes in here, so it looks very much like Earth.
It looks like there are rivers on it, there are oceans or lakes, we know there are clouds. We think it's raining also on it.
So it's very much like the cycle on Earth except because it's so cold, it could not be water, you know, because water would have frozen.
What it turned out, that all that we are seeing, all this liquid, [is made of] hydrocarbon and ethane and methane, similar to what you put in your car.
So here we have a cycle of a planet which is like our Earth, but is all made of ethane and methane and organic material.
So if you were on Mars -- sorry, on Titan, you don't have to worry about four-dollar gasoline.
You just drive to the nearest lake, stick your hose in it, and you've got your car filled up.
On the other hand, if you light a match the whole planet will blow up.
So in closing, I said I want to close by a couple of pictures.
And just to kind of put us in perspective, this is a picture of Saturn taken with a spacecraft from behind Saturn, looking towards the Sun.
The Sun is behind Saturn, so we see what we call "forward scattering," so it highlights all the rings. And I'm going to zoom.
There is a -- I'm not sure you can see it very well, but on the top left, around 10 o'clock, there is a little teeny dot, and that's Earth.
You barely can see ourselves. So what I did, I thought I'd zoom on it.
So as you zoom in, you know, you can see Earth, you know, just in the middle here. So we zoomed all the way on the art center.
So thank you very much.
"New drug may cure cancer."
"Aspirin may reduce risk of heart attacks."
"Eating breakfast can help you lose weight."
Health headlines like these flood the news, often contradicting each other.
So how can you figure out what’s a genuine health concern or a truly promising remedy, and what’s less conclusive?
In medicine, there’s often a disconnect between news headlines and the scientific research they cover.
That’s because a headline is designed to catch attention— it’s most effective when it makes a big claim.
By contrast, many scientific studies produce meaningful results when they focus on a narrow, specific question.
The best way to bridge this gap is to look at the original research behind a headline.
We’ve come up with a simplified research scenario for each of these three headlines to test your skills.
Keep watching for the explanation of the first study; then pause at the headline to figure out the flaw.
Assume all the information you need to spot the flaw is included.
Let’s start with this hypothetical scenario: a study using mice to test a new cancer drug.
The study includes two groups of mice, one treated with the drug, the other with a placebo.
At the end of the trial, the mice that receive the drug are cured, while those that received the placebo are not.
Can you spot the problem with this headline: "Study shows new drug could cure cancer" Since the subjects of the study were mice, we can’t draw conclusions about human disease based on this research.
In real life, early research on new drugs and therapies is not conducted on humans.
If the early results are promising, clinical trials follow to determine if they hold up in humans.
Now that you’ve warmed up, let’s try a trickier example: a study about the impact of aspirin on heart attack risk.
The study randomly divides a pool of men into two groups.
The members of one group take aspirin daily, while the others take a daily placebo.
By the end of the trial, the control group suffered significantly more heart attacks than the group that took aspirin.
Based on this situation, what’s wrong with the headline: "Aspirin may reduce risk of heart attacks" In this case, the study shows evidence that aspirin reduces heart attacks in men, because all the participants were men.
But the conclusion “aspirin reduces risk of heart attacks” is too broad; we can’t assume that results found in men would also apply to women.
Studies often limit participants based on geographic location, age, gender, or many other factors.
Before these findings can be generalized, similar studies need to be run on other groups.
If a headline makes a general claim, it should draw its evidence from a diverse body of research, not one study.
Can you take your skills from the first two questions to the next level?
Try this example about the impact of eating breakfast on weight loss.
Researchers recruit a group of people who had always skipped breakfast and ask them to start eating breakfast everyday.
The participants include men and women of a range of ages and backgrounds.
Over a year-long period, participants lose an average of five pounds.
So what’s wrong with the headline: "Eating breakfast can help you lose weight" The people in the study started eating breakfast and lost weight— but we don’t know that they lost weight because they started eating breakfast; perhaps having their weight tracked inspired them to change their eating habits in other ways.
To rule out the possibility that some other factor caused weight loss, we would need to compare these participants to a group who didn’t eat breakfast before the study and continued to skip it during the study.
A headline certainly shouldn’t claim the results of this research are generally applicable.
And if the study itself made such a claim without a comparison group, then you should question its credibility.
Now that you’ve battle-tested your skills on these hypothetical studies and headlines, you can test them on real-world news.
Even when full papers aren’t available without a fee, you can often find summaries of experimental design and results in freely available abstracts, or even within the text of a news article.
Individual studies have results that don’t necessarily correspond to a grabby headline.
Big conclusions for human health issues require lots of evidence accumulated over time.
But in the meantime, we can keep on top of the science, by reading past the headlines.
I recently had an epiphany.
I realized that I could actually play a role in solving one of the biggest problems that faces mankind today, and that is the problem of climate change.
It also dawned on me that I had been working for 30 years or more just to get to this point in my life where I could actually make this contribution to a bigger problem.
And every experiment that I have done in my lab over the last 30 years and people who work for me did in my lab over the last 30 years has been directed toward doing the really big experiment, this one last big experiment.
So who am I?
I'm a plant geneticist.
I live in a world where there's too much CO2 in the atmosphere because of human activity.
But I've come to appreciate the plants as amazing machines that they are, whose job has been, really, to just suck up CO2.
And they do it so well, because they've been doing it for over 500 million years.
And they're really good at it.
And so ...
I also have some urgency I want to tell you about.
As a mother, I want to give my two children a better world than I inherited from my parents, it would be nicer to keep it going in the right direction, not the bad direction.
But I also ...
I've had Parkinson's for the last 15 years, and this gives me a sense of urgency that I want to do this now, while I feel good enough to really be part of this team.
And I have an incredible team.
We all work together, and this is something we want to do because we have fun.
And if you're only going to have five people trying to save the planet, you better like each other, because you're going to be spending a lot of time together.
(Laughter) OK, alright. But enough about me.
Let's talk about CO2.
CO2 is the star of my talk.
Now, most of you probably think of CO2 as a pollutant.
Or perhaps you think of CO2 as the villain in the novel, you know?
It's always the dark side of CO2.
But as a plant biologist, I see the other side of CO2, actually.
And that CO2 that we see, we see it differently because I think we remember, as plant biologists, something you may have forgotten.
And that is that plants actually do this process called photosynthesis.
And when they do photosynthesis -- all carbon-based life on our earth is all because of the CO2 that plants and other photosynthetic microbes have dragged in from CO2 that was in the atmosphere.
And almost all of the carbon in your body came from air, basically.
So you come from air, and it's because of photosynthesis, because what plants do is they use the energy in sunlight, take that CO2 and fix it into sugars.
It's a great thing.
And the other thing that is really important for what I'm going to tell you today is that plants and other photosynthetic microbes have a great capacity for doing this -- twentyfold or more than the amount of CO2 that we put up because of our human activities.
And so, even though we're not doing a great job at cutting our emissions and things, plants have the capacity, as photosynthetic organisms, to help out.
So we're hoping that's what they'll do.
But there's a catch here.
We have to help the plants a little ourselves, because what plants like to do is put most of the CO2 into sugars.
And when the end of the growing season comes, the plant dies and decomposes, and then all that work they did to suck out the CO2 from the atmosphere and make carbon-based biomass is now basically going right back up in the atmosphere as CO2.
So how can we get plants to redistribute the CO2 they bring in into something that's a little more stable?
And so it turns out that plants make this product, and it's called suberin.
This is a natural product that is in all plant roots.
And suberin is really cool, because as you can see there, I hope, everywhere you see a black dot, that's a carbon.
There's hundreds of them in this molecule.
And where you see those few red dots, those are oxygens.
And oxygen is what microbes like to find so they can decompose a plant.
So you can see why this is a perfect carbon storage device.
And actually it can stabilize the carbon that gets fixed by the plant into something that's a little bit better for the plant.
And so, why now?
Why is now a good time to do a biological solution to this problem?
It's because over the last 30 or so years -- and I know that's a long time, you're saying, "Why now?" -- but 30 years ago, we began to understand the functions of all the genes that are in an organism in general.
And that included humans as well as plants and many other complicated eukaryotes.
And so, what did the 1980s begin?
What began then is that we now know the function of many of the genes that are in a plant that tell a plant to grow.
And that has now converged with the fact that we can do genomics in a faster and cheaper way than we ever did before.
And what that tells us is that all life on earth is really related, but plants are more related to each other than other organisms.
And that you can take a trait that you know from one plant and put it in another plant, and you can make a prediction that it'll do the same thing.
And so that's important as well.
Then finally, we have these little genetic tricks that came along, like you heard about this morning -- things like CRISPR, that allows us to do editing and make genes be a little different from the normal state in the plant.
OK, so now we have biology on our side.
I'm a biologist, so that's why I'm proposing a solution to the climate change problem that really involves the best evolved organism on earth to do it -- plants.
So how are we going to do it?
Biology comes to the rescue.
Here we go.
OK.
You have to remember three simple things from my talk, OK?
We have to get plants to make more suberin than they normally make, because we need them to be a little better than what they are.
We have to get them to make more roots, because if we make more roots, we can make more suberin -- now we have more of the cells that suberin likes to accumulate in.
And then the third thing is, we want the plants to have deeper roots.
And what that does is -- we're asking the plant, actually, "OK, make stable carbon, more than you used to, and then bury it for us in the ground."
So they can do that if they make roots that go deep rather than meander around on the surface of the soil.
Those are the three traits we want to change: more suberin, more roots, and the last one, deep roots.
Then we want to combine all those traits in one plant, and we can do that easily and we will do it, and we are doing it actually, in the model plant, Arabidopsis, which allows us to do these experiments much faster than we can do in another big plant.
And when we find that we have plants where traits all add up and we can get more of them, more suberin in those plants, we're going to move it all -- we can and we we will, we're beginning to do this -- move it to crop plants.
And I'll tell you why we're picking crop plants to do the work for us when I get to that part of my talk.
OK, so I think this is the science behind the whole thing.
And so I know we can do the science, I feel pretty confident about that.
And the reason is because, just in the last year, we've been able to find single genes that affect each of those three traits.
And in several of those cases, two out of the three, we have more than one way to get there.
So that tells us we might be able to even combine within a trait and get even more suberin.
This shows one result, where we have a plant here on the right that's making more than double the amount of root than the plant on the left, and that's just because of the way we expressed one gene that's normally in the plant in a slightly different way than the plant usually does on its own.
Alright, so that's just one example I wanted to show you.
And now I want to tell you that, you know, we still have a lot of challenges, actually, when we get to this problem, because it takes ...
We have to get the farmers to actually buy the seeds, or at least the seed company to buy seeds that farmers are going to want to have.
And so when we do the experiments, we can't actually take a loss in yield, because while we are doing these experiments, say, beginning about 10 years from now, the earth's population will be even more than it is right now.
And it's rapidly growing still.
So by the end of the century, we have 11 billion people, we have wasted ecosystems that aren't really going to be able to handle all the load they have to take from agriculture.
And then we also have this competition for land.
And so we figure, to do this carbon sequestration experiment actually requires a fair amount of land.
We can't take it away from food, because we have to feed the people that are also going to be on the earth until we get past this big crisis.
And the climate change is actually causing loss of yield all over the earth.
So why would farmers want to buy seeds if it's going to impact yield?
So we're not going to let it impact yield, we're going to always have checks and balances that says go or no go on that experiment.
And then the second thing is, when a plant actually makes more carbon and buries it in the soil like that, almost all the soils on earth are actually depleted of carbon because of the load from agriculture, trying to feed eight billion people, which is what lives on the earth right now.
And so, that is also a problem as well.
Plants that are making more carbon, those soils become enriched in carbon.
And carbon-enriched soils actually hold nitrogen and they hold sulphur and they hold phosphate -- all the minerals that are required for plants to grow and have a good yield.
And they also retain water in the soil as well.
So the suberin will break up into little particles and give the whole soil a new texture.
And as we've shown that we can get more carbon in that soil, the soil will get darker.
And so we will be able to measure all that, and hopefully, this is going to help us solve the problem.
So, OK.
So we have the challenges of a lot of land that we need to use, we have to get farmers to buy it, and that's going to be the hard thing for us, I think, because we're not really salesmen, we're people who like to Google a person rather than meet them, you know what I mean?
(Laughter) That's what scientists are mostly like.
But we know now that, you know, no one can really deny -- the climate is changing, everyone knows that.
And it's here and it's bad and it's serious, and we need to do something about it.
But I feel pretty optimistic that we can do this.
So I'm here today as a character witness for plants.
And I want to tell you that plants are going to do it for us, all we have to do is give them a little help, and they will go and get a gold medal for humanity.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) (Cheers) Thank you.
(Applause) I finally got it out.
Chris Anderson: Wow.
Joanne, you're so extraordinary.
Just to be sure we heard this right: you believe that within the next 10 years you may be able to offer the world seed variants for the major crops, like -- what? -- wheat, corn, maybe rice, that can offer farmers just as much yield, sequester three times, four times, more carbon than they currently do?
Even more than that?
Joanne Chory: We don't know that number, really.
But they will do more.
CA: And at the same time, make the soil that those farmers have more fertile?
JC: Yes, right.
CA: So that is astonishing.
And the genius of doing that and a solution that can scale where there's already scale.
JC: Yes, thank you for saying that.
CA: No, no, you said it, you said it.
But it almost seems too good to be true.
Your Audacious Project is that we scale up the research in your lab and pave the way to start some of these pilots and make this incredible vision possible.
JC: That's right, yes, thank you.
CA: Joanne Chory, thank you so much.
Godspeed.
(Applause) JC: Thank you.
So, I have a pretty fun job, which is to figure out what makes people happy.
It's so fun, it might almost seen a little frivolous, especially at a time where we're being confronted with some pretty depressing headlines.
But it turns out that studying happiness might provide a key to solving some of the toughest problems we're facing.
It's taken me almost a decade to figure this out.
Pretty early on in my career, I published a paper in "Science" with my collaborators, entitled, "Spending Money on Others Promotes Happiness."
I was very confident in this conclusion, except for one thing: it didn't seem to apply to me.
(Laughter) I hardly ever gave money to charity, and when I did, I didn't feel that warm glow I was expecting.
So I started to wonder if maybe there was something wrong with my research or something wrong with me.
My own lackluster emotional response to giving was especially puzzling because my follow-up studies revealed that even toddlers exhibited joy from giving to others.
In one experiment, my colleagues Kiley Hamlin, Lara Aknin and I brought kids just under the age of two into the lab.
Now, as you might imagine, we had to work with a resource that toddlers really care about, so we used the toddler equivalent of gold, namely, Goldfish crackers.
(Laughter) We gave kids this windfall of Goldfish for themselves and a chance to give some of their Goldfish away to a puppet named Monkey.
(Video) Researcher: I found even more treats, and I'm going to give them all to you.
Toddler: Ooh. Thank you.
Researcher: But, you know, I don't see any more treats.
Will you give one to Monkey?
Toddler: Yeah. Researcher: Yeah?
Toddler: Yeah.
Here.
Researcher: Ooh, yummy. Mmmm.
Toddler: All gone, he ate it.
Elizabeth Dunn: Now, we trained research assistants to watch these videos and code toddlers' emotional reactions.
Of course, we didn't tell them our hypotheses.
The data revealed that toddlers were pretty happy when they got this pile of Goldfish for themselves, but they were actually even happier when they got to give some of their Goldfish away.
And this warm glow of giving persists into adulthood.
When we analyzed surveys from more than 200,000 adults across the globe, we saw that nearly a third of the world's population reported giving at least some money to charity in the past month.
Remarkably, in every major region of the world, people who gave money to charity were happier than those who did not, even after taking into account their own personal financial situation.
And this correlation wasn't trivial.
It looked like giving to charity made about the same difference for happiness as having twice as much income.
Now, as a researcher, if you're lucky enough to stumble on an effect that replicates around the world in children and adults alike, you start to wonder: Could this be part of human nature?
We know that pleasure reinforces adaptive behaviors like eating and sex that help perpetuate our species, and it looked to me like giving might be one of those behaviors.
I was really excited about these ideas, and I wrote about them in the "New York Times."
One of the people who read this article was my accountant.
(Laughter) Yeah.
At tax time, I found myself seated across from him, watching as he slowly tapped his pen on the charitable giving line of my tax return with this look of, like, poorly concealed disapproval.
(Laughter) Despite building my career by showing how great giving can feel, I actually wasn't doing very much of it.
So I resolved to give more.
Around that time, devastating stories about the Syrian refugee crisis were everywhere.
I really wanted to help, so I pulled out my credit card.
I knew my donations would probably make a difference for someone somewhere, but going to the website of an effective charity and entering my Visa number still just didn't feel like enough.
That's when I learned about the Group of Five.
The Canadian government allows any five Canadians to privately sponsor a family of refugees.
You have to raise enough money to support the family for their first year in Canada, and then they literally get on a plane to your city.
One of the things that I think is so cool about this program is that no one is allowed to do it alone.
And instead of a Group of Five, we ended up partnering with a community organization and forming a group of 25.
After almost two years of paperwork and waiting, we learned that our family would be arriving in Vancouver in less than six weeks.
They had four sons and a daughter, so we raced to find them a place to live.
We were very lucky to find them a house, but it needed quite a bit of work.
So my friends came out on evenings and weekends and painted and cleaned and assembled furniture.
When the big day came, we filled their fridge with milk and fresh fruit and headed to the airport to meet our family.
It was a little overwhelming for everyone, especially the four-year-old.
His mother was reunited with her sister who had come to Canada earlier through the same program.
They hadn't seen each other in 15 years.
When you hear that more than 5.6 million refugees have fled Syria, you're faced with this tragedy that the human brain hasn't really evolved to comprehend.
It's so abstract.
Before, if any of us had been asked to donate 15 hours a month to help out with the refugee crisis, we probably would have said no.
But as soon as we took our family to their new home in Vancouver, we all had the same realization: we were just going to do whatever it took to help them be happy.
This experience made me think a little more deeply about my research.
Back in my lab, we'd seen the benefits of giving spike when people felt a real sense of connection with those they were helping and could easily envision the difference they were making in those individuals' lives.
For example, in one experiment, we gave participants an opportunity to donate a bit of money to either UNICEF or Spread the Net.
We chose these charities intentionally, because they were partners and shared the same critically important goal of promoting children's health.
But I think UNICEF is just such a big, broad charity that it can be a little hard to envision how your own small donation will make a difference.
In contrast, Spread the Net offers donors a concrete promise: for every 10 dollars donated, they provide one bed net to protect a child from malaria.
We saw that the more money people gave to Spread the Net, the happier they reported feeling afterward.
In contrast, this emotional return on investment was completely eliminated when people gave money to UNICEF.
So this suggests that just giving money to a worthwhile charity isn't always enough.
You need to be able to envision how, exactly, your dollars are going to make a difference.
Of course, the Group of Five program takes this idea to a whole new level.
When we first took on this project, we would talk about when the refugees would arrive.
Now, we just refer to them as our family.
Recently, we took the kids ice skating, and later that day, my six-year-old, Oliver, asked me, "Mommy, who is the oldest kid in our family?"
I assumed he was talking about his plethora of cousins, and he was talking about them, but also about our Syrian family.
Since our family arrived, so many people and organizations have offered to help, providing everything from free dental fillings to summer camps.
It's made me see the goodness that exists in our community.
Thanks to one donation, the kids got to go to bike camp, and every day of the week, some member of our group tried to be there to cheer for them.
I happened to be there the day the training wheels were supposed to come off, and let me tell you, the four-year-old did not think this was a good idea.
So I went over and talked to him about the long-term benefits of riding without training wheels.
(Laughter) Then I remembered that he was four and barely spoke English.
So I reverted to two words he definitely knew: ice cream.
You try without training wheels, I'll buy you ice cream.
Here's what happened next.
(Video) ED: Yes. Yeah!
Kid: I'm gonna try.
ED: Oh my God! Look at you go!
(Squealing) Look at you go! You're doing it all by yourself!
(Audience) (Laughter) (Video) ED: Good job!
(Audience) (Laughter) (Applause) ED: So this is the kind of helping that human beings evolved to enjoy, but for 40 years, Canada was the only country in the world that allowed private citizens to sponsor refugees.
Now -- Canada!
(Applause) It's pretty great.
Now Australia and the UK are starting up similar programs.
Just imagine how different the refugee crisis could look if more countries made this possible.
Creating these kinds of meaningful connections between individuals provides an opportunity to deal with challenges that feel overwhelming.
One of those challenges lies just blocks from where I'm standing right now, in the Downtown Eastside of Vancouver.
By some measures, it's the poorest urban postal code in Canada.
We actually debated whether to bring over a family of refugees, because there are so many people right here already struggling.
My friend Evan told me that when he was a kid and his parents drove through this neighborhood, he would duck down in the back seat.
But Evan's parents never would have guessed that when he grew up, he would open up the doors of a local restaurant and invite this community inside to enjoy three-course dinners.
The program that Evan helped build is called "Plenty of Plates," and the goal is not just to provide free meals but to create moments of connection between people who otherwise might never make eye contact.
Each night, a local business sponsors the dinner and sends a team of volunteers who help make and serve the meal.
Afterward, the leftovers get distributed to people who are out on the street, and importantly, there's enough money left to provide a thousand free lunches for this community in the days that follow.
But the benefits of this program extend beyond food.
For the volunteers, it provides an opportunity to engage with people, to sit down and hear their stories.
After this experience, one volunteer changed his commute so that instead of avoiding this neighborhood, he walks through it, smiling or making eye contact as he passes familiar faces.
All of us are capable of finding joy in giving.
But we shouldn't expect this to happen automatically.
Spending money helping others doesn't necessarily promote happiness.
Instead, it matters how we do it.
And if we want people to give more, we need to subvert the way we think about charitable giving.
We need to create opportunities to give that enable us to appreciate our shared humanity.
If any of you work for a charity, don't reward your donors with pens or calendars.
(Applause) Reward them with the opportunity to see the specific impact that their generosity is having and to connect with the individuals and communities they're helping.
We're used to thinking about giving as something we should do.
And it is.
But in thinking about it this way, we're missing out on one of the best parts of being human: that we have evolved to find joy in helping others.
Let's stop thinking about giving as just this moral obligation and start thinking of it as a source of pleasure.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to start off by saying, Houston, we have a problem.
We're entering a second generation of no progress in terms of human flight in space. In fact, we've regressed.
We stand a very big chance of losing our ability to inspire our youth to go out and continue this very important thing that we as a species have always done.
And that is, instinctively we've gone out and climbed over difficult places, went to more hostile places, and found out later, maybe to our surprise, that that's the reason we survived.
And I feel very strongly that it's not good enough for us to have generations of kids that think that it's OK to look forward to a better version of a cell phone with a video in it.
They need to look forward to exploration; they need to look forward to colonization; they need to look forward to breakthroughs.
We need to inspire them, because they need to lead us and help us survive in the future.
I'm particularly troubled that what NASA's doing right now with this new Bush doctrine to -- for this next decade and a half -- oh shoot, I screwed up.
We have real specific instructions here not to talk about politics.
(Laughter) What we're looking forward to is -- (Applause) what we're looking forward to is not only the inspiration of our children, but the current plan right now is not really even allowing the most creative people in this country -- the Boeing's and Lockheed's space engineers -- to go out and take risks and try new stuff.
We're going to go back to the moon ... 50 years later?
And we're going to do it very specifically planned to not learn anything new.
I'm really troubled by that. But anyway that's -- the basis of the thing that I want to share with you today, though, is that right back to where we inspire people who will be our great leaders later.
That's the theme of my next 15 minutes here.
And I think that the inspiration begins when you're very young: three-year-olds, up to 12-, 14-year-olds.
What they look at is the most important thing.
Let's take a snapshot at aviation.
And there was a wonderful little short four-year time period when marvelous things happened.
It started in 1908, when the Wright brothers flew in Paris, and everybody said, "Ooh, hey, I can do that." There's only a few people that have flown in early 1908. In four years, 39 countries had hundreds of airplanes, thousand of pilots. Airplanes were invented by natural selection.
Now you can say that intelligent design designs our airplanes of today, but there was no intelligent design really designing those early airplanes.
There were probably at least 30,000 different things tried, and when they crash and kill the pilot, don't try that again.
The ones that flew and landed OK because there were no trained pilots who had good flying qualities by definition.
So we, by making a whole bunch of attempts, thousands of attempts, in that four-year time period, we invented the concepts of the airplanes that we fly today. And that's why they're so safe, as we gave it a lot of chance to find what's good.
That has not happened at all in space flying.
There's only been two concepts tried -- two by the U.S. and one by the Russians.
Well, who was inspired during that time period?
Aviation Week asked me to make a list of who I thought were the movers and shakers of the first 100 years of aviation.
And I wrote them down and I found out later that every one of them was a little kid in that wonderful renaissance of aviation.
Well, what happened when I was a little kid was -- some pretty heavy stuff too.
The jet age started: the missile age started. Von Braun was on there showing how to go to Mars -- and this was before Sputnik.
And this was at a time when Mars was a hell of a lot more interesting than it is now. We thought there'd be animals there; we knew there were plants there; the colors change, right?
But, you know, NASA screwed that up because they've sent these robots and they've landed it only in the deserts.
(Laughter) If you look at what happened -- this little black line is as fast as man ever flew, and the red line is top-of-the-line military fighters and the blue line is commercial air transport.
You notice here's a big jump when I was a little kid -- and I think that had something to do with giving me the courage to go out and try something that other people weren't having the courage to try.
Well, what did I do when I was a kid?
I didn't do the hotrods and the girls and the dancing and, well, we didn't have drugs in those days. But I did competition model airplanes.
I spent about seven years during the Vietnam War flight-testing airplanes for the Air Force.
And then I went in and I had a lot of fun building airplanes that people could build in their garages.
And some 3,000 of those are flying. Of course, one of them is around the world Voyager. I founded another company in '82, which is my company now.
And we have developed more than one new type of airplane every year since 1982.
And there's a lot of them that I actually can't show you on this chart.
The most impressive airplane ever, I believe, was designed only a dozen years after the first operational jet.
Stayed in service till it was too rusty to fly, taken out of service.
We retreated in '98 back to something that was developed in '56. What?
The most impressive spaceship ever, I believe, was a Grumman Lunar Lander. It was a -- you know, it landed on the moon, take off of the moon, didn't need any maintenance guys -- that's kind of cool.
We've lost that capability. We abandoned it in '72.
This thing was designed three years after Gagarin first flew in space in 1961.
Three years, and we can't do that now. Crazy.
Talk very briefly about innovation cycles, things that grow, have a lot of activity; they die out when they're replaced by something else.
These things tend to happen every 25 years.
40 years long, with an overlap. You can put that statement on all kinds of different technologies. The interesting thing -- by the way, the speed here, excuse me, higher-speed travel is the title of these innovation cycles. There is none here.
These two new airplanes are the same speed as the DC8 that was done in 1958.
Here's the biggie, and that is, you don't have innovation cycles if the government develops and the government uses it.
You know, a good example, of course, is the DARPA net.
Computers were used for artillery first, then IRS.
But when we got it, now you have all the level of activity, all the benefit from it. Private sector has to do it.
Keep that in mind. I put down innovation -- I've looked for innovation cycles in space; I found none.
The very first year, starting when Gagarin went in space, and a few weeks later Alan Shepherd, there were five manned space flights in the world -- the very first year.
In 2003, everyone that the United States sent to space was killed.
There were only three or four flights in 2003.
In 2004, there were only two flights: two Russian Soyuz flights to the international manned station. And I had to fly three in Mojave with my little group of a couple dozen people in order to get to a total of five, which was the number the same year back in 1961.
There is no growth. There's no activity. There's no nothing.
This is a picture here taken from SpaceShipOne.
This is a picture here taken from orbit.
Our goal is to make it so that you can see this picture and really enjoy that.
We know how to do it for sub-orbital flying now, do it safe enough -- at least as safe as the early airlines -- so that can be done.
And I think I want to talk a little bit about why we had the courage to go out and try that as a small company.
Well, first of all, what's going to happen next?
The first industry will be a high volume, a lot of players.
There's another one announced just last week.
And it will be sub-orbital. And the reason it has to be sub-orbital is, there is not solutions for adequate safety to fly the public to orbit. The governments have been doing this -- three governments have been doing this for 45 years, and still four percent of the people that have left the atmosphere have died.
That's -- You don't want to run a business with that kind of a safety record.
It'll be very high volume; we think 100,000 people will fly by 2020.
I can't tell you when this will start, because I don't want my competition to know my schedule.
But I think once it does, we will find solutions, and very quickly, you'll see those resort hotels in orbit.
And that real easy thing to do, which is a swing around the moon so you have this cool view. And that will be really cool.
Because the moon doesn't have an atmosphere -- you can do an elliptical orbit and miss it by 10 feet if you want.
Oh, it's going to be so much fun.
(Laughter) OK. My critics say, "Hey, Rutan's just spending a lot of these billionaires' money for joyrides for billionaires.
What's this? This is not a transportation system; it's just for fun."
And I used to be bothered by that, and then I got to thinking, well, wait a minute. I bought my first Apple computer in 1978 and I bought it because I could say, "I got a computer at my house and you don't.
'What do you use it for?' Come over. It does Frogger." OK.
(Laughter) Not the bank's computer or Lockheed's computer, but the home computer was for games.
For a whole decade it was for fun -- we didn't even know what it was for.
But what happened, the fact that we had this big industry, big development, big improvement and capability and so on, and they get out there in enough homes -- we were ripe for a new invention.
And the inventor is in this audience.
Al Gore invented the Internet and because of that, something that we used for a whole year -- excuse me -- a whole decade for fun, became everything -- our commerce, our research, our communication and, if we let the Google guys think for another couple weekends, we can add a dozen more things to the list. (Laughter) And it won't be very long before you won't be able to convince kids that we didn't always have computers in our homes.
So fun is defendable.
OK, I want to show you kind of a busy chart, but in it is my prediction with what's going to happen.
And in it also brings up another point, right here.
There's a group of people that have come forward -- and you don't know all of them -- but the ones that have come forward were inspired as young children, this little three- to 15-year-old age, by us going to orbit and going to the moon here, right in this time period.
Paul Allen, Elan Musk, Richard Branson, Jeff Bezos, the Ansari family, which is now funding the Russians' sub-orbital thing, Bob Bigelow, a private space station, and Carmack.
These people are taking money and putting it in an interesting area, and I think it's a lot better than they put it in an area of a better cell phone or something -- but they're putting it in very -- areas and this will lead us into this kind of capability, and it will lead us into the next really big thing and it will allow us to explore. And I think eventually it will allow us to colonize and to keep us from going extinct.
They were inspired by big progress. But look at the progress that's going on after that.
There were a couple of examples here.
The military fighters had a -- highest-performance military airplane was the SR71. It went a whole life cycle, got too rusty to fly, and was taken out of service. The Concorde doubled the speed for airline travel.
It went a whole life cycle without competition, took out of service. And we're stuck back here with the same kind of capability for military fighters and commercial airline travel that we had back in the late '50s.
But something is out there to inspire our kids now.
And I'm talking about if you've got a baby now, or if you've got a 10-year-old now.
What's out there is there's something really interesting going to happen here.
Relatively soon, you'll be able to buy a ticket and fly higher and faster than the highest-performance military operational airplane. It's never happened before.
The fact that they have stuck here with this kind of performance has been, well, you know, you win the war in 12 minutes; why do you need something better?
But I think when you guys start buying tickets and flying sub-orbital flights to space, very soon -- wait a minute, what's happening here, we'll have military fighters with sub-orbital capability, and I think very soon this.
But the interesting thing about it is the commercial guys are going to go first.
OK, I look forward to a new "capitalist's space race," let's call it.
You remember the space race in the '60s was for national prestige, because we lost the first two milestones.
We didn't lose them technically. The fact that we had the hardware to put something in orbit when we let Von Braun fly it -- you can argue that's not a technical loss.
Sputnik wasn't a technical loss, but it was a prestige loss.
America -- the world saw America as not being the leader in technology, and that was a very strong thing.
And then we flew Alan Shepherd weeks after Gagarin, not months or decades, or whatever. So we had the capability.
But America lost. We lost. And because of that, we made a big jump to recover it.
Well, again, what's interesting here is we've lost to the Russians on the first couple of milestones already.
You cannot buy a ticket commercially to fly into space in America -- can't do it. You can buy it in Russia.
You can fly with Russian hardware. This is available because a Russian space program is starving, and it's nice for them to get 20 million here and there to take one of the seats.
It's commercial. It can be defined as space tourism. They are also offering a trip to go on this whip around the moon, like Apollo 8 was done.
100 million bucks -- hey, I can go to the moon.
But, you know, would you have thought back in the '60s, when the space race was going on, that the first commercial capitalist-like thing to do to buy a ticket to go to the moon would be in Russian hardware?
And would you have thought, would the Russians have thought, that when they first go to the moon in their developed hardware, the guys inside won't be Russians? Maybe it'll probably be a Japanese or an American billionaire? Well, that's weird: you know, it really is.
But anyway, I think we need to beat them again.
I think what we'll do is we'll see a successful, very successful, private space flight industry. Whether we're first or not really doesn't matter.
The Russians actually flew a supersonic transport before the Concorde.
And then they flew a few cargo flights, and took it out of service.
I think you kind of see the same kind of parallel when the commercial stuff is offered.
OK, we'll talk just a little bit about commercial development for human space flight.
This little thing says here: five times what NASA's doing by 2020. I want to tell you, already there's about 1.5 billion to 1.7 billion investment in private space flight that is not government at all -- already, worldwide. If you read -- if you Google it, you'll find about half of that money, but there's twice of that being committed out there -- not spent yet, but being committed and planned for the next few years. Hey, that's pretty big.
I'm predicting, though, as profitable as this industry is going to be -- and it certainly is profitable when you fly people at 200,000 dollars on something that you can actually operate at a tenth of that cost, or less -- this is going to be very profitable.
I predict, also, that the investment that will flow into this will be somewhere around half of what the U.S. taxpayer spends for NASA's manned spacecraft work.
And every dollar that flows into that will be spent more efficiently by a factor of 10 to 15. And what that means is before we know it, the progress in human space flight, with no taxpayer dollars, will be at a level of about five times as much as the current NASA budgets for human space flight.
And that is because it's us. It's private industry.
You should never depend on the government to do this sort of stuff -- and we've done it for a long time. The NACA, before NASA, never developed an airliner and never ran an airline.
But NASA is developing the space liner, always has, and runs the only space line, OK. And we've shied away from it because we're afraid of it. But starting back in June of 2004, when I showed that a little group out there actually can do it, can get a start with it, everything changed after that time.
OK, thank you very much.
(Applause)
Nature's my muse and it's been my passion.
As a photographer for National Geographic, I've portrayed it for many.
But five years ago, I went on a personal journey.
I wanted to visualize the story of life.
It's the hardest thing I've ever attempted, and there have been plenty of times when I felt like backing out.
But there were also revelations.
And one of those I'd like to share with you today.
I went down to a remote lagoon in Australia, hoping to see the Earth the way it was three billion years ago, back before the sky turned blue.
There's stromatolites down there -- the first living things to capture photosynthesis -- and it's the only place they still occur today.
Going down there was like entering a time capsule, and I came out with a different sense of myself in time.
The oxygen exhaled by those stromatolites is what we all breathe today.
Stromatolites are the heroes in my story.
I hope it's a story that has some resonance for our time.
It's a story about you and me, nature and science.
And with that said, I'd like to invite you for a short, brief journey of life through time.
Our journey starts in space, where matter condenses into spheres over time ...
solidifying into surface, molded by fire.
The fire gave way, Earth emerged -- but this was an alien planet.
The moon was closer; things were different.
Heat from within made geysers erupt -- that is how the oceans were born.
Water froze around the poles and shaped the edges of the Earth.
Water is the key to life, but in frozen form, it is a latent force.
And when it vanishes, Earth becomes Mars.
But this planet is different -- it's roiling inside.
And where that energy touches water, something new emerges: life.
It arises around cracks in the Earth.
Mud and minerals become substrate; there are bacteria.
Learn to multiply, thickening in places ...
Growing living structures under an alien sky ...
Stromatolites were the first to exhale oxygen.
And they changed the atmosphere.
A breath that's fossilized now as iron.
Meteorites delivered chemistry, and perhaps membranes, too.
Life needs a membrane to contain itself so it can replicate and mutate.
These are diatoms, single-celled phytoplankton with skeletons of silicon ...
circuit boards of the future.
Shallow seas nurtured life early on, and that's where it morphed into more complex forms.
It grew as light and oxygen increased.
Life hardened and became defensive.
It learned to move and began to see. The first eyes grew on trilobites.
Vision was refined in horseshoe crabs, among the first to leave the sea.
They still do what they've done for ages, their enemies long gone.
Scorpions follow prey out of the sea. Slugs became snails.
Fish tried amphibian life. Frogs adapted to deserts.
Lichens arose as a co-op. Fungi married algae ...
clinging to rock, and eating it too ... transforming barren land.
True land plants arose, leafless at first.
Once they learn how to stay upright, they grew in size and shape.
The fundamental forms of ferns followed, to bear spores that foreshadowed seeds.
Life flourished in swamps.
On land, life turned a corner. Jaws formed first; teeth came later.
Leatherbacks and tuataras are echoes from that era.
It took time for life to break away from water, and it still beckons all the time.
Life turned hard so it could venture inland.
And the dragons that arose are still among us today.
Jurassic Park still shimmers in part of Madagascar, and the center of Brazil, where plants called "cycads" remain rock hard.
Forests arose and nurtured things with wings.
One early form left an imprint, like it died only yesterday.
And others fly today like echoes of the past.
In birds, life gained new mobility.
Flamingos covered continents. Migrations got underway.
Birds witnessed the emergence of flowering plants.
Water lilies were among the first.
Plants began to diversify and grew, turning into trees.
In Australia, a lily turned into a grass tree, and in Hawaii, a daisy became a silver sword.
In Africa, Gondwana molded Proteas.
But when that ancient continent broke up, life got lusher.
Tropical rainforests arose, sparking new layers of interdependence.
Fungi multiplied. Orchids emerged, genitalia shaped to lure insects ...
a trick shared by the largest flower on Earth.
Co-evolution entwined insects and birds and plants forever.
When birds can't fly, they become vulnerable.
Kiwis are, and so are these hawks trapped near Antarctica.
Extinction can come slowly, but sometimes it arrives fast.
An asteroid hits, and the world went down in flames.
But there were witnesses, survivors in the dark.
When the skies cleared, a new world was born.
A world fit for mammals. From tiny shrews [came] tenrecs, accustomed to the dark.
New forms became bats. Civets.
New predators, hyenas, getting faster and faster still.
Grasslands created opportunities.
Herd safety came with sharpened senses.
Growing big was another answer, but size always comes at a price.
Some mammals turned back to water.
Walruses adapted with layers of fat. Sea lions got sleek.
And cetaceans moved into a world without bounds.
There are many ways to be a mammal. A 'roo hops in Oz; a horse runs in Asia; and a wolf evolves stilt legs in Brazil.
Primates emerge from jungles, as tarsiers first, becoming lemurs not much later.
Learning became reinforced. Bands of apes ventured into the open.
And forests dried out once more. Going upright became a lifestyle.
So who are we? Brothers of masculine chimps, sisters of feminine bonobos? We are all of them, and more.
We're molded by the same life force.
The blood veins in our hands echoed a course of water traces on the Earth.
And our brains -- our celebrated brains -- reflect a drainage of a tidal marsh.
Life is a force in its own right. It is a new element.
And it has altered the Earth. It covers Earth like a skin.
And where it doesn't, as in Greenland in winter, Mars is still not very far.
But that likelihood fades as long as ice melts again.
And where water is liquid, it becomes a womb for cells green with chlorophyll -- and that molecular marvel is what's made a difference -- it powers everything.
The whole animal world today lives on a stockpile of bacterial oxygen that is cycled constantly through plants and algae, and their waste is our breath, and vice versa.
This Earth is alive, and it's made its own membrane.
We call it "atmosphere." This is the icon of our journey.
And you all here today can imagine and will shape where we go next.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you.
My name is Ursus Wehrli, and I would like to talk to you this morning about my project, Tidying Up Art.
First of all -- any questions so far?
First of all, I have to say I'm not from around here.
I'm from a completely different cultural area, maybe you noticed?
I mean, I'm wearing a tie, first. And then secondly, I'm a little bit nervous because I'm speaking in a foreign language, and I want to apologize in advance, for any mistakes I might make.
Because I'm from Switzerland, and I just don't hope you think this is Swiss German I'm speaking now here. This is just what it sounds like if we Swiss try to speak American.
But don't worry -- I don't have trouble with English, as such.
I mean, it's not my problem, it's your language after all.
(Laughter) I am fine. After this presentation here at TED, I can simply go back to Switzerland, and you have to go on talking like this all the time.
(Laughter) So I've been asked by the organizers to read from my book.
It's called "Tidying Up Art" and it's, as you can see, it's more or less a picture book.
So the reading would be over very quickly.
But since I'm here at TED, I decided to hold my talk here in a more modern way, in the spirit of TED here, and I managed to do some slides here for you.
I'd like to show them around so we can just, you know -- (Laughter) Actually, I managed to prepare for you some enlarged pictures -- even better.
So Tidying Up Art, I mean, I have to say, that's a relatively new term.
You won't be familiar with it.
I mean, it's a hobby of mine that I've been indulging in for the last few years, and it all started out with this picture of the American artist, Donald Baechler I had hanging at home. I had to look at it every day and after a while I just couldn't stand the mess anymore this guy was looking at all day long.
Yeah, I kind of felt sorry for him.
And it seemed to me even he felt really bad facing these unorganized red squares day after day.
So I decided to give him a little support, and brought some order into neatly stacking the blocks on top of each other.
(Laughter) Yeah. And I think he looks now less miserable.
And it was great. With this experience, I started to look more closely at modern art. Then I realized how, you know, the world of modern art is particularly topsy-turvy.
And I can show here a very good example.
It's actually a simple one, but it's a good one to start with.
It's a picture by Paul Klee.
And we can see here very clearly, it's a confusion of color.
(Laughter) Yeah. The artist doesn't really seem to know where to put the different colors.
The various pictures here of the various elements of the picture -- the whole thing is unstructured.
We don't know, maybe Mr. Klee was probably in a hurry, I mean -- (Laughter) -- maybe he had to catch a plane, or something.
We can see here he started out with orange, and then he already ran out of orange, and here we can see he decided to take a break for a square.
And I would like to show you here my tidied up version of this picture.
(Laughter) We can see now what was barely recognizable in the original: 17 red and orange squares are juxtaposed with just two green squares.
Yeah, that's great.
So I mean, that's just tidying up for beginners.
I would like to show you here a picture which is a bit more advanced.
(Laughter) What can you say? What a mess.
I mean, you see, everything seems to have been scattered aimlessly around the space.
If my room back home had looked like this, my mother would have grounded me for three days.
So I'd like to -- I wanted to reintroduce some structure into that picture.
And that's really advanced tidying up.
(Applause) Yeah, you're right. Sometimes people clap at this point, but that's actually more in Switzerland.
(Laughter) We Swiss are famous for chocolate and cheese. Our trains run on time.
We are only happy when things are in order.
But to go on, here is a very good example to see.
This is a picture by Joan Miro.
And yeah, we can see the artist has drawn a few lines and shapes and dropped them any old way onto a yellow background.
And yeah, it's the sort of thing you produce when you're doodling on the phone.
(Laughter) And this is my -- (Laughter) -- you can see now the whole thing takes up far less space.
It's more economical and also more efficient.
With this method Mr. Miro could have saved canvas for another picture.
But I can see in your faces that you're still a little bit skeptical.
So that you can just appreciate how serious I am about all this, I brought along the patents, the specifications for some of these works, because I've had my working methods patented at the Eidgenössische Amt für Geistiges Eigentum in Bern, Switzerland.
(Laughter) I'll just quote from the specification.
"Laut den Kunstprüfer Dr. Albrecht --" It's not finished yet.
"Laut den Kunstprüfer Dr. Albrecht Götz von Ohlenhusen wird die Verfahrensweise rechtlich geschützt welche die Kunst durch spezifisch aufgeräumte Regelmässigkeiten des allgemeinen Formenschatzes neue Wirkungen zu erzielen möglich wird."
Ja, well I could have translated that, but you would have been none the wiser.
I'm not sure myself what it means but it sounds good anyway.
I just realized it's important how one introduces new ideas to people, that's why these patents are sometimes necessary.
I would like to do a short test with you.
Everyone is sitting in quite an orderly fashion here this morning.
So I would like to ask you all to raise your right hand. Yeah.
The right hand is the one we write with, apart from the left-handers.
And now, I'll count to three. I mean, it still looks very orderly to me.
Now, I'll count to three, and on the count of three I'd like you all to shake hands with the person behind you. OK?
One, two, three.
(Laughter) You can see now, that's a good example: even behaving in an orderly, systematic way can sometimes lead to complete chaos.
So we can also see that very clearly in this next painting.
This is a painting by the artist, Niki de Saint Phalle.
And I mean, in the original it's completely unclear to see what this tangle of colors and shapes is supposed to depict.
But in the tidied up version, it's plain to see that it's a sunburnt woman playing volleyball.
(Laughter) Yeah, it's a -- this one here, that's much better.
That's a picture by Keith Haring.
(Laughter) I think it doesn't matter.
So, I mean, this picture has not even got a proper title.
It's called "Untitled" and I think that's appropriate.
So, in the tidied-up version we have a sort of Keith Haring spare parts shop.
(Laughter) This is Keith Haring looked at statistically.
One can see here quite clearly, you can see we have 25 pale green elements, of which one is in the form of a circle.
Or here, for example, we have 27 pink squares with only one pink curve.
I mean, that's interesting. One could extend this sort of statistical analysis to cover all Mr. Haring's various works, in order to establish in which period the artist favored pale green circles or pink squares.
And the artist himself could also benefit from this sort of listing procedure by using it to estimate how many pots of paint he's likely to need in the future.
(Laughter) One can obviously also make combinations.
For example, with the Keith Haring circles and Kandinsky's dots.
You can add them to all the squares of Paul Klee.
In the end, one has a list with which one then can arrange.
Then you categorize it, then you file it, put that file in a filing cabinet, put it in your office and you can make a living doing it.
(Laughter) Yeah, from my own experience. So I'm -- (Laughter) Actually, I mean, here we have some artists that are a bit more structured. It's not too bad.
This is Jasper Johns. We can see here he was practicing with his ruler.
(Laughter) But I think it could still benefit from more discipline.
And I think the whole thing adds up much better if you do it like this.
(Laughter) And here, that's one of my favorites.
Tidying up Rene Magritte -- this is really fun.
You know, there is a -- (Laughter) I'm always being asked what inspired me to embark on all this.
It goes back to a time when I was very often staying in hotels.
So once I had the opportunity to stay in a ritzy, five-star hotel.
And you know, there you had this little sign -- I put this little sign outside the door every morning that read, "Please tidy room." I don't know if you have them over here.
So actually, my room there hasn't been tidied once daily, but three times a day.
So after a while I decided to have a little fun, and before leaving the room each day I'd scatter a few things around the space.
Like books, clothes, toothbrush, etc. And it was great.
By the time I returned everything had always been neatly returned to its place.
But then one morning, I hang the same little sign onto that picture by Vincent van Gogh.
(Laughter) And you have to say this room hadn't been tidied up since 1888.
And when I returned it looked like this.
(Laughter) Yeah, at least it is now possible to do some vacuuming.
(Laughter) OK, I mean, I can see there are always people that like reacting that one or another picture hasn't been properly tidied up. So we can make a short test with you.
This is a picture by Rene Magritte, and I'd like you all to inwardly -- like in your head, that is -- to tidy that up. So it's possible that some of you would make it like this.
(Laughter) Yeah? I would actually prefer to do it more this way.
Some people would make apple pie out of it.
But it's a very good example to see that the whole work was more of a handicraft endeavor that involved the very time-consuming job of cutting out the various elements and sticking them back in new arrangements.
And it's not done, as many people imagine, with the computer, otherwise it would look like this.
(Laughter) So now I've been able to tidy up pictures that I've wanted to tidy up for a long time.
Here is a very good example. Take Jackson Pollock, for example.
It's -- oh, no, it's -- that's a really hard one.
But after a while, I just decided here to go all the way and put the paint back into the cans.
(Applause) Or you could go into three-dimensional art.
Here we have the fur cup by Meret Oppenheim.
Here I just brought it back to its original state.
(Laughter) But yeah, and it's great, you can even go, you know -- Or we have this pointillist movement for those of you who are into art.
The pointillist movement is that kind of paintings where everything is broken down into dots and pixels.
And then I -- this sort of thing is ideal for tidying up.
(Laughter) So I once applied myself to the work of the inventor of that method, Georges Seurat, and I collected together all his dots.
And now they're all in here.
(Laughter) You can count them afterwards, if you like.
You see, that's the wonderful thing about the tidy up art idea: it's new. So there is no existing tradition in it.
There is no textbooks, I mean, not yet, anyway.
I mean, it's "the future we will create."
(Laughter) But to round things up I would like to show you just one more.
This is the village square by Pieter Bruegel.
That's how it looks like when you send everyone home.
(Laughter) Yeah, maybe you're asking yourselves where old Bruegel's people went?
Of course, they're not gone. They're all here.
(Laughter) I just piled them up.
(Laughter) So I'm -- yeah, actually I'm kind of finished at that moment.
And for those who want to see more, I've got my book downstairs in the bookshop.
And I'm happy to sign it for you with any name of any artist.
(Laughter) But before leaving I would like to show you, I'm working right now on another -- in a related field with my tidying up art method. I'm working in a related field.
And I started to bring some order into some flags.
Here -- that's just my new proposal here for the Union Jack.
(Laughter) And then maybe before I leave you ...
yeah, I think, after you have seen that I have to leave anyway.
(Laughter) Yeah, that was a hard one. I couldn't find a way to tidy that up properly, so I just decided to make it a little bit more simpler.
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
On April 26th, 1937, Fascist forces bombed the Basque village of Guernica in Northern Spain.
It was one of the worst civilian casualties of the Spanish Civil War, waged between the democratic republic and General Franco’s fascist contingent.
For Pablo Picasso, the tragedy sparked a frenzied period of work in which he produced a massive anti-war mural, aptly titled "Guernica."
The painting is a powerful work of historical documentation and political protest.
But while Picasso’s artistic motivations are clear, the symbolism of the painting can be as confusing and chaotic as war itself.
How can we make sense of this overwhelming image, and what exactly makes it a masterpiece of anti-war art?
The painting’s monumental canvas is disorienting from the start, rendered in the abstracted Cubist style Picasso pioneered.
Cubism deliberately emphasized the two-dimensionality of the canvas by flattening the objects being painted.
This afforded viewers multiple and often impossible perspectives on the same object; a technique considered shocking even in Picasso’s domestic scenes.
But in this context, the style offers a profoundly overwhelming view of violence, destruction, and casualties.
Multiple perspectives only compound the horror on display– sending the eyes hurtling around the frame in a futile hunt for peace.
On the far left, a woman holding her dead child releases a scream; her eyes sliding down her face in the shape of tears and her head bending back unnaturally to echo her baby’s.
There is the statue of a soldier present below, but he is unable to defend the woman and child.
Instead his broken body lies in pieces, his arm clutching a splintered sword in a signal of utmost defeat.
The tip of his sword meets a woman’s foot as she attempts to flee the devastation.
But her other leg appears rooted to the spot, locked in the corner of the canvas even as she stretches to move it.
Another victim appears behind this slouching figure.
Falling helplessly as flames lick around her, she too is caught in her own hopeless scene.
Each of these figures bordering the painting are horribly trapped, giving the work an acute sense of claustrophobia.
And where you might expect the canvas’ massive size to counteract this feeling, its scale only highlights the nearly life-sized atrocities on display.
Some possible relief comes from a lamp held tightly by a ghostly woman reaching out her window.
But is her lantern’s hopeful glow truly lighting the scene?
Or is it the jagged lightbulb– thought to represent the technologies of modern warfare– which illuminates her view of the chaos below?
From the coffin-like confines of her window, her arm guides the viewer back into the fray, to perhaps the most controversial symbols of all– two ghostly animals caught in the destruction.
Does the screaming horse embody the threat of Franco’s military nationalism; or does the spike running through its body convey its victimhood?
Does the white bull represent Spain, the country of matadors and a common theme in Picasso’s work– or does it stand for the brutality of war?
In this scene of strife, these animals raise more questions than answers.
And additional elements hidden throughout the frame offer even more secrets for close observers.
At the top of the canvas flashes a bird desperate to escape the carnage.
And the abundance of animals on display may hint at the bombing’s date– a market day which flooded the streets with villagers, animals, and other potential causalities.
Like the bombing of Guernica itself, Picasso’s painting is dense with destruction.
But hidden beneath this supposed chaos, are carefully crafted scenes and symbols, carrying out the painting’s multifaceted attack on fascism.
Decades after its creation, "Guernica" retains its power to shock viewers and ignite debate, and is often referenced at anti-war gatherings around the world.
Hundreds of viewers have grappled with its harsh imagery, shattering symbolism and complex political messaging.
But even without a close understanding of it’s complicated subtext, Picasso’s work remains a searing reminder of the true casualties of violence.
My name is Hannah.
And that is a palindrome.
That is a word you can spell the same forwards and backwards, if you can spell.
But the thing is -- (Laughter) my entire family have palindromic names.
It's a bit of a tradition.
We've got Mum, Dad -- (Laughter) Nan, Pop.
(Laughter) And my brother, Kayak.
(Laughter) There you go.
That's just a bit a joke, there.
(Laughter) I like to kick things off with a joke because I'm a comedian.
Now there's two things you know about me already: my name's Hannah and I'm a comedian.
I'm wasting no time.
Here's a third thing you can know about me: I don't think I'm qualified to speak my own mind.
Bold way to begin a talk, yes, but it's true.
I've always had a great deal of difficulty turning my thinking into the talking.
So it seems a bit of a contradiction, then, that someone like me, who is so bad at the chat, could be something like a stand-up comedian.
But there you go. There you go.
It's what it is.
I first tried my hand at stand-up comedi -- comedie ... See?
See? See?
(Laughter) I first tried my hand at stand-up comedy in my late 20s, and despite being a pathologically shy virtual mute with low self-esteem who'd never held a microphone before, I knew as soon as I walked and stood in front of the audience, I knew, before I'd even landed my first joke, I knew that I really liked stand-up, and stand-up really liked me.
But for the life of me, I couldn't work out why.
Why is it I could be so good at doing something I was so bad at?
(Laughter) I just couldn't work it out, I could not understand it.
That is, until I could.
Now, before I explain to you why it is that I can be good at something I'm so bad at, let me throw another spanner of contradiction into the work by telling you that not long after I worked out why that was, I decided to quit comedy.
And before I explain that little oppositional cat I just threw amongst the thinking pigeons, let me also tell you this: quitting launched my comedy career.
(Laughter) Like, really launched it, to the point where after quitting comedy, I became the most talked-about comedian on the planet, because apparently, I'm even worse at making retirement plans than I am at speaking my own mind.
Now, all I've done up until this point apart from giving over a spattering of biographical detail is to tell you indirectly that I have three ideas that I want to share with you today.
And I've done that by way of sharing three contradictions: one, I am bad at talking, I am good at talking; I quit, I did not quit.
Three ideas, three contradictions.
Now, if you're wondering why there's only two things on my so-called list of three -- (Laughter) I remind you it is literally a list of contradictions.
Keep up.
(Laughter) Now, the folks at TED advised me that with a talk of this length, it's best to stick with just sharing one idea.
I said no.
(Laughter) What would they know?
To explain why I have chosen to ignore what is clearly very good advice, I want to take you back to the beginning of this talk, specifically, my palindrome joke.
Now that joke uses my favorite trick of the comedian trade, the rule of three, whereby you make a statement and then back that statement up with a list.
My entire family have palindromic names: Mum, Dad, Nan, Pop.
The first two ideas on that list create a pattern, and that pattern creates expectation.
And then the third thing -- bam! -- Kayak. What?
That's the rule of three.
One, two, surprise! Ha ha.
(Laughter) Now, the rule of three is not only fundamental to the way I do my craft, it is also fundamental to the way I communicate.
So I won't be changing anything for nobody, not even TED, which, I will point out, stands for three ideas: technology, entertainment and dickheads.
(Laughter) Works every time, doesn't it?
But you need more than just jokes to be able to cut it as a professional comedian.
You need to be able to walk that fine line between being charming and disarming.
And I discovered the most effective way to generate the amount of charm I needed to offset my disarming personality was through not jokes but stories.
So my stand-up routines are filled with stories: stories about growing up, my coming out story, stories about the abuse I've copped for being not only a woman but a big woman and a masculine-of-center woman.
If you watch my work online, check the comments out below for examples of abuse.
(Laughter) It's that time in the talk where I shift into second gear, and I'm going to tell you a story about everything I've just said.
In the last few days of her life, my grandma was surrounded by people, a lot of people, because my grandma was the loving matriarch of a large and loving family.
Now, if you haven't made the connection already, I am a member of that family.
I was lucky enough to be able to say goodbye to my grandma on the day she died.
But as she was already cocooned within herself by then, it was something of a one-sided goodbye.
So I thought about a lot of things, things I hadn't thought about in a long time, like the letters I used to write to my grandma when I first started university, letters I filled with funny stories and anecdotes that I embellished for her amusement.
And I remembered how I couldn't articulate the anxiety and fear that filled me as I tried to carve my tiny little life into a world that felt far too big for me.
But I remembered finding comfort in those letters, because I wrote them with my grandma in mind.
But as the world got more and more overwhelming and my ability to negotiate it got worse, not better, I stopped writing those letters.
I just didn't think I had the life that Grandma would want to read about.
Grandma did not know I was gay, and about six months before she died, out of nowhere, she asked me if I had a boyfriend.
Now, I remember making a conscious decision in that moment not to come out to my grandmother.
And I did that because I knew her life was drawing to an end, and my time with her was finite, and I did not want to talk about the ways we were different.
I wanted to talk about the ways were we connected.
So I changed the subject.
And at the time, it felt like the right decision.
But as I sat witness to my grandmother's life as it tapered to its inevitable end, I couldn't help but feel I'd made a mistake not to share such a significant part of my life.
But I also knew that I'd missed my opportunity, and as Grandma always used to say, "Ah, well, it's all part of the soup.
Too late to take the onions out now."
(Laughter) And I thought about that, and I thought about how I had to deal with too many onions as a kid, growing up gay in a state where homosexuality was illegal.
And with that thought, I could see how tightly wrapped in the tendrils of my own internalized shame I was.
And with that, I thought about all my traumas: the violence, the abuse, my rape.
And with all that cluster of thinking, a thought, a question, kept popping into my mind to which I had no answer: What is the purpose of my human?
Out of anyone in my family, I felt the most akin to my grandmother.
I mean, we share the most traits in common.
Not so much these days.
Death really changes people.
But that -- (Laughter) is my grandmother's sense of humor.
But the person I felt most akin to in the world was a mother, a grandmother, a great-grandmother, a great-great-grandmother.
Me? I represented the very end of my branch of the family tree.
And I wasn't entirely sure I was still connected to the trunk.
What was the purpose of my human?
The year after my grandmother's death was the most intensely creative of my life.
And I suppose that's because, at an end, my thoughts gather more than they scatter.
My thought process is not linear.
I'm a visual thinker. I see my thoughts.
I don't have a photographic memory, and nor is my head a static gallery of sensibly collected think pieces.
It's more that I've got this ever-evolving language of hieroglyphics that I've developed and can understand fluently and think deeply with.
but I struggle to translate.
I can't paint, draw, sculpt, or even haberdash, and as for the written word, I'm OK at it but it's a tortuous process of translation, and I don't feel it does the job.
And as far as speaking my own mind, like I said, I'm not great at it.
Speech has always felt like an inadequate freeze-frame for the life inside of me.
All this to say, I've always understood far more than I've ever been able to communicate.
Now, about a year before Grandma died, I was formally diagnosed with autism.
Now for me, that was mostly good news.
I always thought that I couldn't sort my life out like a normal person because I was depressed and anxious.
But it turns out I was depressed and anxious because I couldn't sort my life out like a normal person, because I was not a normal person, and I didn't know it.
Now, this is not to say I still don't struggle.
Every day is a bit of a struggle, to be honest.
But at least now I know what my struggle is, and getting to the starting line of normal is not it.
My struggle is not to escape the storm.
My struggle is to find the eye of the storm as best I can.
Now, apart from the usual way us spectrum types find our calm -- repetitive behaviors, routine and obsessive thinking -- I have another surprising doorway into the eye of the storm: stand-up comedy.
And if you need any more proof I'm neurodivergent, yes, I am calm doing a thing that scares the hell out of most people.
I'm almost dead inside up here.
(Laughter) Diagnosis gave me a framework on which to hang bits of me I could never understand.
My misfit suddenly had a fit, and for a while, I got giddy with a newfound confidence I had in my thinking.
But after Grandma died, that confidence took a dive, because thinking is how I grieve.
And in that grief of thought, I could suddenly see with so much clarity just how profoundly isolated I was and always had been.
What was the purpose of my human?
I began to think a lot about how autism and PTSD have so much in common.
And I started to worry, because I had both.
Could I ever untangle them?
I'd always been told that the way out of trauma was through a cohesive narrative.
I had a cohesive narrative, but I was still at the mercy of my traumas.
They're all part of my soup, but the onions still stung.
And at that point, I realized that I'd been telling my stories for laughs.
I'd been trimming away the darkness, cutting away the pain and holding on to my trauma for the comfort of my audience.
I was connecting other people through laughs, yet I remained profoundly disconnected.
What was the purpose of my human?
I did not have an answer, but I had an idea.
I had an idea to tell my truth, all of it, not to share laughs but to share the literal, visceral pain of my trauma.
And I thought the best way to do that would be through a comedy show.
And that is what I did.
I wrote a comedy show that did not respect the punchline, that line where comedians are expected and trusted to pull their punches and turn them into tickles.
I did not stop.
I punched through that line into the metaphorical guts of my audience.
I did not want to make them laugh.
I wanted to take their breath away, to shock them, so they could listen to my story and hold my pain as individuals, not as a mindless, laughing mob.
And that's what I did, and I called that show "Nanette."
Now, many -- (Applause) Now, many have argued that "Nanette" is not a comedy show.
And while I can agree "Nanette" is definitely not a comedy show, those people are still wrong -- (Laughter) because they have framed their argument as a way of saying I failed to do comedy.
I did not fail to do comedy.
I took everything I knew about comedy -- all the tricks, the tools, the know-how -- I took all that, and with it, I broke comedy.
You cannot break comedy with comedy if you fail at comedy.
Flaccid be thy hammer.
(Laughter) (Applause) That was not my point.
The point was not simply to break comedy.
The point was to break comedy so I could rebuild it and reshape it, reform it into something that could better hold everything I needed to share, and that is what I meant when I said I quit comedy.
Now, it's probably at this point where you're going, "Yeah, cool, but what are the three ideas, exactly?
It's a bit vague."
I'm glad I pretended you asked.
(Laughter) Now, I'm sure there's quite a few of you who have already identified three ideas.
A smart crowd, by all accounts, so I wouldn't be surprised at all.
But you might be surprised to find out that I don't have three ideas.
I told you I had three ideas, and that was a lie.
That was pure misdirection -- I'm very funny.
What I've done instead is I've taken whole handfuls of my ideas as seeds, and I've scattered them all throughout my talk.
And why did I do that?
Well, apart from shits and giggles, it comes down to something my grandma always used to say.
"It's not the garden, it's the gardening that counts."
And "Nanette" taught me the truth to that truism.
I fully expected by breaking the contract of comedy and telling my story in all its truth and pain that that would push me further into the margins of both life and art.
I expected that, and I was willing to pay that cost in order to tell my truth.
But that is not what happened.
The world did not push me away. It pulled me closer.
Through an act of disconnection, I found connection.
And it took me a long time to understand that what is at the heart of that contradiction is also at the heart of the contradiction as to why I can be so good at something I am so bad at.
You see, in the real world, I struggle to talk to people because my neurodiversity makes it difficult for me to think, listen, speak and process new information all at the same time.
But onstage, I don't have to think.
I prepare my thinks well in advance.
I don't have to listen. That is your job.
(Laughter) And I don't really have to talk, because, strictly speaking, I'm reciting.
So all that is left is for me to do my best to make a genuine connection with my audience.
And if the experience of "Nanette" taught me anything, it's that connection depends not just on me.
You play a part.
"Nanette" may have begun in me, but she now lives and grows in a whole world of other minds, minds I do not share.
But I trust I am connected.
And in that, she is so much bigger than me, just like the purpose of being human is so much bigger than all of us.
Make of that what you will.
Thank you, and hello.
(Applause)
Welcome to 10,000 feet.
Let me explain why we are here and why some of you have a pine cone close to you.
Once upon a time, I did a book called "How Buildings Learn."
Today's event you might call "How Mountains Teach."
A little background: For 10 years I've been trying to figure out how to hack civilization so that we can get long-term thinking to be automatic and common instead of difficult and rare -- or in some cases, non-existent.
It would be helpful if humanity got into the habit of thinking of the now not just as next week or next quarter, but you know, next 10,000 years and the last 10,000 years -- basically civilization's story so far.
So we have the Long Now Foundation in San Francisco.
It's an incubator for about a dozen projects, all having to do with continuity over the long term.
Our core project is a rather ambitious folly -- I suppose, a mythic undertaking: to build a 10,000-year clock that can really keep good time for that long a period.
And the design problems of a project like that are just absolutely delicious.
Go to the clock. And what we have here is something many of you saw here three years ago.
It's the first working prototype of the clock.
It's about nine feet high.
Designed by Danny Hillis and Alexander Rose. It's presently in London, and is ticking away very deliberately at the science museum there.
So the design problem for today is going to be, how do you house an eventual monumental clock like this so it can really tick, save time beautifully for 100 centuries?
Well, this was the first solution.
Alexander Rose came up with this idea of a spiraloid tower with continuous sloping ramps.
And it looked like a way to go, until you start thinking about, what does deep time do to a building?
Well, this is what deep time does to a building.
This is the Parthenon. It's only 2,450 years old, and look what happened to it.
Here's a beautiful project. They really knew it'd last forever, because they'd build it out of absolutely huge stones.
And now it's a pathetic ruin and no one even knows what it was used for.
That's what happens to buildings. They're vulnerable.
Even the most durable and intactable buildings, like the pyramids of Giza, are in bad shape when you look up close.
They've been looted inside and out.
And they're built to protect things but they don't protect things.
So we got to thinking, if you can't put things safely in a building, where can you safely put them? We thought, OK, underground.
How about underground with a view?
Underground in a place that's really solid.
So the obvious answer was, we need a mountain.
You don't want just any mountain.
You need absolutely the right mountain if you're going to have a clock for 10,000 years.
So here's an image of the long view of the search problem.
And we got to thinking for various reasons it ought to be a desert mountain, so we got looking in the dry areas of the Southwest.
We looked at mesas in New Mexico.
We were looking at dead volcanoes in Arizona.
Then Roger Kennedy, who was the director of the National Parks Service, led us to Eastern Nevada, to America's newest and oldest national park, which is called Great Basin National Park.
It's right on the eastern border of Nevada.
It's the highest range in the state -- over 13,000 feet.
And you'll notice that on the left, on the left, on the west, it's very steep, and on the right it's gentle.
This place is remote. It's over 200 miles from any major city.
It's nowhere near any Interstate or railroad.
And it's -- the only thing that goes by is what's called America's loneliest highway, U.S. 50.
Now, inside the yellow line here, on the right is -- that's all national park.
Inside the green line is national forest.
And then over to the left is Bureau of Land Management land and some private land.
Now, as it happened, that two-mile-long strip right in the middle, this vertical, was available because it was private land.
And thanks to Jay Walker who was here and Mitch Kapor who was here, who started the process, Long Now was able to get that two-mile-long strip of land.
And now let's look at the grand truth of what's there.
We're in Pole Canyon, looking west up the western escarpment of Mount Washington, which is 11,600 feet on top.
Those white cliffs are a dense Cambrian limestone.
That's a 2,000-foot thick formation, and it might be a beautiful place to hide a clock.
It would be a pilgrimage to get to it; it would be a serious hike to get up to where the clock is.
So last June, the Long Now board, some staff and some donors and advisors, made a two-week expedition to the mountain to explore it and investigate, one, if it's the right mountain, and two, if it's the right mountain, how it might actually work for us.
Now Danny Hillis sort of framed the problem.
He has a theory of how the overall clock experience should work.
It's what he calls the seven stages of a mythic adventure.
It starts with the image. The image is a picture you have in your mind of the goal at the end of the journey.
In this case it might well be an image of the clock.
Then there's the point of embarkation, that is, the point of transition from ordinary life to being a pilgrim on a quest.
Then -- this is a nice image of it, there's the labyrinth.
The labyrinth is a concept, it's like a twilight zone, it's a place where it's difficult, where you get disoriented, maybe you get scared -- but you have to go through it if you're going to get to some kind of deep reintegration.
Then there should always be in sight the draw -- a kind of a beacon that draws you on through the labyrinth to finish the process of getting there.
Now Brian Eno, who's been in the thick of the Long Now process, spent two years making a C.D. called "January 7003," and it's "Bell Studies for the Clock of the Long Now."
Based on -- parts of it are based on an algorithm that Danny Hillis developed, so that a peal of 10 bells makes a different peal every day for 10,000 years.
The Hillis algorithm. 10 factorial gives you that number.
And in fact, pretty soon we'll hear the sound.
January 7003. There it is.
OK, back to Danny's list.
Number five of the seven is the payoff. This is it. The climax.
The goal. The main thing that you're trying to get to.
And then Danny says a really great journey will have a secret payoff.
Something you didn't expect that caps what you did expect.
Then there's the return.
You've got to have a gradual return to the ordinary world, so you have time to assimilate what you've learned.
And then, how about a memento? Number seven.
At the end of it there's something physical, a kind of reward that you take away.
It might be a piece of a core drill of the mountain.
Something that's just yours.
How do you study a mountain for the kinds of things we're talking about?
This is not a normal building project.
What do you look for?
What are the elements that will most affect your ideas and decisions?
Start with borders. If you look on the left side of the cliffs here, that's national park. That's sacrosanct -- you can't do anything with that. To the right of it is national forest.
There's possibilities. The borders are important.
Other elements were mines, weather, approaches and elevation.
And especially trees. Look at those things up on top there.
It turns out that Mount Washington is covered with bristlecone pines.
They're the world's oldest living thing.
People think they're just the size of shrubs, but that's not actually true.
There are trees on that mountain that are 5,000 years old and still living.
The wood is so solid it's like stone, and it lasts for a long time.
So when you do tree ring studies of trunks that are on the mountain, some of them go back 10,000 years.
The stone itself is absolutely beautiful, sculpted by millennia of very tough winters up there.
We had tree ring analysts from the University of Arizona join us on the expedition.
Now, if you guys have a pine cone handy, now's a good time to put it in your hand and feel it, especially on the end.
That's interesting.
You'll find out why it's called a bristlecone pine. A little sensory experience.
Here's Danny Hillis in the midst of a bristlecone pine forest on Long Now land. I should say that the age of bristlecones was discovered, led by a theory.
Edmund Schulman in the 1950s had been studying trees under great stress at Timberline, and came to the realization that he put in an article in Science magazine called, "Longevity under Adversity in Conifers."
And then, based on that principle, he started looking around at the various trees at Timberline, and realized that the bristlecone pines -- he found some in the White Mountains that were over 4,000 years old.
Longevity under adversity is a pretty interesting design principle in its own right.
OK, onto the mines. The first asking price for the property when we looked at it in 1998 was one billion dollars for 180 acres and a couple of mines.
Because the owner said, "There's one billion dollars of beryllium in that mountain."
And we said, "Wow, that's great. Listen, we'll counter. How about zero?
(Laughter) And we're a non-profit foundation, you can give us the property and take a hell of a tax deduction.
(Laughter) All you have to do is prove to the government it's worth a billion dollars."
Well, a few years went by and there was some kind of back and forth, and by and by, thanks to Mitch and Jay, we were able to buy the whole property for 140,000 dollars.
This is one of the mines. It doesn't have any beryllium in it.
It's called the Pole Adit. And it does have tungsten, a little bit of tungsten, left over, that's the kind of mine it was.
But it goes a mile-and-a-half in a straight line, due east into the range, into very interesting territory -- except that, as you'll see when we go inside in a minute, we were hoping for limestone but in there is just shale.
And shale is not quite completely competent rock.
Competent rock is rock that will hold itself up without any shoring.
The shale would like some shoring, and so parts of it are caved in in there.
That's Ben Roberts from -- he's the bat specialist from the National Park.
But there are many wonders back in there, like this weird fungus on some of the collapsed timbers.
OK, here's another mine that's up on top of the property, and it dates back to 1870.
That's what the property was originally built around -- it was a set of mining claims. It was a very productive silver mine.
In fact, it was the highest-operating mine in Nevada, and it ran year round.
You can imagine what it was like in the winter at 10,000 feet.
You may recognize a couple of the miners there.
There's Jeff Bezos on the right and Paul Saville on the left looking for galena, which is the lead-silver thing. They didn't find any.
They both kept their day jobs. Here's the last mine.
It's called the Bonanza Adit. It's down in a canyon.
And Alexander Rose on the left there worked with a bunch of people from the National Park to survey the whole mine. It's a mile deep.
And they also found four species of bats in there.
Now, almost all those mines, by the way, meet underneath the mountain.
They don't quite, but it's something to think about.
They don't quite meet.
Let's go to weather. Mountains specialize in interesting weather.
Way more interesting than Monterey even today.
And so one Tuesday morning last June, there we were.
Woke up in the morning -- the mountain was covered with snow.
That was a great time to go up and visit our weather station which again, thanks to Mitch Kapor, we're building up there.
And it's a pretty interesting scene.
This is, on the left there, the joyful lady is Pat Irwin, who's the regional head of the National Forest Service, and they gave us the temporary use permit to be there.
We want a temporary use permit for the clock, eventually -- 10,000-year temporary use permit.
(Laughter) The weather station's pretty interesting.
Kurt Bollacker and Alexander Rose designed a radically wireless station.
It runs on solar, and it sends a signal with that antenna and bounces it off of micrometeorite trails in the atmosphere to a place in Bozeman, Montana, where the data is taken down and then sent through landlines to San Francisco, where we put the data in real time up on our website.
And there you see a week of weather at 9,400 feet on Mount Washington.
Let's go to approaches.
As it happens, there are no trails anywhere on Mount Washington, just a few old mining roads like this, so you have to bushwhack everywhere.
But there's no bears, and there's no poison oak, and there's basically no people because this place has been empty for a long time.
You can hike for days and not encounter anybody.
Well, here's a potential approach.
You need to come up the Lincoln Canyon.
It's this beautiful world all of its own, surrounded by cliffs, and it's an easy hike to stroll up the canyon bottom, until you get to this barrier, and it actually presents a problem.
So you can scratch Lincoln Canyon as an approach.
Another possible approach is right up the western front of the mountain.
You can see why we sometimes call it Long Mountain.
And from where you're standing at 6,000 feet in the valley, it's an easy hike up to the mature pinyon and juniper forest through that knoll at the front at 7,600 feet.
And you can carry right on up through meadows and steepening forest to the high base of the cliffs at 10,500 feet, where there's a bit of a problem.
Now, Jeff Bezos advised us when he left at the end of the expedition, "Make the clock inaccessible.
The harder it is to get to, the more people will value it."
And check -- those are 600-foot vertical walls there.
So Alexander Rose wanted to explore this route, and he started over here on the left from his pickup truck at 8,900 feet and headed up the mountain.
Now, as you gain elevation your IQ goes down -- (Laughter) but your emotional affect goes up, which is great for having a mythic experience, whether you want to or not.
In fact, Danny Hillis can estimate altitude by how much math he can't do in his head.
(Laughter) Now, I happened to be on the radio with Alexander when he got to this point at the base of the cliffs, and he said, quote, "There's a hidden notch. I think I can get up a ways."
Now, he's a rock climber, but you know, he's our executive director.
I don't want him killed. I know he's going to love cliffs.
I'm saying, "Be careful, be careful, be careful."
Then he starts going up, and the next thing I hear is, "I'm half-way up. It's like climbing stairs. I'm going up 60 degrees.
It's a secret passage. It's like something from Tolkien."
And I'm going, "Careful, careful. Please be careful."
And then, of course, the next thing I hear is, "I've made it to the top. You can see all of creation from up here."
And he dashed across the top of the mountains.
In fact, there he is. That's Alexander Rose.
First ascent of the western face to Mount Washington, and a solo ascent at that.
This discovery changed everything about our sense of these cliffs and what to do with them.
We realized that we had to name this thing that Alexander discovered.
How about Zander's Crevice? No.
(Laughter) So we finally decided on Alexander's Siq.
Zander's Siq is named after -- some of you have been to Petra, there's this wonderful slot canyon that leads into Petra called the Siq, and so this is the Siq.
And it really is hidden. I can't find it in this image, and I'm not sure you can.
Only when you get fresh snow can you see just along the rim there, and that brings it out.
Now, Danny and I were up at this same area one day, and Danny looked over to the right and noticed something halfway up the cliffs, which is a kind of a porch or a cliff shelf with bristlecones on it, and supposed that people going up to the clock inside the mountain could come out onto that shelf and look down at the view.
And the people toiling up the mountain could see them, these tiny little people up there, incredibly halfway up the cliff.
How did they get there? Do I have to do that?
And so that maybe becomes part of the draw and part of the labyrinth.
You can get another angle on Danny's porch by going around to the south and looking north at the whole formation there.
And you need to know that Danny's clock is to be kept accurate by a ray of sunshine, that perfect noon hitting it every sunny day, and the pulse of heat from that sets off a solar trigger which resets the clock to make it perfectly accurate.
So even with the slowing of the rotation of the earth and so on, the clock will keep perfectly good time.
So here we're looking from the south, look north.
This is all Forest Service land. If you go up on top of those cliffs, that's some of the Long Now land in those trees.
And if you go up there and look back, then you'll get a sense of what the view starts to be like from the top of the mountain.
That's the long view. That's 80 miles to the horizon.
And that's also timberline and those bristlecones really are shrubs.
That's a different place to be. It's 11,400 feet and it's exquisite.
Now, if you go over to the right from this image to looking at the edge of the cliffs, it's 600 foot, just about a yard to the left of Kurt Bollacker's foot, there is a 600-foot drop. He's ambling on over to Zander's Siq.
That's what it looks like looking down it.
We should probably put in a rail or something.
Over on the eastern side it's gentle, as you can see.
And that's not snow -- that's what the white limestone looks like.
You also see there a bighorn sheep.
Their herd was reintroduced from Wyoming.
And they're doing pretty well, but they've got a bit of trouble.
This is Danny Hillis, and he's figuring out a design problem.
he's trying to determine if where he is on a bit of Long Now land would appear from down in the valley to be the actual peak of the mountain.
because the real peak is hidden around the corner.
This is what in the infantry we used to call the military crest.
And as it turned out the answer is, yes, that is from down below in the valley it does look like the peak, and that might be conjured with.
We gradually realized we have three serious design domains to work on with this.
One is the experience of the mountain.
Another is the experience in the mountain.
And the third is the experience from the mountain, which is really dominated by the view shed of the spring valley there behind Danny, and if you look off to the right, out there, 15 miles across to the Schell Creek range.
In the front, there are 10 ranches strung right along the base of the mountains using the water from the mountains.
In fact, there are artesian wells where water springs right into the air.
One of the ranches is called the Kirkeby Ranch, and I'll take you there for a minute.
It's a very nice ranch.
Alfalfa and cattle, run by Paul and Ronnie Brenham, and it's pretty idyllic. It's also hard work.
And most of these ranches are having trouble keeping going.
This is their view to the west of the Schell Creek range.
And if you go out to that line of trees at the far end, you'll see what the valley used to look like.
This is Rocky Mountain junipers that have been there for thousands of years.
And a scheme emerged that Long Now is looking to see if it might be possible to buy up the whole valley, because those 10 ranches with their 17,000 acres dominate a 500 square mile valley with their grazing allotments and so on, and there's a possibility that you could get the whole thing for five million dollars and gradually restore it to its wild condition, and somewhere in the process turn it back over to the National Park, and it would double the size of Great Basin National Park. That would be swell.
OK, let's take one more look at the mountain itself.
The clock experience should be profound, but from the outside it should be invisible.
Now, at the base of the high cliffs there's this natural cave.
It's only about 12 feet deep, but what if it were deepened from inside?
You excavated from somewhere, came up from inside and deepened it.
And then you could have an entrance which was very rough and narrow as you first went in, that gradually becomes more refined and then actually quite exquisite.
And this stone takes a perfect polish.
You'd have a polished set of passages and chambers in there eventually leading to the 10,000 year clock.
And it's not a mine. This would be a nuanced evocation of the basic structure of the mountain, and you would be appreciating it as much from inside as you do from outside.
This is architecture not made by building, but by what you very carefully take away.
So that's what the mountain taught us.
Most of the amazingness of the clock we can borrow from the amazingness of the mountain.
All we have to do is highlight its spectacular features and blend in with them.
It's not a clock in a mountain -- it's a mountain clock.
Now, the Tewa Indians in the Southwest have a saying for what you need to do when you want to think long term about anything.
They say, "pin peya obe" -- welcome to the mountain.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Black holes are among the most destructive objects in the universe.
Anything that gets too close to the central singularity of a black hole, be it an asteroid, planet, or star, risks being torn apart by its extreme gravitational field.
And if the approaching object happens to cross the black hole’s event horizon, it’ll disappear and never re-emerge, adding to the black hole’s mass and expanding its radius in the process.
There is nothing we could throw at a black hole that would do the least bit of damage to it.
Even another black hole won’t destroy it– the two will simply merge into a larger black hole, releasing a bit of energy as gravitational waves in the process.
By some accounts, it’s possible that the universe may eventually consist entirely of black holes in a very distant future.
And yet, there may be a way to destroy, or “evaporate,” these objects after all.
If the theory is true, all we need to do is to wait.
In 1974, Stephen Hawking theorized a process that could lead a black hole to gradually lose mass.
Hawking radiation, as it came to be known, is based on a well-established phenomenon called quantum fluctuations of the vacuum.
According to quantum mechanics, a given point in spacetime fluctuates between multiple possible energy states.
These fluctuations are driven by the continuous creation and destruction of virtual particle pairs, which consist of a particle and its oppositely charged antiparticle.
Normally, the two collide and annihilate each other shortly after appearing, preserving the total energy.
But what happens when they appear just at the edge of a black hole’s event horizon?
If they’re positioned just right, one of the particles could escape the black hole’s pull while its counterpart falls in.
It would then annihilate another oppositely charged particle within the event horizon of the black hole, reducing the black hole’s mass.
Meanwhile, to an outside observer, it would look like the black hole had emitted the escaped particle.
Thus, unless a black hole continues to absorb additional matter and energy, it’ll evaporate particle by particle, at an excruciatingly slow rate.
How slow?
A branch of physics, called black hole thermodynamics, gives us an answer.
When everyday objects or celestial bodies release energy to their environment, we perceive that as heat, and can use their energy emission to measure their temperature.
Black hole thermodynamics suggests that we can similarly define the “temperature” of a black hole.
It theorizes that the more massive the black hole, the lower its temperature.
The universe’s largest black holes would give off temperatures of the order of 10 to the -17th power Kelvin, very close to absolute zero.
Meanwhile, one with the mass of the asteroid Vesta would have a temperature close to 200 degrees Celsius, thus releasing a lot of energy in the form of Hawking Radiation to the cold outside environment.
The smaller the black hole, the hotter it seems to be burning– and the sooner it’ll burn out completely.
Just how soon?
Well, don’t hold your breath.
First of all, most black holes accrete, or absorb matter and energy, more quickly than they emit Hawking radiation.
But even if a black hole with the mass of our Sun stopped accreting, it would take 10 to the 67th power years– many many magnitudes longer than the current age of the Universe— to fully evaporate.
When a black hole reaches about 230 metric tons, it’ll have only one more second to live.
In that final second, its event horizon becomes increasingly tiny, until finally releasing all of its energy back into the universe.
And while Hawking radiation has never been directly observed, some scientists believe that certain gamma ray flashes detected in the sky are actually traces of the last moments of small, primordial black holes formed at the dawn of time.
Eventually, in an almost inconceivably distant future, the universe may be left as a cold and dark place.
But if Stephen Hawking was right, before that happens, the normally terrifying and otherwise impervious black holes will end their existence in a final blaze of glory.
I have a story, a story that I would like to share with you.
And it's an African story.
It is a story of hope, resilience and glamour.
There was Hollywood.
Then came Bollywood.
Today we have Nollywood, the third-largest film industry in the world.
In 2006 alone, almost 2,000 films were made in Nigeria.
Now, try to imagine 40, 50 films wrapped, distributed, every week in the streets of Lagos, Nigeria and West Africa.
Some estimates put the value of this industry at 250 million dollars.
It has created thousands, if not tens of thousands of jobs.
And it's expanding.
But keep in mind that this was a grassroots movement.
This is something that happened without foreign investment, without government aid, and actually, it happened against all odds, in one of the most difficult moments in Nigerian economy.
The industry is 15 years old.
And so maybe you're thinking now, why, how, an Italian filmmaker based in Boston is so interested in this story?
And so I think I have to tell you just a few words, a few things about my personal life, because I think there is a connection.
My grandfather lived most of his life and is buried in Zambia.
My father also lived most of his adult life in East Africa.
And I was born in Zambia.
Even though I left when I was only three years old, I really felt that Africa was this big part of my life.
And it really was a place where I learned to walk.
I think I uttered the first words, and my family bought their first home.
So when we came back to Italy, and one of the things that I remember the most is my family having this hard time to share stories.
It seemed that for our neighbors and friends, Africa was either this exotic place, this imaginary land that probably exists only in their imagination, or the place of horror, famine.
And so we were always caught in this stereotype.
And I remember really this desire to talk about Africa as a place where we lived and people live and go about their lives, and have dreams like we all have.
So when I read in a newspaper in the business page the story of Nollywood, I really felt this is an incredible opportunity to tell a story that goes against all these preconceived notions.
Here I can tell a story of Africans making movies like I do, and actually I felt this was an inspiration for me.
I have the good fortune of being a filmmaker-in-residence at the Center of Digital Imaging Arts at Boston University.
And we really look how digital technology is changing, and how young, independent filmmakers can make movies at a fraction of the cost.
So when I proposed the story, I really had all the support to make this film.
And not only had the support, I found two wonderful partners in crime in this adventure.
Aimee Corrigan, a very talented and young photographer, and Robert Caputo, a friend and a mentor, who is a veteran of National Geographic, and told me, "You know, Franco, in 25 years of covering Africa, I don't know if I have come across a story that is so full of hope and so fun."
So we went to Lagos in October 2005.
And we went to Lagos to meet Bond Emeruwa, a wonderful, talented film director who is with us tonight.
The plan was to give you a portrait of Nollywood, of this incredible film industry, following Bond in his quest to make an action movie that deals with the issue of corruption, called "Checkpoint."
Police corruption.
And he had nine days to make it.
We thought this was a good story.
In the meantime, we had to cover Nollywood, and we talked to a lot of filmmakers.
But I don't want to create too many expectations.
I would like to show you six minutes.
And these are six minutes they really prepared for the TED audience.
There are several themes from the documentary, but they are re-edited and made for you, OK?
So I guess it's a world premier.
(Video) Man: Action.
Milverton Nwokedi: You cut a nice movie with just 10,000 dollars in Nigeria here.
And you shoot in seven days.
Peace Piberesima: We're doing films for the masses.
We're not doing films for the elite and the people in their glass houses.
They can afford to watch their "Robocop" and whatever.
Mahmood Ali Balogun: I think filmmaking in Nigeria, for those who work in it, is a kind of subsistence filmmaking -- what they do to make a living.
It's not the fancy filmmaking where you say, oh, you want to put all the razzmatazz of Hollywood, and where you have big budgets.
Here is that you make these films, it sells, you jump onto the location again to make another film, because if you don't make the next film, you're not going to feed.
Bond Emeruwa: So while we're entertaining, we should be able to educate.
I believe in the power of audiovisuals.
I mean, 90 percent of the population will watch Nollywood.
I think it's the most viable vehicle right now to pass information across a dedicated cable.
So if you're making a movie, no matter what your topic is, put in a message in there.
Woman: You still have to report the incident.
He needs proper medical attention.
PP: I keep trying to explain to people, it's not about the quality at the moment -- the quality is coming.
I mean, there are those films that people are making for quality, but the first thing you have to remember about this society is that Africa still has people that live on one dollar a day, and these are the people that really watch these films.
Sonny McDon W: Nollywood is a fantastic industry that has just been born in this part of the world.
Because nobody believed that Nollywood can come out of Africa.
Lancelot Imasen: But our films, they are stories that our people can relate to themselves.
They are stories about our people, for our people.
And consistently, they are glued to their screen whenever they see the story.
Narrator: Suspense, fun and intrigue.
It's the blockbuster comedy.
You'll crack your ribs.
Bernard Pinayon Agbaosi: We have been so deep into the foreign movies.
It's all about the foreign movies.
But we can do something too.
We can do something, something that when the world sees it, they say, wow, this is Nigeria.
Man: Just arrest yourself, sergeant.
Don't embarrass yourself.
Come on. Don't run away. Come back. Come back.
SMW: You can now walk the street and see a role model.
It’s not just what you see in picture.
You see the person live.
You see how he talks. You see how he lives.
He influences you really good, you know.
It’s not just what you see in the picture.
It is not what you hear, you know, from the Western press.
Man: See you. Bye.
Action.
Saint Obi: I was so fascinated, you know, with those cowboy movies.
But then when I discovered the situation in my country, at that time there was so much corruption.
For a young man to really make it out here, you got to think of some negative things and all that, or some kind of vices.
And I didn't want that, you know.
And I discovered that I could be successful in life as an actor, without doing crime, without cheating nobody, without telling no lies.
Just me and God-given talent.
Man: Let's go.
OK, it's time to kick some ass.
Cover this. It's your own.
Move it.
Roboger Animadu: In big countries, when they do the movies, they have all these things in place.
But here, we improvise these items, like the gunshots.
Like they go, here, now, now, you see the gun there, but you won't see any guns shot, we use knock-out.
Kevin Books Ikeduba: What I'm scared of is just the explosion will come up in my face.
Woman: That's why I use enough masking tape.
The masking tape will hold it.
Wat, wait. Just hold this for me.
KBI: I'm just telling her to make sure she places it well so that it won't affect my face -- the explosion, you know.
But she's a professional. She knows what she’s doing.
I'm trying to protect my face too.
This ain't going to be my last movie.
You know, this is Nollywood, where the magic lives.
RA: So now you're about to see how we do our own movies here, with or without any assistance from anybody.
Man: Action.
Cut.
(Applause) Franco Sacchi: So many things to say, so little time.
So many themes in this story.
I just can't tell you -- there’s one thing I want to tell you.
I spent, you know, several weeks with all these actors, producers, and the problems they have to go through are unimaginable for, you know, a Westerner, a filmmaker who works in America or in Europe.
But always with a smile, always with an enthusiasm, that is incredible.
Werner Herzog, the German filmmaker said, "I need to make movies like you need oxygen."
And I think they’re breathing.
The Nigerian filmmakers really, really, are doing what they like.
And so it's a very, very important thing for them, and for their audiences.
A woman told me, "When I see a Nollywood film, I can relax, I really -- I can breathe better."
There is also another very important thing that I hope will resonate with this audience.
It’s technology. I’m very interested in it and I really think that the digital non-linear editing has slashed, you know, the cost now is a fraction of what it used to be.
Incredible cameras cost under 5,000 dollars.
And this has unleashed tremendous energy.
And guess what?
We didn’t have to tell to the Nigerian filmmakers.
They understood it, they embraced the technology and they run with it, and they’re successful.
I hope that the Nollywood phenomenon will go both ways.
I hope it will inspire other African nations to embrace the technology, look at the Nigerian model, make their films, create jobs, create a narrative for the population, something to identify, something positive, something that really is psychological relief and it's part of the culture.
But I really think this is a phenomenon that can inspire us.
I really think it goes both ways.
Filmmakers, friends of mine, they look at Nollywood and they say, "Wow, they are doing what we really want to do, and make a buck and live with this job."
So I really think it’s a lesson that we're actually learning from them.
And there's one thing, one small challenge that I have for you, and should make us reflect on the importance of storytelling.
And I think this is really the theme of this session.
Try to imagine a world where the only goal is food and a shelter, but no stories.
No stories around the campfire.
No legends, no fairytales.
Nothing.
No novels.
Difficult, eh? It's meaningless.
So this is what I really think.
I think that the key to a healthy society is a thriving community of storytellers, and I think that the Nigerian filmmakers really have proved this.
I would like you to hear their voices.
Just a few moments.
It’s not an added sequence, just some voices from Nollywood.
(Video) Toyin Alousa: Nollywood is the best thing that can happen to them.
If you have an industry that puts a smile on people's face, that’s Nollywood.
SO: I believe very soon, we’re not only going to have better movies, we'll have that original Nigerian movie.
BE: It’s still the same basic themes.
Love, action.
But we're telling it our own way, our own Nigerian way, African way.
We have diverse cultures, diverse cultures, there are so many, that in the natal lifetimes, I don't see us exhausting the stories we have.
FS: My job ends here, and the Nollywood filmmakers really have now to work.
And I really hope that there will be many, many collaborations, where we teach each other things.
And I really hope that this will happen.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Stop. I've got two questions.
Franco, you described this as the world's third largest film industry.
What does that translate to in terms of numbers of films, really?
FS: Oh, yes. I think I mentioned briefly -- it's close to 2,000 films.
There is scientific data on this.
CA: 2,000 films a year?
FS: 2,000 films a year. 2005 or 6, the censor board has censored 1,600 films alone.
And we know that there are more.
So it’s safe to say that there are 2,000 films.
So imagine 45 films per week.
There are challenges. There are challenges.
There is a glut of film, the quality has to be raised, they need to go to the next level, but I’m optimistic.
CA: And these aren’t films that are primarily seen in cinemas?
FS: Oh yes, of course. This is very important.
Maybe, you know, for you to try to imagine this, these are films that are distributed directly in markets.
They are bought in video shops.
They can be rented for pennies.
CA: On what format?
FS: Oh, the format -- thank you for the question. Yes, it's VCDs.
It's a CD, it's a little bit more compressed image.
They started with VHS.
They actually didn't wait for, you know, the latest technology.
They started in '92, '94.
So there are 57 million VCRs in Nigeria that play, you know, VHS and these VCDs.
It's a CD basically. It's a compact disc.
CA: So on the streets, are film casts ... ?
FS: You can be in a Lagos traffic jam and you can buy a movie or some bananas or some water. Yes.
(Laughter) And I have to say, this really proves that storytelling, it's a commodity, it's a staple.
There is no life without stories.
CA: Franco, thank you so much.
I thought I would think about changing your perspective on the world a bit, and showing you some of the designs that we have in nature.
And so, I have my first slide to talk about the dawning of the universe and what I call the cosmic scene investigation, that is, looking at the relics of creation and inferring what happened at the beginning, and then following it up and trying to understand it.
And so one of the questions that I asked you is, when you look around, what do you see?
Well, you see this space that's created by designers and by the work of people, but what you actually see is a lot of material that was already here, being reshaped in a certain form.
And so the question is: how did that material get here?
How did it get into the form that it had before it got reshaped, and so forth?
It's a question of what's the continuity?
So one of the things I look at is, how did the universe begin and shape?
What was the whole process in the creation and the evolution of the universe to getting to the point that we have these kinds of materials?
So that's sort of the part, and let me move on then and show you the Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
If you look at this picture, what you will see is a lot of dark with some light objects in it.
And everything but -- four of these light objects are stars, and you can see them there -- little pluses.
This is a star, this is a star, everything else is a galaxy, OK?
So there's a couple of thousand galaxies you can see easily with your eye in here.
And when I look out at particularly this galaxy, which looks a lot like ours, I wonder if there's an art design college conference going on, and intelligent beings there are thinking about, you know, what designs they might do, and there might be a few cosmologists trying to understand where the universe itself came from, and there might even be some in that galaxy looking at ours trying to figure out what's going on over here.
But there's a lot of other galaxies, and some are nearby, and they're kind of the color of the Sun, and some are further away and they're a little bluer, and so forth.
But one of the questions is -- this should be, to you -- how come there are so many galaxies?
Because this represents a very clean fraction of the sky.
This is only 1,000 galaxies.
We think there's on the order -- visible to the Hubble Space Telescope, if you had the time to scan it around -- about 100 billion galaxies. Right?
It's a very large number of galaxies.
And that's roughly how many stars there are in our own galaxy.
But when you look at some of these regions like this, you'll see more galaxies than stars, which is kind of a conundrum.
So the question should come to your mind is, what kind of design, you know, what kind of creative process and what kind of design produced the world like that?
And then I'm going to show you it's actually a lot more complicated.
We're going to try and follow it up.
We have a tool that actually helps us out in this study, and that's the fact that the universe is so incredibly big that it's a time machine, in a certain sense.
We draw this set of nested spheres cut away so you see it.
Put the Earth at the center of the nested spheres, just because that's where we're making observations.
And the moon is only two seconds away, so if you take a picture of the moon using ordinary light, it's the moon two seconds ago, and who cares.
Two seconds is like the present.
The Sun is eight minutes ago. That's not such a big deal, right, unless there's solar flares coming then you want to get out the way.
You'd like to have a little advance warning.
But you get out to Jupiter and it's 40 minutes away. It's a problem.
You hear about Mars, it's a problem communicating to Mars because it takes light long enough to go there.
But if you look out to the nearest set of stars, to the nearest 40 or 50 stars, it's about 10 years.
So if you take a picture of what's going on, it's 10 years ago.
But you go and look to the center of the galaxy, it's thousands of years ago.
If you look at Andromeda, which is the nearest big galaxy, and it's two million years ago.
If you took a picture of the Earth two million years ago, there'd be no evidence of humans at all, because we don't think there were humans yet.
I mean, it just gives you the scale.
With the Hubble Space Telescope, we're looking at hundreds of millions of years to a billion years.
But if we were capable to come up with an idea of how to look even further -- there's some things even further, and that was what I did in a lot of my work, was to develop the techniques -- we could look out back to even earlier epochs before there were stars and before there were galaxies, back to when the universe was hot and dense and very different.
And so that's the sort of sequence, and so I have a more artistic impression of this.
There's the galaxy in the middle, which is the Milky Way, and around that are the Hubble -- you know, nearby kind of galaxies, and there's a sphere that marks the different times.
And behind that are some more modern galaxies.
You see the whole big picture?
The beginning of time is funny -- it's on the outside, right?
And then there's a part of the universe we can't see because it's so dense and so hot, light can't escape.
It's like you can't see to the center of the Sun; you have to use other techniques to know what's going on inside the Sun.
But you can see the edge of the Sun, and the universe gets that way, and you can see that.
And then you see this sort of model area around the outside, and that is the radiation coming from the Big Bang, which is actually incredibly uniform.
The universe is almost a perfect sphere, but there are these very tiny variations which we show here in great exaggeration.
And from them in the time sequence we're going to have to go from these tiny variations to these irregular galaxies and first stars to these more advanced galaxies, and eventually the solar system, and so forth.
So it's a big design job, but we'll see about how things are going on.
So the way these measurements were done, there's been a set of satellites, and this is where you get to see.
So there was the COBE satellite, which was launched in 1989, and we discovered these variations.
And then in 2000, the MAP satellite was launched -- the WMAP -- and it made somewhat better pictures.
And later this year -- this is the cool stealth version, the one that actually has some beautiful design features to it, and you should look -- the Planck satellite will be launched, and it will make very high-resolution maps.
And that will be the sequence of understanding the very beginning of the universe.
And what we saw was, we saw these variations, and then they told us the secrets, both about the structure of space-time, and about the contents of the universe, and about how the universe started in its original motions.
So we have this picture, which is quite a spectacular picture, and I'll come back to the beginning, where we're going to have some mysterious process that kicks the universe off at the beginning.
And we go through a period of accelerating expansion, and the universe expands and cools until it gets to the point where it becomes transparent, then to the Dark Ages, and then the first stars turn on, and they evolve into galaxies, and then later they get to the more expansive galaxies.
And somewhere around this period is when our solar system started forming.
And it's maturing up to the present time.
And there's some spectacular things.
And this wastebasket part, that's to represent what the structure of space-time itself is doing during this period.
And so this is a pretty weird model, right?
What kind of evidence do we have for that?
So let me show you some of nature's patterns that are the result of this.
I always think of space-time as being the real substance of space, and the galaxies and the stars just like the foam on the ocean.
It's a marker of where the interesting waves are and whatever went on.
So here is the Sloan Digital Sky Survey showing the location of a million galaxies.
So there's a dot on here for every galaxy.
They go out and point a telescope at the sky, take a picture, identify what are stars and throw them away, look at the galaxies, estimate how far away they are, and plot them up.
And just put radially they're going out that way.
And you see these structures, this thing we call the Great Wall, but there are voids and those kinds of stuff, and they kind of fade out because the telescope isn't sensitive enough to do it.
Now I'm going to show you this in 3D.
What happens is, you take pictures as the Earth rotates, you get a fan across the sky.
There are some places you can't look because of our own galaxy, or because there are no telescopes available to do it.
So the next picture shows you the three-dimensional version of this rotating around.
Do you see the fan-like scans made across the sky?
Remember, every spot on here is a galaxy, and you see the galaxies, you know, sort of in our neighborhood, and you sort of see the structure.
And you see this thing we call the Great Wall, and you see the complicated structure, and you see these voids.
There are places where there are no galaxies and there are places where there are thousands of galaxies clumped together, right.
So there's an interesting pattern, but we don't have enough data here to actually see the pattern.
We only have a million galaxies, right?
So we're keeping, like, a million balls in the air but, what's going on?
There's another survey which is very similar to this, called the Two-degree Field of View Galaxy Redshift Survey.
Now we're going to fly through it at warp a million.
And every time there's a galaxy -- at its location there's a galaxy -- and if we know anything about the galaxy, which we do, because there's a redshift measurement and everything, you put in the type of galaxy and the color, so this is the real representation.
And when you're in the middle of the galaxies it's hard to see the pattern; it's like being in the middle of life.
It's hard to see the pattern in the middle of the audience, it's hard to see the pattern of this.
So we're going to go out and swing around and look back at this.
And you'll see, first, the structure of the survey, and then you'll start seeing the structure of the galaxies that we see out there.
So again, you can see the extension of this Great Wall of galaxies showing up here.
But you can see the voids, you can see the complicated structure, and you say, well, how did this happen?
Suppose you're the cosmic designer.
How are you going to put galaxies out there in a pattern like that?
It's not just throwing them out at random.
There's a more complicated process going on here.
How are you going to end up doing that?
And so now we're in for some serious play.
That is, we have to seriously play God, not just change people's lives, but make the universe, right.
So if that's your responsibility, how are you going to do that?
What's the kind of technique?
What's the kind of thing you're going to do?
So I'm going to show you the results of a very large-scale simulation of what we think the universe might be like, using, essentially, some of the play principles and some of the design principles that, you know, humans have labored so hard to pick up, but apparently nature knew how to do at the beginning.
And that is, you start out with very simple ingredients and some simple rules, but you have to have enough ingredients to make it complicated.
And then you put in some randomness, some fluctuations and some randomness, and realize a whole bunch of different representations.
So what I'm going to do is show you the distribution of matter as a function of scales.
We're going to zoom in, but this is a plot of what it is.
And we had to add one more thing to make the universe come out right.
It's called dark matter.
That is matter that doesn't interact with light the typical way that ordinary matter does, the way the light's shining on me or on the stage.
It's transparent to light, but in order for you to see it, we're going to make it white. OK?
So the stuff that's in this picture that's white, that is the dark matter.
It should be called invisible matter, but the dark matter we've made visible.
And the stuff that is in the yellow color, that is the ordinary kind of matter that's turned into stars and galaxies.
So I'll show you the next movie.
So this -- we're going to zoom in.
Notice this pattern and pay attention to this pattern.
We're going to zoom in and zoom in.
And you'll see there are all these filaments and structures and voids.
And when a number of filaments come together in a knot, that makes a supercluster of galaxies.
This one we're zooming in on is somewhere between 100,000 and a million galaxies in that small region.
So we live in the boonies.
We don't live in the center of the solar system, we don't live in the center of the galaxy and our galaxy's not in the center of the cluster.
So we're zooming in.
This is a region which probably has more than 100,000, on the order of a million galaxies in that region.
We're going to keep zooming in. OK.
And so I forgot to tell you the scale.
A parsec is 3.26 light years.
So a gigaparsec is three billion light years -- that's the scale.
So it takes light three billion years to travel over that distance.
Now we're into a distance sort of between here and here.
That's the distance between us and Andromeda, right?
These little specks that you're seeing in here, they're galaxies.
Now we're going to zoom back out, and you can see this structure that, when we get very far out, looks very regular, but it's made up of a lot of irregular variations.
So they're simple building blocks.
There's a very simple fluid to begin with.
It's got dark matter, it's got ordinary matter, it's got photons and it's got neutrinos, which don't play much role in the later part of the universe.
And it's just a simple fluid and it, over time, develops into this complicated structure.
And so you know when you first saw this picture, it didn't mean quite so much to you.
Here you're looking across one percent of the volume of the visible universe and you're seeing billions of galaxies, right, and nodes, but you realize they're not even the main structure.
There's a framework, which is the dark matter, the invisible matter, that's out there that's actually holding it all together.
So let's fly through it, and you can see how much harder it is when you're in the middle of something to figure this out.
So here's that same end result.
You see a filament, you see the light is the invisible matter, and the yellow is the stars or the galaxies showing up.
And we're going to fly around, and we'll fly around, and you'll see occasionally a couple of filaments intersect, and you get a large cluster of galaxies.
And then we'll fly in to where the very large cluster is, and you can see what it looks like.
And so from inside, it doesn't look very complicated, right?
It's only when you look at it at a very large scale, and explore it and so forth, you realize it's a very intricate, complicated kind of a design, right?
And it's grown up in some kind of way.
So the question is, how hard would it be to assemble this, right?
How big a contractor team would you need to put this universe together, right?
That's the issue, right?
And so here we are.
You see how the filament -- you see how several filaments are coming together, therefore making this supercluster of galaxies.
And you have to understand, this is not how it would actually look if you -- first, you can't travel this fast, everything would be distorted, but this is using simple rendering and graphic arts kind of stuff.
This is how, if you took billions of years to go around, it might look to you, right?
And if you could see invisible matter, too.
And so the idea is, you know, how would you put together the universe in a very simple way?
We're going to start and realize that the entire visible universe, everything we can see in every direction with the Hubble Space Telescope plus our other instruments, was once in a region that was smaller than an atom.
It started with tiny quantum mechanical fluctuations, but expanding at a tremendous rate.
And those fluctuations were stretched to astronomical sizes, and those fluctuations eventually are the things we see in the cosmic microwave background.
And then we needed some way to turn those fluctuations into galaxies and clusters of galaxies and make these kinds of structures go on.
So I'm going to show you a smaller simulation.
This simulation was run on 1,000 processors for a month in order to make just this simple visible one.
So I'm going to show you one that can be run on a desktop in two days in the next picture.
So you start out with teeny fluctuations when the universe was at this point, now four times smaller, and so forth.
And you start seeing these networks, this cosmic web of structure forming.
And this is a simple one, because it doesn't have the ordinary matter and it just has the dark matter in it.
And you see how the dark matter lumps up, and the ordinary matter just trails along behind.
So there it is.
At the beginning it's very uniform.
The fluctuations are a part in 100,000.
There are a few peaks that are a part in 10,000, and then over billions of years, gravity just pulls in.
This is light over density, pulls the material around in.
That pulls in more material and pulls in more material.
But the distances on the universe are so large and the time scales are so large that it takes a long time for this to form.
And it keeps forming until the universe is roughly about half the size it is now, in terms of its expansion.
And at that point, the universe mysteriously starts accelerating its expansion and cuts off the formation of larger-scale structure.
So we're just seeing as large a scale structure as we can see, and then only things that have started forming already are going to form, and then from then on it's going to go on.
So we're able to do the simulation, but this is two days on a desktop.
We need, you know, 30 days on 1,000 processors to do the kind of simulation that I showed you before.
So we have an idea of how to play seriously, creating the universe by starting with essentially less than an eyedrop full of material, and we create everything we can see in any direction, right, from almost nothing -- that is, something extremely tiny, extremely small -- and it is almost perfect, except it has these tiny fluctuations at a part in 100,000 level, which turn out to produce the interesting patterns and designs we see, that is, galaxies and stars and so forth.
So we have a model, and we can calculate it, and we can use it to make designs of what we think the universe really looks like.
And that design is sort of way beyond what our original imagination ever was.
So this is what we started with 15 years ago, with the Cosmic Background Explorer -- made the map on the upper right, which basically showed us that there were large-scale fluctuations, and actually fluctuations on several scales. You can kind of see that.
Since then we've had WMAP, which just gives us higher angular resolution.
We see the same large-scale structure, but we see additional small-scale structure.
And on the bottom right is if the satellite had flipped upside down and mapped the Earth, what kind of a map we would have got of the Earth.
You can see, well, you can, kind of pick out all the major continents, but that's about it.
But what we're hoping when we get to Planck, we'll have resolution about equivalent to the resolution you see of the Earth there, where you can really see the complicated pattern that exists on the Earth.
And you can also tell, because of the sharp edges and the way things fit together, there are some non-linear processes.
Geology has these effects, which is moving the plates around and so forth.
You can see that just from the map alone.
We want to get to the point in our maps of the early universe we can see whether there are any non-linear effects that are starting to move, to modify, and are giving us a hint about how space-time itself was actually created at the beginning moments.
So that's where we are today, and that's what I wanted to give you a flavor of.
Give you a different view about what the design and what everything else looks like.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What shape are your cells?
Squishy cylinders? Jagged zig-zags?
You probably don’t think much about the bodies of these building blocks, but at the microscopic level, small changes can have huge consequences.
And while some adaptations change these shapes for the better, others can spark a cascade of debilitating complications.
This is the story of sickle-cell disease.
Sickle-cell disease affects the red blood cells, which transport oxygen from the lungs to all the tissues in the body.
To perform this vital task, red blood cells are filled with hemoglobin proteins to carry oxygen molecules.
These proteins float independently inside the red blood cell’s pliable, doughnut-like shape, keeping the cells flexible enough to accommodate even the tiniest of blood vessels.
But in sickle cell disease, a single genetic mutation alters the structure of hemoglobin.
After releasing oxygen to tissues, these mutated proteins lock together into rigid rows.
Rods of hemoglobin cause the cell to deform into a long, pointed sickle.
These red blood cells are harder and stickier, and no longer flow smoothly through blood vessels.
Sickled cells snag and pile up– sometimes blocking the vessel completely.
This keeps oxygen from reaching a variety of cells, causing the wide range of symptoms experienced by people with sickle-cell disease.
Starting when they’re less than a year old, patients suffer from repeated episodes of stabbing pain in oxygen-starved tissues.
The location of the clogged vessel determines the specific symptoms experienced.
A blockage in the spleen, part of the immune system, puts patients at risk for dangerous infections.
A pileup in the lungs can produce fevers and difficulty breathing.
A clog near the eye can cause vision problems and retinal detachment.
And if the obstructed vessels supply the brain the patient could even suffer a stroke.
Worse still, sickled red blood cells also don’t survive very long— just 10 or 20 days, versus a healthy cell’s 4 months.
This short lifespan means that patients live with a constantly depleted supply of red blood cells; a condition called sickle-cell anemia.
Perhaps what’s most surprising about this malignant mutation is that it originally evolved as a beneficial adaptation.
Researchers have been able to trace the origins of the sickle cell mutation to regions historically ravaged by a tropical disease called malaria.
Spread by a parasite found in local mosquitoes, malaria uses red blood cells as incubators to spread quickly and lethally through the bloodstream.
However, the same structural changes that turn red blood cells into roadblocks also make them more resistant to malaria.
And if a child inherits a copy of the mutation from only one parent, there will be just enough abnormal hemoglobin to make life difficult for the malaria parasite, while most of their red blood cells retain their normal shape and function.
In regions rife with this parasite, sickle cell mutation offered a serious evolutionary advantage.
But as the adaptation flourished, it became clear that inheriting the mutation from both parents resulted in sickle-cell anemia.
Today, most people with sickle-cell disease can trace their ancestry to a country where malaria is endemic.
And this mutation still plays a key role in Africa, where more than 90% of malaria infections occur worldwide.
Fortunately, as this “adaptation” thrives, our treatment for sickle cell continues to improve.
For years, hydroxyurea was the only medication available to reduce the amount of sickling, blunting symptoms and increasing life expectancy.
Bone marrow transplantations offer a curative measure, but these procedures are complicated and often inaccessible.
But promising new medications are intervening in novel ways, like keeping oxygen bonded to hemoglobin to prevent sickling, or reducing the stickiness of sickled cells.
And the ability to edit DNA has raised the possibility of enabling stem cells to produce normal hemoglobin.
As these tools become available in the areas most affected by malaria and sickle cell disease, we can improve the quality of life for more patients with this adverse adaptation.
What technology can we really apply to reducing global poverty?
And what I found was quite surprising.
We started looking at things like death rates in the 20th century, and how they'd been improved, and very simple things turned out.
You'd think maybe antibiotics made more difference than clean water, but it's actually the opposite.
And so very simple things -- off-the-shelf technologies that we could easily find on the then-early Web -- would clearly make a huge difference to that problem.
But I also, in looking at more powerful technologies and nanotechnology and genetic engineering and other new emerging kind of digital technologies, became very concerned about the potential for abuse.
If you think about it, in history, a long, long time ago we dealt with the problem of an individual abusing another individual.
We came up with something -- the Ten Commandments: Thou shalt not kill.
That's a, kind of a one-on-one thing.
We organized into cities. We had many people.
And to keep the many from tyrannizing the one, we came up with concepts like individual liberty.
And then, to have to deal with large groups, say, at the nation-state level, and we had to have mutual non-aggression, or through a series of conflicts, we eventually came to a rough international bargain to largely keep the peace.
But now we have a new situation, really what people call an asymmetric situation, where technology is so powerful that it extends beyond a nation-state.
It's not the nation-states that have potential access to mass destruction, but individuals.
And this is a consequence of the fact that these new technologies tend to be digital.
We saw genome sequences.
You can download the gene sequences of pathogens off the Internet if you want to, and clearly someone recently -- I saw in a science magazine -- they said, well, the 1918 flu is too dangerous to FedEx around.
If people want to use it in their labs for working on research, just reconstruct it yourself, because, you know, it might break in FedEx.
So that this is possible to do this is not deniable.
So individuals in small groups super-empowered by access to these kinds of self-replicating technologies, whether it be biological or other, are clearly a danger in our world.
And the danger is that they can cause roughly what's a pandemic.
And we really don't have experience with pandemics, and we're also not very good as a society at acting to things we don't have direct and sort of gut-level experience with.
So it's not in our nature to pre-act.
And in this case, piling on more technology doesn't solve the problem, because it only super-empowers people more.
So the solution has to be, as people like Russell and Einstein and others imagine in a conversation that existed in a much stronger form, I think, early in the 20th century, that the solution had to be not just the head but the heart.
You know, public policy and moral progress.
The bargain that gives us civilization is a bargain to not use power.
We get our individual rights by society protecting us from others not doing everything they can do but largely doing only what is legal.
And so to limit the danger of these new things, we have to limit, ultimately, the ability of individuals to have access, essentially, to pandemic power.
We also have to have sensible defense, because no limitation is going to prevent a crazy person from doing something.
And you know, and the troubling thing is that it's much easier to do something bad than to defend against all possible bad things, so the offensive uses really have an asymmetric advantage.
So these are the kind of thoughts I was thinking in 1999 and 2000, and my friends told me I was getting really depressed, and they were really worried about me.
And then I signed a book contract to write more gloomy thoughts about this and moved into a hotel room in New York with one room full of books on the Plague, and you know, nuclear bombs exploding in New York where I would be within the circle, and so on.
And then I was there on September 11th, and I stood in the streets with everyone.
And it was quite an experience to be there.
I got up the next morning and walked out of the city, and all the sanitation trucks were parked on Houston Street and ready to go down and start taking the rubble away.
And I walked down the middle, up to the train station, and everything below 14th Street was closed.
It was quite a compelling experience, but not really, I suppose, a surprise to someone who'd had his room full of the books.
It was always a surprise that it happened then and there, but it wasn't a surprise that it happened at all.
And everyone then started writing about this.
Thousands of people started writing about this.
And I eventually abandoned the book, and then Chris called me to talk at the conference. I really don't talk about this anymore because, you know, there's enough frustrating and depressing things going on.
But I agreed to come and say a few things about this.
And I would say that we can't give up the rule of law to fight an asymmetric threat, which is what we seem to be doing because of the present, the people that are in power, because that's to give up the thing that makes civilization.
And we can't fight the threat in the kind of stupid way we're doing, because a million-dollar act causes a billion dollars of damage, causes a trillion dollar response which is largely ineffective and arguably, probably almost certainly, has made the problem worse.
So we can't fight the thing with a million-to-one cost, one-to-a-million cost-benefit ratio.
So after giving up on the book -- and I had the great honor to be able to join Kleiner Perkins about a year ago, and to work through venture capital on the innovative side, and to try to find some innovations that could address what I saw as some of these big problems.
Things where, you know, a factor of 10 difference can make a factor of 1,000 difference in the outcome.
I've been amazed in the last year at the incredible quality and excitement of the innovations that have come across my desk.
It's overwhelming at times. I'm very thankful for Google and Wikipedia so I can understand at least a little of what people are talking about who come through the doors.
But I wanted to share with you three areas that I'm particularly excited about and that relate to the problems that I was talking about in the Wired article.
The first is this whole area of education, and it really relates to what Nicholas was talking about with a $100 computer.
And that is to say that there's a lot of legs left in Moore's Law.
The most advanced transistors today are at 65 nanometers, and we've seen, and I've had the pleasure to invest in, companies that give me great confidence that we'll extend Moore's Law all the way down to roughly the 10 nanometer scale.
Another factor of, say, six in dimensional reduction, which should give us about another factor of 100 in raw improvement in what the chips can do. And so, to put that in practical terms, if something costs about 1,000 dollars today, say, the best personal computer you can buy, that might be its cost, I think we can have that in 2020 for 10 dollars. Okay?
Now, just imagine what that $100 computer will be in 2020 as a tool for education.
I think the challenge for us is -- I'm very certain that that will happen, the challenge is, will we develop the kind of educational tools and things with the net to let us take advantage of that device?
I'd argue today that we have incredibly powerful computers, but we don't have very good software for them.
And it's only in retrospect, after the better software comes along, and you take it and you run it on a ten-year-old machine, you say, God, the machine was that fast?
I remember when they took the Apple Mac interface and they put it back on the Apple II.
The Apple II was perfectly capable of running that kind of interface, we just didn't know how to do it at the time.
So given that we know and should believe -- because Moore's Law's been, like, a constant, I mean, it's just been very predictable progress over the last 40 years or whatever.
We can know what the computers are going to be like in 2020.
It's great that we have initiatives to say, let's go create the education and educate people in the world, because that's a great force for peace.
And we can give everyone in the world a $100 computer or a $10 computer in the next 15 years.
The second area that I'm focusing on is the environmental problem, because that's clearly going to put a lot of pressure on this world.
We'll hear a lot more about that from Al Gore very shortly.
The thing that we see as the kind of Moore's Law trend that's driving improvement in our ability to address the environmental problem is new materials.
We have a challenge, because the urban population is growing in this century from two billion to six billion in a very short amount of time. People are moving to the cities.
They all need clean water, they need energy, they need transportation, and we want them to develop in a green way.
We're reasonably efficient in the industrial sectors.
We've made improvements in energy and resource efficiency, but the consumer sector, especially in America, is very inefficient.
But these new materials bring such incredible innovations that there's a strong basis for hope that these things will be so profitable that they can be brought to the market.
And I want to give you a specific example of a new material that was discovered 15 years ago.
If we take carbon nanotubes, you know, Iijima discovered them in 1991, they just have incredible properties.
And these are the kinds of things we're going to discover as we start to engineer at the nano scale.
Their strength: they're almost the strongest material, tensile strength material known.
They're very, very stiff. They stretch very, very little.
In two dimensions, if you make, like, a fabric out of them, they're 30 times stronger than Kevlar.
And if you make a three-dimensional structure, like a buckyball, they have all sorts of incredible properties.
If you shoot a particle at them and knock a hole in them, they repair themselves; they go zip and they repair the hole in femtoseconds, which is not -- is really quick.
(Laughter) If you shine a light on them, they produce electricity.
In fact, if you flash them with a camera they catch on fire.
If you put electricity on them, they emit light.
If you run current through them, you can run 1,000 times more current through one of these than through a piece of metal.
You can make both p- and n-type semiconductors, which means you can make transistors out of them.
They conduct heat along their length but not across -- well, there is no width, but not in the other direction if you stack them up; that's a property of carbon fiber also.
If you put particles in them, and they go shooting out the tip -- they're like miniature linear accelerators or electron guns.
The inside of the nanotubes is so small -- the smallest ones are 0.7 nanometers -- that it's basically a quantum world.
It's a strange place inside a nanotube.
And so we begin to see, and we've seen business plans already, where the kind of things Lisa Randall's talking about are in there.
I had one business plan where I was trying to learn more about Witten's cosmic dimension strings to try to understand what the phenomenon was going on in this proposed nanomaterial.
So inside of a nanotube, we're really at the limit here.
So what we see is with these and other new materials that we can do things with different properties -- lighter, stronger -- and apply these new materials to the environmental problems.
New materials that can make water, new materials that can make fuel cells work better, new materials that catalyze chemical reactions, that cut pollution and so on.
Ethanol -- new ways of making ethanol.
New ways of making electric transportation.
The whole green dream -- because it can be profitable.
And we've dedicated -- we've just raised a new fund, we dedicated 100 million dollars to these kinds of investments.
We believe that Genentech, the Compaq, the Lotus, the Sun, the Netscape, the Amazon, the Google in these fields are yet to be found, because this materials revolution will drive these things forward.
The third area that we're working on, and we just announced last week -- we were all in New York.
We raised 200 million dollars in a specialty fund to work on a pandemic in biodefense.
And to give you an idea of the last fund that Kleiner raised was a $400 million fund, so this for us is a very substantial fund.
And what we did, over the last few months -- well, a few months ago, Ray Kurzweil and I wrote an op-ed in the New York Times about how publishing the 1918 genome was very dangerous.
And John Doerr and Brook and others got concerned, [unclear], and we started looking around at what the world was doing about being prepared for a pandemic. And we saw a lot of gaps.
And so we asked ourselves, you know, can we find innovative things that will go fill these gaps? And Brooks told me in a break here, he said he's found so much stuff he can't sleep, because there's so many great technologies out there, we're essentially buried. And we need them, you know.
We have one antiviral that people are talking about stockpiling that still works, roughly. That's Tamiflu.
But Tamiflu -- the virus is resistant. It is resistant to Tamiflu.
We've discovered with AIDS we need cocktails to work well so that the viral resistance -- we need several anti-virals.
We need better surveillance.
We need networks that can find out what's going on.
We need rapid diagnostics so that we can tell if somebody has a strain of flu which we have only identified very recently.
We've got to be able to make the rapid diagnostics quickly.
We need new anti-virals and cocktails. We need new kinds of vaccines.
Vaccines that are broad spectrum.
Vaccines that we can manufacture quickly.
Cocktails, more polyvalent vaccines.
You normally get a trivalent vaccine against three possible strains.
We need -- we don't know where this thing is going.
We believe that if we could fill these 10 gaps, we have a chance to help really reduce the risk of a pandemic.
And the difference between a normal flu season and a pandemic is about a factor of 1,000 in deaths and certainly enormous economic impact.
So we're very excited because we think we can fund 10, or speed up 10 projects and see them come to market in the next couple years that will address this.
So if we can address, use technology, help address education, help address the environment, help address the pandemic, does that solve the larger problem that I was talking about in the Wired article? And I'm afraid the answer is really no, because you can't solve a problem with the management of technology with more technology.
If we let an unlimited amount of power loose, then we will -- a very small number of people will be able to abuse it.
We can't fight at a million-to-one disadvantage.
So what we need to do is, we need better policy.
And for example, some things we could do that would be policy solutions which are not really in the political air right now but perhaps with the change of administration would be -- use markets.
Markets are a very strong force.
For example, rather than trying to regulate away problems, which probably won't work, if we could price into the cost of doing business, the cost of catastrophe, so that people who are doing things that had a higher cost of catastrophe would have to take insurance against that risk.
So if you wanted to put a drug on the market you could put it on.
But it wouldn't have to be approved by regulators; you'd have to convince an actuary that it would be safe.
And if you apply the notion of insurance more broadly, you can use a more powerful force, a market force, to provide feedback.
How could you keep the law?
I think the law would be a really good thing to keep.
Well, you have to hold people accountable.
The law requires accountability.
Today scientists, technologists, businessmen, engineers don't have any personal responsibility for the consequences of their actions.
So if you tie that -- you have to tie that back with the law.
And finally, I think we have to do something that's not really -- it's almost unacceptable to say this -- which, we have to begin to design the future.
We can't pick the future, but we can steer the future.
Our investment in trying to prevent pandemic flu is affecting the distribution of possible outcomes.
We may not be able to stop it, but the likelihood that it will get past us is lower if we focus on that problem.
So we can design the future if we choose what kind of things we want to have happen and not have happen, and steer us to a lower-risk place.
Vice President Gore will talk about how we could steer the climate trajectory into a lower probability of catastrophic risk.
But above all, what we have to do is we have to help the good guys, the people on the defensive side, have an advantage over the people who want to abuse things.
And what we have to do to do that is we have to limit access to certain information.
And growing up as we have, and holding very high the value of free speech, this is a hard thing for us to accept -- for all of us to accept.
It's especially hard for the scientists to accept who still remember, you know, Galileo essentially locked up, and who are still fighting this battle against the church.
But that's the price of having a civilization.
The price of retaining the rule of law is to limit the access to the great and kind of unbridled power.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I went to Spain a few months ago and I had the best foie gras of my life.
The best culinary experience of my life.
Because what I saw, I'm convinced, is the future of cooking.
Ridiculous, right?
Foie gras and the future of cooking.
There's not a food today that's more maligned than foie gras, right?
I mean, it's crucified.
It was outlawed in Chicago for a while.
It's pending here in California, and just recently in New York.
It's like if you're a chef and you put it on your menu, you risk being attacked.
Really, it happened here in San Francisco to a famous chef.
I'm not saying that there's not a rationale for being opposed to foie gras.
The reasons usually just boil down to the gavage, which is the force feeding.
Basically you take a goose or a duck and you force feed a ton of grain down its throat.
More grain in a couple of weeks than it would ever get in a lifetime.
Its liver expands by eight times.
Suffice to say it's like -- it's not the prettiest picture of sustainable farming.
The problem for us chefs is that it's so freakin' delicious.
(Laughter) I mean, I love the stuff.
It is fatty, it's sweet, it's silky, it's unctuous.
It makes everything else you put it with taste incredible.
Can we produce a menu that's delicious without foie gras?
Yes, sure.
You can also bike the Tour de France without steroids, right?
(Laughter) Not a lot of people are doing it.
And for good reason.
(Laughter) So several months ago, a friend of mine sent me this link to this guy, Eduardo Sousa.
Eduardo is doing what he calls natural foie gras.
Natural foie gras.
What's natural about foie gras?
To take advantage of when the temperature drops in the fall, geese and ducks gorge on food to prepare for the harsh realities of winter.
And the rest of the year they're free to roam around Eduardo's land and eat what they want.
So no gavage, no force feeding, no factory-like conditions, no cruelty.
And it's shockingly not a new idea.
His great-granddad started -- Patería de Sousa -- in 1812.
And they've been doing it quietly ever since.
That is until last year, when Eduardo won the Coup de Coeur, the coveted French gastronomic prize.
It's like the Olympics of food products.
He placed first for his foie gras.
Big, big problem.
As he said to me, that really pissed the French off.
(Laughter) He said it sort of gleefully.
It was all over the papers.
I read about it. It was in Le Monde.
"Spanish chef accused ... " -- and the French accused him.
"Spanish chef accused of cheating."
They accused him of paying off the judges.
They implicated actually, the Spanish government, amazingly.
Huh, amazing.
A huge scandal for a few weeks.
Couldn't find a shred of evidence.
Now, look at the guy.
He doesn't look like a guy who's paying off French judges for his foie gras.
So that died down, and very soon afterward, new controversy.
He shouldn't win because it's not foie gras.
It's not foie gras because it's not gavage.
There's no force feeding.
So by definition, he's lying and should be disqualified.
As funny as it sounds, articulating it now and reading about it -- actually, if we had talked about it before this controversy, I would have said, "That's kind of true."
You know, foie gras by definition, force feeding, it's gavage, and that's what you get when you want foie gras.
That is, until I went to Eduardo's farm in Extremadura, 50 miles north of Seville, right on the Portugal border.
I saw first-hand a system that is incredibly complex and then at the same time, like everything beautiful in nature, is utterly simple.
And he said to me, really from the first moment, my life's work is to give the geese what they want.
He repeated that about 50 times in the two days I was with him.
I'm just here to give the geese what they want.
Actually, when I showed up he was lying down with the geese with his cell phone taking pictures of them like his children in the grass.
Amazing.
He's really just in love with -- he's at one with -- he's the goose whisperer.
(Laughter) And when I was speaking to him, you know, I thought, like I'm speaking to you now, right, but sort of in the middle of my questions, my excited questions, because the more I got to know him and his system, the more exciting this whole idea became.
He kept going like this to me.
And I thought, OK, excited Jew from New York, right?
I'm talking a little too aggressively, whatever, so you know, I slowed down.
And finally, by the end of the day I was like, Ed-uar-do, you know like this?
But he was still going like this.
I figured it out.
I was speaking too loudly.
So I hushed my voice.
I kind of like asked these questions and chatted with him through a translator in kind of a half whisper.
And he stopped doing this.
And amazingly, the geese who were on the other side of the paddock when I was around -- "Get the hell away from this kid!" -- when I lowered my voice, they all came right up to us.
Right up to us, like right up to here.
Right along the fence line.
And fence line was amazing in itself.
The fence -- like this conception of fence that we have it's totally backward with him.
The electricity on this fiberglass fence is only on the outside.
He rewired it. He invented it.
I've never seen it. Have you?
You fence in animals. You electrify the inside.
He doesn't.
He electrifies only the outside.
Why?
Because he said to me that he felt like the geese -- and he proved this actually, not just a conceit, he proved this -- the geese felt manipulated when they were imprisoned in their little paddocks.
Even though they were imprisoned in this Garden of Eden with figs and everything else.
He felt like they felt manipulated.
So he got rid of the electricity, he got rid of current on the inside and kept it on the outside, so it would protect them against coyotes and other predators.
Now, what happened?
They ate, and he showed me on a chart, how they ate about 20 percent more feed to feed their livers.
The landscape is incredible.
I mean, his farm is incredible.
It really is the Garden of Eden.
There's figs and everything else there for the taking.
And the irony of ironies is because Extremadura, the area -- what does Extremadura mean?
Extra hard land, right?
Extra difficult. Extra hard.
But over four generations, he and his family have literally transformed this extra hard land into a tasting menu.
Upgrades the life for these geese.
And they are allowed to take whatever they want.
Another irony, the double irony is that on the figs and the olives, Eduardo can make more money selling those than he can on the foie gras.
He doesn't care.
He lets them take what they want and he says, "Usually, it's about 50 percent. They're very fair."
The other 50 percent, he takes and he sells and he makes money on them.
Part of the income for his farm.
A big part of his income for his farm.
But he never controls it.
They get what they want, they leave the rest for me and I sell it.
His biggest obstacle, really, was the marketplace, which demands these days bright yellow foie gras.
That's how I've been trained.
You want to look and see what good foie gras is, it's got to be bright yellow.
It's the indication that it's the best foie gras.
Well, because he doesn't force feed, because he doesn't gavage tons of corn, his livers were pretty grey.
Or they were.
But he found this wild plant called the Lupin bush.
The Lupin bush, it's all around Extremadura.
He let it go to seed, he took the seeds, he planted it on his 30 acres, all around.
And the geese love the Lupin bush.
Not for the bush, but for the seeds.
And when they eat the seeds, their foie gras turns yellow.
Radioactive yellow.
Bright yellow.
Of the highest quality foie gras yellow I've ever seen.
(Laughter) So I'm listening to all this, you know, and I'm like, is this guy for real? Is he making some of this up?
Is he like, you know -- because he seemed to have an answer for everything, and it was always nature.
It was never him.
And I was like, you know, I always get a little, like, weirded out by people who deflect everything away from themselves.
Because, really, they want you to look at themselves, right?
But he deflected everything away from his ingenuity into working with his landscape.
So it's like, here I am, I'm on the fence about this guy, but increasingly, eating up his every word.
And we're sitting there, and I hear [clapping] from a distance, so I look over.
And he grabs my arm and the translator's, and ducks us under a bush and says, "Watch this."
"Shush," he says again for the 500th time to me.
"Shush, watch this."
And this squadron of geese come over.
[Clapping] And they're getting louder, louder, louder, like really loud, right over us.
And like airport traffic control, as they start to go past us they're called back -- and they're called back and back and back.
And then they circle around.
And his geese are calling up now to the wild geese.
[Clapping] And the wild geese are calling down.
[Clapping] And it's getting louder and louder and they circle and circle and they land.
And I'm just saying, "No way."
(Laughter) No way.
And I look at Eduardo, who's near tears looking at this, and I say, "You're telling me that your geese are calling to the wild geese to say come for a visit?"
And he says, "No, no, no.
They've come to stay."
They've come to stay?
(Laughter) It's like the DNA of a goose is to fly south in the winter, right?
I said that. I said "Isn't that what they're put on this Earth for?
To fly south in the winter and north when it gets warm?"
He said, "No, no, no.
Their DNA is to find the conditions that are conducive to life.
To happiness.
They find it here.
They don't need anything more."
They stop. They mate with his domesticated geese, and his flock continues.
Think about that for a minute.
It's brilliant, right?
Imagine -- I don't know, imagine a hog farm in, like, North Carolina, and a wild pig comes upon a factory farm and decides to stay.
(Laughter) So how did it taste?
I finally got to taste it before I left.
He took me to his neighborhood restaurant and he served me some of his foie gras, confit de foie gras.
It was incredible.
And the problem with saying that, of course, is that you know, at this point it risks hyperbole really easily.
And I'd like to make a metaphor, but I don't have one really.
I was drinking this guy's Kool-Aid so much, he could have served me goose feathers and I would have been like, this guy's a genius, you know?
I'm really in love with him at this point.
But it truly was the best foie gras of my life.
So much so that I don't think I had ever really had foie gras until that moment.
I'd had something that was called foie gras.
But this was transformative. Really transformative.
And I say to you, I might not stick to this, but I don't think I'll ever serve foie gras on my menu again because of that taste experience with Eduardo.
It was sweet, it was unctuous.
It had all the qualities of foie gras, but its fat had a lot of integrity and a lot of honesty.
And you could taste herbs, you could taste spices.
And I kept -- I said, you know, I swear to God I tasted star anise.
I was sure of it.
And I'm not like some super taster, you know?
But I can taste things.
There's 100 percent star anise in there.
And he says, "No."
And I ended up like going down the spices, and finally, it was like, OK, salt and pepper, thinking he's salted and peppered his liver.
But no.
He takes the liver when he harvests the foie gras, he sticks them in this jar and he confits it.
No salt, no pepper, no oil, no spices.
What?
We went back out for the final tour of the farm, and he showed me the wild pepper plants and the plants that he made sure existed on his farm for salinity.
He doesn't need salt and pepper.
And he doesn't need spices, because he's got this potpourri of herbs and flavors that his geese love to gorge on.
I turned to him at the end of the meal, and it's a question I asked several times, and he hadn't, kind of, answered me directly, but I said, "Now look, you're in Spain, some of the greatest chefs in the world are -- Ferran Adria, the preeminent chef of the world today, not that far from you.
How come you don't give him this?
How come no one's really heard of you?"
And it may be because of the wine, or it may be because of my excitement, he answered me directly and he said, "Because chefs don't deserve my foie gras."
(Laughter) And he was right.
He was right.
Chefs take foie gras and they make it their own.
They create a dish where all the vectors point at us.
With Eduardo it's about the expression of nature.
And as he said, I think fittingly, it's a gift from God, with God saying, you've done good work.
Simple.
I flew home, I'm on the flight with my little black book and I took, you know, pages and pages of notes about it.
I really was moved.
And in the corner of one of these -- one of my notes, is this note that says, when asked, what do you think of conventional foie gras?
What do you think of foie gras that 99.99999 percent of the world eats?
He said, "I think it's an insult to history."
And I wrote, insult to history.
I'm on the plane and I'm just tearing my hair out.
It's like, why didn't I follow up on that?
What the hell does that mean?
Insult to history.
So I did some research when I got back, and here's what I found.
The history of foie gras.
Jews invented foie gras.
True story.
True story.
By accident.
They were looking for an alternative to schmaltz.
Gotten sick of the chicken fat.
They were looking for an alternative.
And they saw in the fall that there was this natural, beautiful, sweet, delicious fat from geese.
And they slaughtered them, used the fat throughout the winter for cooking.
The Pharaoh got wind of this -- This is true, right off the Internet.
The Pharaoh got -- (Laughter) I swear to God.
(Laughter) The Pharaoh got wind of this and wanted to taste it.
He tasted it and fell in love with it.
He started demanding it.
And he didn't want it just in the fall, he wanted it all year round.
And he demanded that the Jews supply enough for everyone.
And the Jews, fearing for their life, had to come up with an ingenious idea, or at least try and satisfy the Pharaoh's wishes, of course.
And they invented, what? Gavage.
They invented gavage in a great moment of fear for their lives, and they provided the Pharaoh with gavage liver, and the good stuff they kept for themselves.
Supposedly, anyway. I believe that one.
That's the history of foie gras.
And if you think about it, it's the history of industrial agriculture.
It's the history of what we eat today.
Most of what we eat today.
Mega-farms, feed lots, chemical amendments, long-distance travel, food processing.
All of it, our food system.
That's also an insult to history.
It's an insult to the basic laws of nature and of biology.
Whether we're talking about beef cattle or we're talking about chickens, or we're talking about broccoli or Brussels sprouts, or in the case of this morning's New York Times, catfish -- which wholesale are going out of business.
Whatever it is, it's a mindset that is reminiscent of General Motors.
It's rooted in extraction.
Take more, sell more, waste more.
And for the future it won't serve us.
Jonas Salk has a great quote.
He said, "If all the insects disappeared, life on Earth as we know it would disappear within 50 years.
If human beings disappeared, life on Earth as we know it would flourish."
And he's right.
We need now to adopt a new conception of agriculture.
Really new.
One in which we stop treating the planet as if it were some kind of business in liquidation.
And stop degrading resources under the guise of cheap food.
We can start by looking to farmers like Eduardo.
Farmers that rely on nature for solutions, for answers, rather than imposing solutions on nature.
Listening as Janine Benyus, one of my favorite writers and thinkers about this topic says, "Listening to nature's operating instructions."
That's what Eduardo does, and does so brilliantly.
And what he showed me and what he can show all of us, I think, is that the great thing for chefs, the great blessing for chefs, and for people that care about food and cooking, is that the most ecological choice for food is also the most ethical choice for food.
Whether we're talking about Brussels sprouts or foie gras.
And it's also almost always, and I haven't found an example otherwise, but almost always, the most delicious choice.
I'm an exhausted dad.
Currently owned and dominated by two mini dictators, who rule my life with an iron fist while wearing their Huggies diapers.
(Laughter) Now probably because I've been drowning in small people lately, I've been paying close attention to a particular headline.
It seems around the world, in developed countries, people are having fewer babies.
From North America to Europe to China to Japan, there's actually been a consistent decline in birth rates.
In fact, over the past 50 years, the global fertility rate has halved.
What the heck is going on?
Now, my friends who don't want kids, all point to climate change as a reason for never having babies.
And many of you are sitting there right now, saying, "Waj, there's also overpopulation, there's also high birth rates, which still exist in many African and Middle Eastern countries, there's also orphan kids who still need parents, there's also a lack of resources to go around for everyone, and oh, by the way, we have a ginormous carbon footprint that is destroying this planet.
I hear you, I hear you.
And yet, despite all this chaos, I still think we should have babies.
I believe we can and should fight for the earth and humanity, side by side.
Now, if I could take it personal for a second, I get it, I get why some of you might be skeptical about having babies.
Here's a photo of my wife and me before we had kids.
Young, happy, fresh.
(Laughter) Here's a photo of me after having kids.
A broken, defeated husk of a man.
(Laughter) Here's the photo of the car I thought I'd be driving as an adult.
A Porsche.
Here's what I actually drive.
A Honda Odyssey minivan.
(Laughter) (Applause) For the minivan.
Where there was once hope, now there is convenient space, and good mileage, good mileage.
Now, I just want to stress that I'm completely aware of the very dire threats of global warming and climate change.
I just want to acknowledge that choosing to have babies is a deeply, profoundly personal choice.
And that many who want to are unable.
But just for today, let's examine the flip side of the coin.
At how not having enough new people is going to be a major problem moving forward.
According to the World Health Organization, we need to average about 2.1 children per woman today just so we have enough people to replace the previous generation.
A lot of you thought overpopulation was going to be a problem in 100 years -- yeah, it might be underpopulation.
So a question: what happens if that number dips below 2.1?
There's going to be a domino effect.
As all of us get older, and live longer, there's going to be a shrinking younger population, which is going to lead to rising labor shortages in the world's biggest economies.
I'm talking about United States, China, Japan, Germany.
Fewer younger working people means less tax revenue.
Less tax revenue means less money and resources to go to safety net programs that all of us are going to depend upon.
I'm talking about pensions and health care.
It seems every generation is indeed connected.
But how the heck did we get here in the first place?
Well, in some cases, it was intentional.
Let's take the DeLorean to simpler times.
Let's stop in China.
Somewhere between the death of disco and "Empire Strikes Back" -- 1980.
In 1980, China decided to implement the one-child policy, largely limiting most parents to having just one kid to combat overpopulation.
Check out some good old-fashioned Chinese propaganda, lovely.
Now, fast-forward to 2019.
Even after ending its one-child policy in 2015, China's birth rates have largely declined.
In fact, the falling population in China is removing one of its biggest drivers of growth -- people.
If trends continue, China's population is actually going to peak in 2029, before entering "unstoppable decline."
China's government is so freaked out right now that it's actually doing new propaganda -- it's begging couples to have children for the country.
Let's take the DeLorean and hop over to Japan, home of my beloved Honda Odyssey minivan.
(Laughter) Japan is now producing more adult diapers than infant ones.
The number of kids in Japan has fallen for the 37th straight year.
And unlike other countries, it has not been able to replace its population numbers through immigrant workers.
There will be labor shortages and not enough money to fund the safety-net programs.
Now, Japan has introduced two solutions.
First, a financial incentive.
Some local governments in Japan have offered couples money to have babies, with the money increasing with each additional child being born.
This actually worked for one year in 2014 in this town called Ama.
It actually raised the birth rate from about 1.66 kids per woman to 1.8.
But it did not gain traction across Japan.
In 2018, a leader of Japan's ruling party tried a new tack.
He told young people, "You're selfish for not having babies."
Shockingly, shaming was not a rousing aphrodisiac.
Surprise, I know, surprise.
Who would have thought?
(Laughter) Let's take the DeLorean to Europe, the continent of delicious cheeses I love to eat but cannot pronounce.
The UK and much of Western Europe has a birth rate of about 1.7 kids per woman, which at least is better than Hungary, where it hovers around 1.45.
Now, Hungary's prime minister Viktor Orbán has proposed a new solution to try to incentivize people to have kids.
He said families where the women have four or more kids will no longer pay income tax.
Pretty good, right, pretty good.
At least it's better than Russia's 2007 proposal, which once offered women in a particular region the opportunity of winning a fridge if they had more kids.
(Laughter) Yeah, it didn't work, it didn't work.
But hold on, pump the brakes.
Orbán is primarily proposing this because he wants to limit the population of Muslims and people of color.
He says he doesn't think Hungary's traditions and culture and color has to be "mixed with those of others."
Subtle.
Unfortunately for Orbán, and much of the EU, the birth rates are not high enough right now to be replenished without immigration.
Among EU countries, there is a demographic decline.
So it seems, in Europe, karma is going to be brown and Muslim.
(Laughter) (Applause) Just saying.
The question remains: Why aren't people having enough kids?
Why is the birth rate declining in these countries?
In some cases, it's because women are more literate, more educated.
They have more economic opportunities -- applaud.
All good things, all good things, yes.
(Applause) In India, this has been fantastic, it has actually reduced the birth rate but kept it above that magic 2.1 number.
Women also have more access to birth control, more control over their reproductive lives, all good things.
But in the United States, in particular, a lot of young people are opting out of having kids, largely cite the same reason: financial concerns.
Let's take the DeLorean to my motherland, the United States of America, where the birth rate hit its historic low in 2017.
The United States is the most expensive country in the world to give birth.
If you do not have insurance, it will cost you 32,000 dollars to have a baby, if everything goes perfectly.
That's like buying a brand new Honda Odyssey minivan, OK?
So, congratulations, you just had a baby, but the baby's economic productivity is zero, and guess what?
The United States is the only industrialized country in the world that does not require employers to offer paid parental leave.
"Mom, you just had a baby, congratulations, that's lovely.
Get back to work or you're fired, young mom!"
My wife and I, both working parents, pay about 3,500 dollars a month -- a month -- in Virginia for childcare.
If you do the math, that's 40,000 dollars a year.
That's like buying a brand new, souped-up, Honda Odyssey minivan, OK.
I have one, I do not need 10.
So here's my bold suggestion.
Let's make it easier for people to have babies.
It seems in order to invest in our future, we actually have to invest in the present and help those people who want to become parents.
Give them affordable health care, give them affordable childcare, give them paid parental leave.
Among the EU states in 2017, France reported the highest birth rates.
Why?
Largely due to its pronatal policies that actually kept women in the workforce.
I'm talking about subsidized daycare and paid maternal leave.
China and Japan, thank God, are finally wisening up and proposing such policies.
This is great.
That being said, I know some of you have listened to me and you still think the best investment we can make in the future is not having babies.
I respect that.
I get where you're coming from.
And I know many of you in this audience want to have babies but you are terrified about the future.
And as a parent, I feel you.
I'm scared about the future.
I wrote that last line a month ago.
But it really hit home three days ago for me, while I was at TED.
Three days ago, my wife calls me, crying.
I pick it up in my hotel room.
And she said, "I'm calling from the hospital."
We had to take my baby daughter Nusayba, who was named after a warrior princess, to the hospital, because she found a bump on the stomach.
We got back the results, and there were bumps all around her liver.
Today, this morning, we found out that she has stage IV liver cancer.
(Audience gasps) It has been a challenging week.
And if I may, I just want to take a moment to acknowledge the TED staff, everyone, top-down, everyone in the back, in the green room, some of the speakers, word has spread.
On behalf of my family, my wife, and my parents -- my Pakistani parents said I had to say this -- thank you for just being decent and kind this week.
So thank you.
(Applause) These are my beloveds, my Ibrahim and Nusayba, my babies.
I talked to my wife, and despite the terrible news and the fight ahead, we both concluded that we regret nothing.
Deciding to have babies was the best decision we ever made.
Our babies have brought us so much joy and they've brought the world so much joy, and having kids is a risk, but life is a risk.
And yes, I hope you've been paying attention, we need to invest in babies in developed countries if we want to help save our economy and pensions.
But that's not the reason you have babies.
That's not the main reason.
Babies have always represented humanity's best, boldest, most beautiful infinite possibilities.
And if we in developed countries, as a whole, opt out, and don't invest in present and future generations, then what the hell's the point?
What's the point of being on this absurd journey together?
And so, for those who can and who choose to, for those who can and who choose to have kids, may you pass on this beautiful thing called life, with kindness, generosity, decency and love.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Computers have become truly incredible.
We are walking around with supercomputers in our pocket.
How amazing is that?
So it is disappointing that the way we use computers, the way we interact with them, hasn't really changed in the last 50 years.
We still use a mouse and keyboards. We're clicking on screens and buttons.
Mobile phones are the same.
We're just using fingers instead of a mouse.
So is that it?
Is that what the future looks like?
We're going to be stuck in the screens with our faces not seeing the world around us?
That's not the future I imagine, or the future I'm attracted to.
What I've been always interested in is things, physical things we use every day, like things on this table that the family doesn't pay attention to.
Things tell our story. They tell who we are.
They tell a lot about us.
Let me give you an example.
These are photographs of things a person touched during 24 hours.
What can you tell about him?
He loves his motorcycle. Right?
The biggest thing in his picture.
What can you tell about this girl?
She spends all her time on the beach.
There's a surfboard.
She lives by the sea.
What can you tell about this guy?
He's a chef.
Look at all the ingredients he touched during the day, while he was preparing the food, and the computer is a tiny part of his life, this sad thing in the corner.
So if we are using things all the time, and this is a big part of our lives, can things become the way for us to interact with our digital life?
Can the world become your interface?
That was my idea.
I've been working for 20 years on it.
My idea is that in order to interact in digital life, you don't need to have screens and keyboards and mouses.
You can interact with your digital life just by using the things you use every day.
And to realize this idea, I need to solve three big challenges.
Let me tell you about them.
The first one, obviously: Is it even possible?
How can you take an everyday thing you use every day and turn it into a computer interface?
Now I was inspired by the book "Hackers."
I read it when I was a teenager, and one of the essential ideas of this book is that you can change the purpose of things by inventing new technology and then hacking into things and changing them.
So I've been thinking what kind of technology I can invent so that I can hack into things you use every day and make them interactive.
So when I was working on this thing, I invented this sensor which injects structured electric fields into objects and turns them into gesture interfaces.
So this doorknob, unmodified, can become a gesture sensor.
It can know how you're touching it. It can feel how you're touching it.
It makes a circle, or can I grasp.
And this doorknob isn't modified.
There's nothing special about doorknobs.
Anything can become interactive.
What about plants?
So plants are interesting, because with plants, they can know where you're touching.
You can see the line moving up and down on the image.
And that can turn into a musical interface.
(Musical tones) Now, we do have also practical applications: a calendar plant for those who are obsessed about practicality.
(Laughter) We can give things a personality.
(Low notes changing in pitch) So in this particular example, the orchid can communicate to you through images and sounds.
It doesn't like to be touched, so it's created these electric images that are hissing at you.
This plant, for example, is more robust, it's a snake plant, and it likes playing with you. It engages you.
So every thing can be different, and every thing can represent what it feels.
So everything can be hacked, all the things, including your body.
In this example, we hacked your body so you can measure how you're folding your hands and then using your hand gestures to control something else, so if you don't want to listen to some music thousands of times, you simply can cover your ears to turn it off.
So everything can be hacked, and research is important, but the second challenge we have is how can we go from R and D, and prototypes, to real products?
How can we make real things that are also interfaces?
And you may ask yourself, who would do this?
Silicon Valley?
Is it through Shenzhen?
Now the challenge there is that the world of things is huge.
Every year, the apparel industry produces 150 billion garments.
In comparison, the technology industry only makes 1.4 billion phones.
The world of things is much bigger than the world of technology.
The technology world cannot change the world of things.
Instead, we need to create technology which changes makers of things, people who make your chairs and clothes and everything else, into makers of smart things, enable them to do that.
So to test this challenge, we came up with a very simple idea and challenge: Can a tailor make a wearable?
Now we don't want to take a tailor and turn the tailor into an electrical engineer.
We still want to have some tailors around.
But what we would like to do is create technology which looks, feels and behaves like a raw material used by the tailor to make their clothes.
For example, a touch panel made for a tailor would look like this, made out of textiles, so you can cut it with scissors and sew it in.
At the same time, it has to retain the performance.
The way to make this textile touch panel also requires a very different approach than for making consumer electronics.
In our case, we have to go to the mountains of Tokyo to a small factory which was making kimono garments for generations.
We worked with my collaborators, who were not engineers.
It was an artisan who knows how to make things and an artist who knows how to make things beautiful.
Working with them, we created one of the best yarns in the world, which consists of thin metallic alloys wrapped around with polyester fibers and cotton fibers.
These yarns were made in the same machines which were making yarns for kimonos for generations.
We then took these yarns and gave them to the factory, which is making textiles, and we wove our smart textile using regular machines in a variety of colors and materials, and we gave those textiles to a tailor in Savile Row in London.
So tailors are traditionalists, particularly in Savile Row.
They don't use computers.
They don't use machines.
They use hands and they cut.
They fit their products on the human body, not on 3-D avatars.
Technology is not a part of their vocabulary, but they are modern people.
They know how to use technology.
So if technology can be formed and shaped like a button, like a textile, like something they can use, they absolutely can make a wearable, a garment which can place a phone call.
(Phone rings) So now we've proven that you can actually make a wearable, not by an electronic company, but by a tailor.
We worked and collaborated with Levi's, our partners and our neighbors, to make a real product, and this product is this jacket I'm wearing right now.
You can buy it. It's on sale.
It was made in the same factories which make all their products, and you have noticed I've been controlling my presentation from the sleeve of the jacket.
I go like this, it goes forward. Like this, it goes backward.
And of course, I can do more things.
It's not just to control a presentation.
I can now control my navigation, control my music, but most importantly, it stays a jacket, it stays a thing, which makes me look great.
(Laughter) (Applause) And that's the most important thing.
(Laughter) So OK, we proved we can turn things into interfaces.
We proved that these things can be made by makers of things and not by technology companies.
I look awesome. Are we done?
(Laughter) Not yet.
The third challenge: How can we scale?
How can we go from one product to many products?
And that's what we're working on right now.
Let me tell you how we're going to do this.
First of all, I want to make myself clear -- I am not talking about the Internet of Things.
I'm not talking about creating another gadget you get bored with and throw in the back of your drawer and forget about.
I am talking about the foundational, important principle which guides my work: "Technology has to make existing things better."
It makes them better by connecting them to your digital life and adds new usefulness and new functionality while remaining the same original purpose, not changing it.
This jacket I am wearing can control my mobile phone and presentation, but it still remains a jacket.
That means that once we start making all things interactive and connected, every thing would have its own set of actuators, displays and sensors specific for those things.
A pair of running shoes does not need to have a touch sensor.
Why would it have one?
If you have a sensor, it should measure your running performance or knee impact, while remaining a great pair of shoes.
Makers of things will have to start thinking what kind of digital functionality they have to offer to their consumers.
They will have to become service providers, or they may become irrelevant.
We will have to provide and create a service ecosystem just like we've done for mobile phones, where you have apps and services and everything else, and sometimes, you're still making a phone call.
Now to make this ecosystem possible, we have to avoid fragmentation.
We have to avoid different interfaces for different people for different things.
We have to create uniform user experience and, for that reason, we have to create a single computing platform which powers all those things.
What is the platform going to be?
And I think the answer is obvious: it's a cloud, cloud computing.
Now you cannot connect things directly to the cloud, obviously.
So you have to develop a small device which can be plugged into all the things and make them connected to the cloud to unlock their potential and add new functionality.
So let me show, for the first time, the real device which we've built.
We are showing this for the first time.
That's what it looks like, and it's a small device which will be connected to things we want to make smart and connected and interactive.
How is it going to work?
So on the back, you have a few electrodes.
So when you plug them into different things, like here, the device will recognize where you're plugging them and then reconfigure itself to enable specific functionality for this particular thing.
We would like to give this device to makers of things, the people who make your clothing and furniture, so they can use it just like they use a button or a zipper.
And what they're going to make with them is up to them.
We don't want to dictate the use cases.
We would like to let people who make those things -- artists and designers, brands and craftsmen -- to imagine and create this new world where things are connected and have all this new, exciting digital functionality.
We don't need keyboards and screens and mouses to interact with your computer.
So I've been working on this idea for 20 years, and now it's taking shape, and as it's taking shape, what we are realizing is that I always thought I was working on computer interfaces, I always thought of myself as an interaction designer, but I'm realizing that I'm not building interfaces.
What I realized is that me and my team, we're building a new kind of computer, an ambient computer.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Great creativity. In times of need, we need great creativity.
Discuss. Great creativity is astonishingly, absurdly, rationally, irrationally powerful.
Great creativity can spread tolerance, champion freedom, make education seem like a bright idea.
(Laughter) Great creativity can turn a spotlight on deprivation, or show that deprivation ain't necessarily so.
Great creativity can make politicians electable, or parties unelectable.
It can make war seem like tragedy or farce.
Creativity is the meme-maker that puts slogans on our t-shirts and phrases on our lips.
It's the pathfinder that shows us a simple road through an impenetrable moral maze.
Science is clever, but great creativity is something less knowable, more magical. And now we need that magic.
This is a time of need.
Our climate is changing quickly, too quickly.
And great creativity is needed to do what it does so well: to provoke us to think differently with dramatic creative statements.
To tempt us to act differently with delightful creative scraps.
Here is one such scrap from an initiative I'm involved in using creativity to inspire people to be greener.
(Video) Man: You know, rather than drive today, I'm going to walk.
Narrator: And so he walked, and as he walked he saw things.
Strange and wonderful things he would not otherwise have seen.
A deer with an itchy leg. A flying motorcycle.
A father and daughter separated from a bicycle by a mysterious wall.
And then he stopped. Walking in front of him was her.
The woman who as a child had skipped with him through fields and broken his heart.
Sure, she had aged a little.
In fact, she had aged a lot.
But he felt all his old passion for her return.
"Ford," he called softly. For that was her name.
"Don't say another word, Gusty," she said, for that was his name.
"I know a tent next to a caravan, exactly 300 yards from here.
Let's go there and make love. In the tent."
Ford undressed. She spread one leg, and then the other.
Gusty entered her boldly and made love to her rhythmically while she filmed him, because she was a keen amateur pornographer.
The earth moved for both of them.
And they lived together happily ever after.
And all because he decided to walk that day.
(Applause) Andy Hobsbawm: We've got the science, we've had the debate.
The moral imperative is on the table.
Great creativity is needed to take it all, make it simple and sharp.
To make it connect. To make it make people want to act.
So this is a call, a plea, to the incredibly talented TED community.
Let's get creative against climate change.
And let's do it soon. Thank you.
(Applause)
Xu Xian had just received yet another invitation to the opening ceremony of the new Jin Shan Temple.
His wife, Bai Su Zhen, had warned him not to attend.
Since she was in fact a benevolent white snake spirit in human form, their marriage had already weathered attacks by meddling monks.
But devout Buddhist that he was, Xu Xian felt obligated to make an appearance.
What they didn’t know was that these invitations had come from none other than Fa Hai– the misguided monk who had tried to separate the young lovers, almost killing Xu Xian in the process.
The monk confronted Xu Xian, telling him that because he consorted with a demon, he must remain at the monastery and cleanse his soul.
Xu Xian protested, but Fa Hai would not let him escape.
At home, Bai Su Zhen was uneasy.
Her husband had departed so quickly that she hadn’t been able to tell him she was pregnant with his child.
And now he had been gone so long she sensed something must be wrong.
She made her way to the temple, and upon encountering Fa Hai the monk threw his prayer mat, which erupted into fire and smoke.
Weakened from her pregnancy, Bai Su Zhen desperately summoned a fleet of shrimp soldiers and crab generals to subdue the monk, and waves to put out the blaze.
But the water also flooded the surrounding area, drowning many innocent villagers.
For the first time, Bai Su Zhen had harmed humans, and she fell out of the gods’ favor.
With their blessing retracted, Fa Hai attempted to trap her in his magical alms bowl.
But just when all hope seemed lost, a bright glow came from within her belly, saving her from the mad monk’s magic.
The couple fled home, grateful to the mysterious power that had saved them, and soon after, Bai Su Zhen gave birth to their son, Xu Shi Lin.
Yet despite this joyous occasion, Xu Xian was uneasy.
He was shaken by his wife’s accidental act of destruction, and he feared the misfortune it might bring upon their home.
Not a month later, Fa Hai appeared at their doorstep.
He offered Xu Xian an alms bowl to ensure good fortune for his newborn son.
Still wary of the monk, but also remembering Bai Su Zhen’s destructive act, Xu Xian accepted the gift.
But as soon as the bowl entered their home, it flew to Bai Su Zhen’s head and trapped her inside.
Against the family’s wishes, Fa Hai buried the bowl beneath the Lei Feng Pagoda.
And when Xu Xian begged him to release his wife, the monk sternly replied: “She will be free when the iron tree blooms.” Overcome with guilt, Xu Xian ran away to a monastery, leaving Shi Lin in the care of his aunt.
But there was something neither of them knew.
The boy was the reincarnation of Wen Qu Xing, the wisdom god, sent to the family to reward Xu Xian’s devotion.
It was this power that had protected Bai Su Zhen at the temple, and as he grew, so did his wisdom.
At age 19, Shi Lin went to the capital city to take the nation-wide imperial exam and obtained the highest score in all the empire.
The Emperor himself bestowed Shi Lin’s prize: an ornate hat decorated with jewel-encrusted flowers.
But though he returned home in glory, the fate of his parents still weighed heavy on his mind.
Coaxing his father from exile, Shi Lin took him to visit the Lei Feng Pagoda to pay respects to his mother.
Kneeling before it, he placed his jeweled prize on the iron tree as an offering.
Suddenly, the ground opened and Bai Su Zhen stepped out.
With her sins absolved by the tribute of a god, and a blossom on the iron tree, Shi Lin had freed his mother, and reunited his family– both mortal and divine.
It’s late, pitch dark, and a self-driving car winds down a narrow country road.
Suddenly, three hazards appear at the same time.
What happens next?
Before it can navigate this onslaught of obstacles, the car has to detect them— gleaning enough information about their size, shape, and position, so that its control algorithms can plot the safest course.
With no human at the wheel, the car needs smart eyes, sensors that’ll resolve these details— no matter the environment, weather, or how dark it is— all in a split-second.
That’s a tall order, but there’s a solution that partners two things: a special kind of laser-based probe called LIDAR, and a miniature version of the communications technology that keeps the internet humming, called integrated photonics.
To understand LIDAR, it helps to start with a related technology— radar.
In aviation, radar antennas launch pulses of radio or microwaves at planes to learn their locations by timing how long the beams take to bounce back.
That’s a limited way of seeing, though, because the large beam-size can’t visualize fine details.
In contrast, a self-driving car’s LIDAR system, which stands for Light Detection and Ranging, uses a narrow invisible infrared laser.
It can image features as small as the button on a pedestrian’s shirt across the street.
But how do we determine the shape, or depth, of these features?
LIDAR fires a train of super-short laser pulses to give depth resolution.
Take the moose on the country road.
As the car drives by, one LIDAR pulse scatters off the base of its antlers, while the next may travel to the tip of one antler before bouncing back.
Measuring how much longer the second pulse takes to return provides data about the antler’s shape.
With a lot of short pulses, a LIDAR system quickly renders a detailed profile.
The most obvious way to create a pulse of light is to switch a laser on and off.
But this makes a laser unstable and affects the precise timing of its pulses, which limits depth resolution.
Better to leave it on, and use something else to periodically block the light reliably and rapidly.
That’s where integrated photonics come in.
The digital data of the internet is carried by precision-timed pulses of light, some as short as a hundred picoseconds.
One way to create these pulses is with a Mach-Zehnder modulator.
This device takes advantage of a particular wave property, called interference.
Imagine dropping pebbles into a pond: as the ripples spread and overlap, a pattern forms.
In some places, wave peaks add up to become very large; in other places, they completely cancel out.
The Mach-Zehnder modulator does something similar.
It splits waves of light along two parallel arms and eventually rejoins them.
If the light is slowed down and delayed in one arm, the waves recombine out of sync and cancel, blocking the light.
By toggling this delay in one arm, the modulator acts like an on/off switch, emitting pulses of light.
A light pulse lasting a hundred picoseconds leads to a depth resolution of a few centimeters, but tomorrow’s cars will need to see better than that.
By pairing the modulator with a super- sensitive, fast-acting light detector, the resolution can be refined to a millimeter.
That’s more than a hundred times better than what we can make out with 20/20 vision, from across a street.
The first generation of automobile LIDAR has relied on complex spinning assemblies that scan from rooftops or hoods.
With integrated photonics, modulators and detectors are being shrunk to less than a tenth of a millimeter, and packed into tiny chips that’ll one day fit inside a car’s lights.
These chips will also include a clever variation on the modulator to help do away with moving parts and scan at rapid speeds.
By slowing the light in a modulator arm only a tiny bit, this additional device will act more like a dimmer than an on/off switch.
If an array of many such arms, each with a tiny controlled delay, is stacked in parallel, something novel can be designed: a steerable laser beam.
From their new vantage, these smart eyes will probe and see more thoroughly than anything nature could’ve imagined— and help navigate any number of obstacles.
All without anyone breaking a sweat— except for maybe one disoriented moose.
What drives someone to kill in cold blood?
What goes through the murderer’s mind?
And what kind of a society breeds such people?
Over 150 years ago Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoyevsky took these questions up in what would become one of the best-known works of Russian literature: "Crime and Punishment."
First serialized in a literary magazine in 1866, the novel tells the story of Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, a young law student in Saint Petersburg.
Raskolnikov lives in abject poverty, and at the start of the story has run out of funds to continue his studies.
Letters from his rural home only add to his distress when he realizes how much his mother and sister have sacrificed for his success.
Increasingly desperate after selling the last of his valuables to an elderly pawnbroker, he resolves on a plan to murder and rob her.
But the impact of carrying out this unthinkable act proves to be more than he was prepared for.
Though the novel is sometimes cited as one of the first psychological thrillers, its scope reaches far beyond Raskolnikov’s inner turmoil.
From dank taverns to dilapidated apartments and claustrophobic police stations, the underbelly of 19th century Saint Petersburg is brought to life by Dostoyevsky’s searing prose.
We’re introduced to characters such as Marmeladov, a miserable former official who has drank his family into ruin, and Svidrigailov, an unhinged and lecherous nobleman.
As Raskolnikov’s own family arrives in town, their moral innocence stands in stark contrast to the depravity of those around them, even as their fates grow increasingly intertwined.
This bleak portrait of Russian society reflects the author’s own complex life experiences and evolving ideas.
As a young writer who left behind a promising military career, Fyodor had been attracted to ideas of socialism and reform, and joined a circle of intellectuals to discuss radical texts banned by the Imperial government.
Upon exposure, members of this group, including Dostoyevsky, were arrested.
Many were sentenced to death, only to be subjected to a mock execution and last-minute pardon from the Tsar.
Dostoyevsky spent the next four years in a Siberian labor camp before being released in 1854.
The experience left him with a far more pessimistic view of social reform, and his focus shifted toward spiritual concerns.
In the 1864 novella "Notes from Underground," he expounded on his belief that utopian Western philosophies could never satisfy the contradictory yearnings of the human soul.
"Crime and Punishment" was conceived and completed the following year, picking up on many of the same themes.
In many ways, the novel follows a common narrative thread where a promising youth is seduced and corrupted by the dangers of urban life.
But its social critique cuts far deeper.
Raskolnikov rationalizes that his own advancement at the cost of the exploitative pawnbroker’s death would be a net benefit to society.
In doing so, he echoes the doctrines of egoism and utilitarianism embraced by many of Dostoyevsky’s contemporary intellectuals.
And in believing that his intelligence allows him to transcend moral taboos, Raskolnikov cuts himself off from his own humanity.
Yet although the book is deeply concerned with morality, "Crime and Punishment" never comes across as merely moralizing, with each character given their own distinctive and convincing voice.
One of the most remarkable things about "Crime and Punishment" is its ability to thrill despite the details of the central murder being revealed in the first act.
Raskolnikov’s crime is clear.
But it’s only through Dostoyevsky’s gripping account of the ensuing social and psychological turmoil that we learn the true nature of his punishment– and the possibility of redemption.
Hello.
Well, I'm here to talk to you about my animal muse: the sloth.
(Laughter) I've been documenting the strange lives of the world's slowest mammal for the last 10 years.
I still remember the first time I saw one.
I was fascinated by their freaky biology.
I mean, what's not to love about an animal that's born with a fixed grin on its face?
(Laughter) And the need to hug.
Audience: Awww.
But sloths are massively misunderstood.
They've been saddled with a name that speaks of sin and damned for their languorous lifestyle, which people seem to think has no place amongst the fittest in the fast-paced race for survival.
Well, I'm here to tell you that we've got this animal all wrong -- and how understanding the truth about the sloth may help save us and this planet we both call home.
I traced sloth-based slander back to a Spanish conquistador called Valdés, who gave the first description of a sloth in his encyclopedia of the New World.
He said the sloth was "the stupidest animal that can be found in the world ...
I have never seen such an ugly animal or one that is more useless."
(Laughter) Tell us what you really think, Valdés.
(Laughter) I'd like to have a word about Valdés's drawing skills.
(Laughter) I mean, what is that?
(Laughter) I've never seen an illustration of a sloth that's more useless.
(Laughter) But I mean, on the plus side, he has given the sloth a remarkably humanlike face, and sloths do have remarkably humanlike faces.
This sloth I photographed in Costa Rica, I think looks a lot like Ringo Starr.
(Laughter) But then, sloths do bear an uncanny resemblance to the The Beatles.
(Laughter) Particularly pleased with Paul, actually, on there.
But like The Beatles, sloths are also extremely successful.
They come from an ancient line of mammals, and there were once dozens of species including the giant ground sloth, which was the size of a small elephant and one of the only animals big enough to eat avocado pits whole and disperse them.
So ... (Laughter) Some of you have worked it out already.
(Laughter) That means that without sloths, there might be no avocado on toast today, leaving hipsters everywhere totally bereft at breakfast.
(Laughter) (Applause) Today, there are six surviving species, and they fall into two groups.
You've got your Bradypus three-toed sloths, they're the ones with the Beatles haircuts and the Mona Lisa smiles.
Then, there are the two-toed sloths.
They look a little bit more like a cross between a Wookiee and a pig.
They live in the jungles of Central and South America, and they're extremely prolific.
There was a survey that was done in the 1970s in a Panamanian tropical forest that found that sloths were the most numerically abundant large animal.
They took up one quarter of the mammalian biomass.
Now, that's an awful lot of sloths and suggests they're doing something very right indeed.
So what if, rather than deriding the sloth for being different, we tried to learn from it instead?
We humans are obsessed with speed.
Busyness is a badge of honor, and convenience trumps quality in our quest for quick.
Our addiction to the express life is choking us and the planet.
We idolize animals like the cheetah, the "Ferrari of the animal kingdom," capable of doing naught to 60 in three seconds flat.
Well, so what?
(Laughter) (Applause) So what?
The sloth, on the other hand, can reach a leisurely 17 feet a minute with the wind behind it.
(Laughter) But being fast is costly.
The cheetah is speedy, but at the expense of strength.
They can't risk getting in a fight, so they lose one in nine kills to tougher predators like hyenas.
No wonder they're laughing.
(Laughter) The sloth, on the other hand, has taken a more stealthy approach to dinner.
They survive by capturing and consuming static leaves.
(Laughter) But you see, leaves don't want to be eaten any more than antelope do, so they're loaded full of toxins and very hard to digest.
So in order to consume them, the sloth has also had to become an athlete -- a digesting athlete.
(Laughter) The sloth's secret weapon is a four-chambered stomach and plenty of time.
They have the slowest digestion rate of any mammal.
And it can take up to a month to process a single leaf, which gives their liver plenty of time to process those toxins.
So, sloths aren't lazy.
No, they're busy.
Digesting.
(Laughter) Yeah, really busy.
(Laughter) Hard at work, that sloth, very hard at work.
And of course, leaves have little calorific value, so sloths have evolved to spend as little energy as possible.
They do about 10 percent of the work of a similar-sized mammal and survive on as little as 100 calories a day, thanks to some ingenious adaptations.
The Bradypus, three-toed sloths, they've got more neck bones than any other mammal, even a giraffe.
Which means they can turn their head through 270 degrees and graze all around them, without having to actually bother with the effort of moving their body.
(Laughter) It also means that they are surprisingly good swimmers.
Sloths can bob along in water three times faster than they can move on land, kept afloat by ...
(Laughter) So -- (Laughter) sloths are the only mammal that we know of that don't do flatulence.
When they need to expel gas, it's actually reabsorbed into their bloodstream and expelled orally as a sort of mouth fart.
(Laughter) Turning their lives upside down saves further energy.
They have about half the skeletal muscle of a terrestrial mammal.
They don't really have so many of the extensor muscles that are the weight-bearing muscles; instead, they rely on retractor muscles to pull themselves along.
They have long, hooked claws and a high fatigue resistance, so they can literally hook on and hang like a happy, hairy hammock for hours on end.
And sloths can do almost anything in this inverted position.
They sleep, eat and even give birth.
Their throat and blood vessels are uniquely adapted to pump blood and to swallow food against the force of gravity.
They have sticky bits on their ribs that prevent their enormous stomach from crushing their lungs.
And their fur grows the opposite direction, so they can drip dry after a tropical drenching.
The only problem is, if you turn a sloth the other way up, gravity removes its dignity.
Audience: Awww.
They can't hold themselves upright.
And so they drag their bodies along as if mountaineering on a flat surface.
And I think this is why the early explorers like Valdés thought so poorly of them, because they were observing sloths the wrong way up and out of context.
I've spent many happy hours mesmerized by moving sloths.
Their lack of muscle hasn't impeded their strength or agility.
Nature's zen masters of mellow move like "Swan Lake" in slow mo -- (Laughter) with the core control of a tai chi master.
This one has fallen asleep mid-move, which is not uncommon.
(Laughter) But you're probably wondering: How does a dangling bag of digesting leaves avoid being eaten?
Good question.
Well, this is one of the sloth's main predators.
It's the harpy eagle.
It can fly at speeds of up to 50 miles per hour, has talons the size of a grizzly bear's, razor-sharp eyesight, and that ring of feathers focuses sound so that it can hear the slightest leaf rustle.
The sloth, on the other hand, has poor hearing, bad eyesight, and running from danger is clearly not an option.
No, they survive by wearing an invisibility cloak worthy of Harry Potter.
Their fur has grooves that attract moisture and act as tiny hydroponic gardens for algae, and they also attract a host of invertebrates.
So they are their own slow-moving, miniature ecosystem.
They become one with the trees.
And we think that their movements are so slow, they slip under the radar of the monstrous harpy as it's flying about the canopy, scanning for action.
Sloths are stealth ninjas, and they rarely leave the safety of the canopy -- except to defecate, which they do about once a week at the base of a tree.
Now, this risky and energetic behavior has long been a mystery, and there are lots of theories as to why they do it.
But I think they're leaving surreptitious scented messages for potential mates.
Because, you see, sloths are generally silent, solitary creatures, except for when the female is in heat.
She will climb to the top of a tree and scream for sex.
In D-sharp.
(Laughter) Don't believe me?
(Sound of sloth scream) D-sharp.
This and only this note will get the male's attention.
It mimics the sound of the kiskadee flycatcher.
So the female remains covert, even when yodeling for sex at the top of her lungs.
Her clandestine booty calls will carry for miles across the canopy, and males will beat a slow path towards her.
(Laughter) I think scented messages in her dung will help send Romeo up the right tree so that he doesn't waste precious energy scaling the wrong one.
Sex, by the way, is the only thing that sloths do swiftly.
I've seen them do it in the wild, and it's over and done with in a matter of seconds.
But then, why waste precious energy on it, particularly after that journey?
(Laughter) Unlike other mammals, sloths don't also waste time maintaining a constant warm body temperature.
Energy from the sun is free, so they bask in the sun like lizards and wear an unusually thick coat for the tropics to keep that heat in.
Sloths have a freakishly low metabolism.
And we think that this might be one of the reasons that they can sometimes recover from injuries that would kill most animals.
This sloth recovered from a double amputation, and I've known sloths that have managed to survive even power line electrocutions.
And we now think that a low metabolism may well be key to surviving extinction.
Researchers at Kansas University who were studying mollusks found that a high metabolism predicted which species of mollusk had gone extinct.
Sloths have been around on this planet in one shape or another for over 40 million years.
The secret to their success is their slothful nature.
They are energy-saving icons.
And I founded the Sloth Appreciation Society to both promote and protect their slow, steady, sustainable lives.
I'm a pretty speedy character.
I'm sure you've guessed.
And the sloths have taught me a lot about slowing down.
And I think that the planet would benefit if we all took a slowly digested leaf out of their book.
How about we all embrace our inner sloth by slowing down, being more mindful, reducing wasteful convenience, being economical with our energy, recycling creatively and reconnecting with nature.
Otherwise, I fear, it will be us humans that turn out to be "the stupidest animals that can be found in the world."
Thank you very much.
May the sloth be with you!
(Applause)
Nanahuatl, weakest of the Aztec gods, sickly and covered in pimples, had been chosen to form a new world.
There had already been four worlds, each set in motion by its own “Lord Sun," and each, in turn, destroyed: the first by jaguars, the next by winds, the next by rains of fire, and the fourth by floods.
To establish the Fifth Sun, Lord Quetzalcoatl, the “Feathered Serpent,” had gone to the underworld and returned with the bones of earlier people, nourishing them with his own blood to create new life.
But for them to have a world to live in, another god had to leap into the great bonfire and become the fifth sun.
The Lord of Sustenance and the Lord of Fire had chosen Nanahuatl for this task, while the Lord of Rain and the Lord of the Four Quarters had picked their own offering: the proud, rich Tecciztecatl.
First, the chosen ones had to complete a four-day fasting and bloodletting ritual.
Nanahuatl had nothing but cactus thorns with which to bleed himself, and fir branches to paint with his red offering, but he resolved to try his best.
Meanwhile, Tecciztecatl flaunted his riches, using magnificent jade spines and branches adorned with iridescent quetzal feathers for his own blood offering.
When four days had passed, the fire was roaring high.
Four times proud Tecciztecatl approached the flames, and four times he pulled back in fear.
Humble Nanahuatl stepped forward.
The other gods painted him chalky white and glued feathers to him.
Without hesitation, he threw himself into the flames.
A fire-blackened eagle swooped over the fire, grabbed Nanahuatl and carried him into the sky.
There, Lord and Lady Sustenance bathed him, sat him on a feathered throne, and wrapped a red band around his head.
Inspired by Nanahuatl, Tecciztecatl threw himself into what was left of the fire: cooled ashes.
A jaguar jumped over the fire pit, but couldn’t carry Tecciztecatl into the sky.
When Tecciztecatl reached the horizon, a band of goddesses dressed him in rags.
Still, he shined just as brightly as Nanahuatl.
But since he had shown far less bravery and much more pride, one of the gods picked up a rabbit and tossed it in his face, dimming his light.
But the fifth world still wasn’t truly established.
Nanahuatl, Lord Sun, shined for four days straight without moving through the sky like all the previous suns had moved.
Back in their home, Teotihuacan, the gods began to worry.
They sent Obsidian Hawk up to ask what was wrong.
Nanahuatl replied that just as he had sacrificed himself to become Lord Sun, he now needed the nourishing blood of the other gods in order to move through the sky.
Enraged at this suggestion, Lord Dawn stepped up and shot an arrow at Lord Sun.
Lord Sun shot back, and his quetzal-feathered arrows struck Lord Dawn in the face, turning him to frost.
Before anyone else could act rashly, the other gods turned to each other to discuss what to do.
Of course, no one wanted to sacrifice themselves, but nor did anyone want to act like Lord Dawn.
Besides, Nanahuatl had held up his end of the bargain to nourish the earth— how could they refuse to nourish him in return?
They remembered how even the wimpy Tecciztecatl had eventually managed to emulate Nanahuatl's bravery.
At long last, five other gods agreed to sacrifice themselves.
One by one, Lord Death stabbed them in the heart with an obsidian knife, offering their bodies to their new Lord Sun.
As the last god made the sacrifice, Lord Quetzalcoatl blew the embers of the great fire back to life, and the sun began to move through the sky at last, ushering in the fifth age.
Thanks to a pimply weakling whose fortitude inspired all the other gods, the sun moves along its daily path, the rabbit-faced moon following in its wake.
Unless we do something to prevent it, over the next 40 years we’re facing an epidemic of neurologic diseases on a global scale.
A cheery thought.
On this map, every country that’s colored blue has more than 20 percent of its population over the age of 65.
This is the world we live in.
And this is the world your children will live in.
For 12,000 years, the distribution of ages in the human population has looked like a pyramid, with the oldest on top.
It’s already flattening out.
By 2050, it’s going to be a column and will start to invert.
This is why it’s happening.
The average lifespan’s more than doubled since 1840, and it’s increasing currently at the rate of about five hours every day.
And this is why that’s not entirely a good thing: because over the age of 65, your risk of getting Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease will increase exponentially.
By 2050, there’ll be about 32 million people in the United States over the age of 80, and unless we do something about it, half of them will have Alzheimer’s disease and three million more will have Parkinson’s disease.
Right now, those and other neurologic diseases -- for which we have no cure or prevention -- cost about a third of a trillion dollars a year.
It will be well over a trillion dollars by 2050.
Alzheimer’s disease starts when a protein that should be folded up properly misfolds into a kind of demented origami.
So one approach we’re taking is to try to design drugs that function like molecular Scotch tape, to hold the protein into its proper shape.
That would keep it from forming the tangles that seem to kill large sections of the brain when they do.
Interestingly enough, other neurologic diseases which affect very different parts of the brain also show tangles of misfolded protein, which suggests that the approach might be a general one, and might be used to cure many neurologic diseases, not just Alzheimer’s disease.
There’s also a fascinating connection to cancer here, because people with neurologic diseases have a very low incidence of most cancers.
And this is a connection that most people aren’t pursuing right now, but which we’re fascinated by.
Most of the important and all of the creative work in this area is being funded by private philanthropies.
And there’s tremendous scope for additional private help here, because the government has dropped the ball on much of this, I’m afraid.
In the meantime, while we’re waiting for all these things to happen, here’s what you can do for yourself.
If you want to lower your risk of Parkinson’s disease, caffeine is protective to some extent; nobody knows why.
Head injuries are bad for you. They lead to Parkinson’s disease.
And the Avian Flu is also not a good idea.
As far as protecting yourself against Alzheimer’s disease, well, it turns out that fish oil has the effect of reducing your risk for Alzheimer’s disease.
You should also keep your blood pressure down, because chronic high blood pressure is the biggest single risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease.
It’s also the biggest risk factor for glaucoma, which is just Alzheimer’s disease of the eye.
And of course, when it comes to cognitive effects, "use it or lose it" applies, so you want to stay mentally stimulated.
But hey, you’re listening to me.
So you’ve got that covered.
And one final thing. Wish people like me luck, okay?
Because the clock is ticking for all of us.
Thank you.
The north coast of California has rainforests -- temperate rainforests -- where it can rain more than 100 inches a year.
This is the realm of the Coast Redwood tree.
Its species name is Sequoia sempervirens.
Sequoia sempervirens is the tallest living organism on Earth.
The range of the species goes up to as much as 380 feet tall.
That's 38 stories tall.
These are trees that would stand out in midtown Manhattan.
Nobody knows how old the oldest living Coast Redwoods are because nobody has ever drilled into any of them to count their annual growth rings, and, in any case, the centers of the oldest individuals appear to be hollow.
But it's believed that the oldest living Redwoods are perhaps 2,500 years old -- roughly the age of the Parthenon -- although it's also suspected that there may be individual trees that are older than that.
You can see the range of the Coast Redwoods. It's here, in red.
The largest individuals of this species, the dreadnoughts of their kind, live just on the north coast of California, where the rain is really intense.
In recent historic times, about 96 percent of the Coast Redwood forest was cut down, especially in a series of bursts of intense liquidation logging, clear-cutting that took place in the 1970s through the early 1990s.
Even so, about four percent of the primeval Redwood rainforest remains intact, wild and now protected -- entirely protected -- in a chain of small parks strung out like pearls along the north coast of California, including Redwood National Park.
But curiously, Redwood rainforests, the fragments that we have left, to this day remain under-explored.
Redwood rainforest is incredibly difficult to move through, and even today, individual trees are being discovered that have never been seen before, including, in the summer of 2006, Hyperion, the world's tallest tree.
I'm going to do a little Gedanken experiment.
I'm going to ask you to imagine what a Redwood really is as a living organism.
And, Chris, if I could have you up here? I have a tape measure.
It's a kind loaner from TED.
And Chris, if you could take the end of that tape measure?
We're going to show you what the diameter at breast height of a big Redwood is.
Unfortunately, this tape isn't long enough -- it's only a 25-foot tape.
Chris, could you extend your arm out that way? There we go. OK.
And maybe about here, about 30 feet, is the diameter of a big Redwood.
Now, let your imagination go upward into space.
Think about this tree, rising upward into Redwood space, 325 feet, 32 stories, an individual living organism articulating its forms upward into space over long periods of time.
The Redwood species seems to exist in another kind of time: not human time, but what we might call Redwood time.
Redwood time moves at a more stately pace than human time.
To us, when we look at a Redwood tree, it seems to be motionless and still, and yet Redwoods are constantly in motion, moving upward into space, articulating themselves and filling Redwood space over Redwood time, over thousands of years.
Plant this small seed, wait 2,000 years, and you get this: the Lost Monarch.
It dwells in the Grove of Titans on the north coast, and was discovered in 1998.
And yet, when you look at the base of a Redwood tree, you're not seeing the organism.
You're like a mouse looking at the foot of an elephant, and most of the organism is overhead, unseen.
I became very interested, and I wrote about a couple.
Steve Sillett and Marie Antoine are the principal explorers of the Redwood forest canopy. They're world-class athletes, and they also are world-class forest ecology scientists.
Steve Sillett, when he was a 19-year-old college student at Reed College, had heard that the Redwood forest canopy is considered to be a so-called Redwood desert.
That is to say, at that time it was believed that there was nothing up there except the branches of Redwood trees.
And with a friend of his, he took it upon himself to free-climb a Redwood without ropes or any equipment to see what was up there.
He climbed up a small tree next to this giant Redwood, and then he leaped through space and grabbed a branch with his hands, and ended up hanging, like catching a bar of a trapeze.
And then, from there, he climbed directly up the bark until he got to the top of the tree.
His friend, a guy named Marwood Harris, was following behind.
Neither one of them had noticed that there was a Yellow Jacket wasp's nest the size of a bowling ball hanging from the branch that Steve had jumped into.
And when Marwood made the jump, he was covered with wasps stinging him in the face and eyes. He nearly let go.
He would have fallen to his death, being 75 feet above the ground.
But they made it to the top, and what they found was not a Redwood desert, but a lost world -- a kind of three-dimensional labyrinth in the air, filled with unknown life.
Now, I had been working on other topics: the emergence of infectious diseases, which come out of the natural ecosystems of the Earth, make a trans-species jump, and get into humans.
After three books on this, it got to be a bit much, in a way.
My wife and I adore our children.
And I began climbing trees with my kids as just something to do with them, using the so-called arborist climbing technique, with ropes. You use ropes to get yourself up into the crown of a tree.
Children are incredibly adept at climbing trees.
That's my son, Oliver.
They don't seem to suffer from the same fear of heights that humans do.
(Laughter) If ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny, then children are somewhat closer to our roots as primates in the arboreal forest.
Humans appear to be the only primates that I know of that are afraid of heights.
All other primates, when they're scared, they run up a tree, where they feel safe.
We camped overnight in the trees, in tree boats.
This is my daughter Laura, then 15, looking out of a tree boat.
She's, by the way, tied in with a rope so she can't fall.
Looking out of a tree boat in the morning and hearing birdsong coming in three dimensions around us.
We had been visited in the night by flying squirrels, who don't seem to recognize humans for what they are because they've never seen them in the canopy before.
And we practiced advanced techniques like sky-walking, where you can move from tree to tree through space, rather like Spiderman.
It became a writing project.
When Steve Sillett gets up into a big Redwood, he fires an arrow, which trails a fishing line, which gets over a branch in the tree, and then you ascend up a rope which has been dragged into the tree by the line.
You ascend 30 stories.
There are two people climbing this tree, Gaya, which is thought to be one of the oldest Redwoods. There they are.
They are only one-seventh of the way up that tree.
You do feel a sense of exposure.
There is a small person right down there on the ground.
You feel like you're climbing a wall of wood.
But then you enter the Redwood canopy, and it's like coming through a layer of clouds.
And all of a sudden, you lose sight of the ground, and you also lose sight of the sky, and you're in a three-dimensional labyrinth in the air filled with hanging gardens of ferns growing out of soil, which is populated with all kinds of small organisms.
There are epiphytes, plants that grow on trees.
These are huckleberry bushes.
Many species of mosses, and then all sorts of lichens just plastering the tree.
When you get near the top of the tree, you feel like you can't fall -- in fact, it's difficult to move.
You're worming your way through branches which are crowded with living things that don't occur near the ground.
It's like scuba diving into a coral reef, except you're going upward instead of downward.
And then the trees tend to flare out into platform-like areas at the top.
Maria's sitting on one of them.
These limbs could be five to six hundred years old.
Redwoods grow very slowly in their tops.
They also have a feature: thickets of huckleberry bushes that grow out of the tops of Redwood trees that are technically known as huckleberry afros, and you can sit there and snack on the berries while you're resting.
Redwoods have an enormous surface area that extends upward into space because they have a propensity to do something called reiteration.
A Redwood is a fractal. And as they put out limbs, the limbs burst into small trees, copies of the Redwood.
Now, here we see a reiteration in Chronos, one of the older Redwoods.
This reiteration is a huge flying buttress that comes out the tree itself.
This buttress is less than halfway up the tree.
And then it bursts into a forest of Redwoods.
This particular extra trunk is a meter across at the base and extends upward for 150 feet.
It's as big as any of the biggest trees east of the Mississippi River, and yet it's only a minor feature on Chronos.
This three-dimensional map of the crown structure of a Redwood named Iluvatar, made by Steve Sillett, Marie Antoine and their colleagues, gives you an idea.
What you're seeing here is a hierarchical schematic development of the trunks of this tree as it has elaborated itself over time into six layers of fractal, of trunks springing from trunks springing from trunks.
I asked Steve to put a human being in this to give a sense of scale.
There's the person, right there. The person is waving to us.
I've wanted to ask Craig Venter if it would be possible to insert a synthetic chromosome into a human so that we could reiterate ourselves if we wanted to.
And if we were able to reiterate, then the fingers of our hand would be people who looked like us, and they would have people on their hands and so on.
And if we had Redwood-like biology, we would have six layers of people on our hands, as it were.
And it would be a lovely thing to be able to wave to someone and have all our reiterations wave at the same time.
(Laughter) To reiterate the point, let's go closer into Iluvatar.
We're looking at that yellow box.
And this hallucinatory drawing shows you -- everything you see in this drawing is Iluvatar.
These are millennial structures -- portions of the tree that are believed to be more than 1,000 years old.
There are four humans in this shot -- one, two, three, four.
And there's also something that I want to show you.
This is a flying buttress.
Redwoods grow back into themselves as they expand into space, and this flying buttress is a limb shot out of that small trunk, going back into the main trunk and fusing with it.
Flying buttresses, just as in a cathedral, help strengthen the crown of the tree and help the tree exist longer through time.
The scientists are doing all kinds of experiments in these trees.
They've wired them like patients in an ICU.
They're finding out that Redwoods can move moisture out of the air and down into their trunks, possibly all the way into their root systems.
They also have the ability to put roots anywhere in the tree itself.
If a portion of a Redwood is rotting, the Redwood will send roots into its own form and draw nutrients out of itself as it falls apart.
If we had Redwood-like biology, if we got a touch of gangrene in our arm then we could just, you know, extract the nutrients extract the nutrients and the moisture out of it until it fell off.
Canopy soil can occur up to a meter deep, hundreds of feet above the ground, and there are organisms in this soil that have, as yet, no names.
This is an unnamed species of copepod. A copepod is a crustacean.
These copepods are a major constituent of the oceans, and they are a major part of the diet of grazing baleen whales.
What they're doing in the Redwood forest canopy soil hundreds of feet above the ocean, or how they got there, is completely unknown.
There are some interesting theories that, if I had time, I would tell you about.
But as you go and you look closer at a tree, what you see is, you see increasing complexity.
We're looking at the very top of Gaya, which is thought to be the oldest Redwood.
Gaya may be 3,000 to 5,000 years old, no one really knows, but its top has broken off and it's been rotting back now.
This little Japanese garden-like creation probably took 700 years to form in its complexity that we see right now.
As you look at a tree, it takes a magnifying glass to see a giant tree.
I have to show you something unfortunately very sad at the conclusion of this talk.
The Eastern Hemlock tree has often been described as the Redwood of the East.
And we're moving in a full circle now.
In the 1950s, a small organism appeared in Richmond, Virginia, called the Hemlock woolly adelgid.
It made a trans-species jump out of some other organism in Asia, where it was living on Hemlock trees in Asia.
When it moved into its new host, the Eastern Hemlock tree, it escaped its predators, and the new tree had no resistance to it.
The Eastern Hemlock forest is being considered in some ways the last fragments of primeval rainforest east of the Mississippi River.
I hadn't even known that there were rainforests in the east, but in Great Smoky Mountains National Park it can rain up to 100 inches of rain a year.
And in the last two to three summers, these invasive organisms, this kind of Ebola of the trees, as it were, has swept through the primeval Hemlock forest of the east, and has absolutely wiped it out. I climbed there this past summer.
This is Great Smoky Mountains National Park, and the Hemlocks are dead as far as the eye can see.
And what we're seeing is not just the potential death of the Eastern Hemlock species -- that is to say, its extinction from nature due to this invading parasite -- but we're also seeing the death of an incredibly complex ecosystem for which these trees are merely the substrate for the aerial labyrinth of the sky that exists in their crowns.
It's absolutely heartbreaking to see.
One of the things that is just -- I almost can't conceive it -- is the idea that the national news media hasn't picked this up at all, and this is the devastation of one of the most important ecosystems in North America.
What can the Redwoods tell us about ourselves?
Well, I think they can tell us something about human time.
The flickering, transitory quality of human time and the brevity of human life -- the necessity to love.
But we're different from trees, and they can also teach us something about ourselves in the differences that we have.
We are human, and we have the capacity to love, we have the capacity to wonder, and we have a sort of boundless curiosity, a restless inquisitiveness that so suits us as primates, I think.
And at least for me, personally, the trees have taught me an entirely new way of loving my children.
Exploring with them the forest canopy has been one of the most lovely things of my existence on Earth.
And I think that one of the happiest things is the sense that with my children I've been able to introduce them into the very small circle of humans who are lucky enough, or possibly stupid enough, to still climb trees.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: I think at a previous TED, I think it was Nathan Myhrvold who told me that it was thought that because these trees are like, 2,000 years and older, on many of them there are ecosystems where there are species that are not found anywhere on the Earth except on that one tree. Is that correct?
Richard Preston: Yes, that is correct. I mentioned Hyperion, the world's tallest tree.
And I was a member of a climbing team that made the first climb of it, in 2006.
And while we were climbing Hyperion, Marie Antoine spotted an unknown species of golden-brown ant about halfway up the trunk.
Ants are not known to occur in Redwood trees, curiously enough, and we wondered whether this ant, this species of ant, was only endemic to that one tree, or possibly to that grove.
And in subsequent climbs they could never find that ant again, and so no specimens have ever been collected.
We don't know what it is -- we just know it's there.
CA: So, you have to wonder when, you know, if some other species than us was recording the stories that mattered on Earth, you know, our stories are about Iraq and war and politics and celebrity gossip.
You've just told us a different story of this tragic arms race that's happening, and maybe whole ecosystems gone forever.
It's an amazing sense of wonder you've given me, and a sense of just how fragile this whole thing is.
RP: It is fragile, and you know, I think about emerging human diseases -- parasites that move into the human species.
But that's just a very small facet of a much greater problem of invasions of species worldwide, all through the ecosystems, and you know, the Earth itself -- CA: Partly caused by us, inadvertently.
RP: Caused by humans. Caused by the movement of humans.
You can think of the Earth's biosphere as a palace, and the continents are rooms in the palace, and the islands are small rooms.
But lately, the doors of the palace have been flung open, and the walls are coming down.
CA: Richard Preston, thank you very much, I think.
RP: Thank you.
I'd like to introduce you to an interesting person named Ötzi.
He lives in Italy at the South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology because he's a mummy.
This is an artist's rendition of what he might have looked like when he was alive 5,300 years ago.
You want to see what he looks like today?
(Laughter) OK, brace yourselves, gross mummy pic coming at you.
So, he's not as handsome as he used to be, but he's actually in great shape for a mummy because he was discovered frozen in ice.
Ötzi is the oldest mummy that's been discovered with preserved skin.
5,300 years is super old, older than the Egyptian pyramids, and Ötzi's skin is covered in 61 black tattoos, all lines and crosses on parts of his body where he might have experienced pain.
So scientists think that they might have been used to mark sites for some kind of therapy, like acupuncture.
So clearly, if the oldest skin we've seen is all tattooed up, tattooing is a very ancient practice.
But fast-forward to today and tattoos are everywhere.
Almost one in four Americans has a tattoo, it's a multibillion-dollar industry, and whether you love tattoos or hate them, this talk will change the way you think about them.
So, why are tattoos so popular?
Unlike Ötzi, most of us today use tattoos for some kind of self-expression.
Personally, I love tattoos because I love art and there is something so wonderful to me, almost romantic, about the way a tattoo as an art form cannot be commodified.
Right? Your tattoo lives and dies with you.
It can't be bought or sold or traded, so its only value is really personal to you, and I love that.
Now, I tend to gravitate towards really colorful tattoos because I'm obsessed with color.
I teach a whole course on it at my university.
But my very first tattoo was an all-black tattoo like Ötzi's.
Yep, I did that clichéd thing that young people do sometimes and I got a tattoo in a language I can't even read.
(Laughter) OK, but I was 19 years old, I had just returned from my first trip overseas, I was in Japan in the mountains meditating in Buddhist monasteries, and it was a really meaningful experience to me, so I wanted to commemorate it with this Japanese and Chinese character for "mountain."
Now, here's what blows my mind.
My 14-year-old tattoo and Ötzi's 5,300-year-old tattoos are made of the same exact stuff: soot, that black powdery carbon dust that gets left behind in the fireplace when you burn stuff.
And if you zoom way, way in on either my tattoo or Ötzi's tattoos, you'll find that they all look something like this.
A tattoo is nothing more than a bunch of tiny pigment particles, soot in this case, that get trapped in the dermis, which is the layer of tissue right underneath the surface of the skin.
So in over five thousand years, we've done very little to update tattoo technology, apart from getting access to more colors and slightly more efficient methods of installation.
While I'm an artist, I'm also a scientist, and I direct a laboratory that researches nanotechnology, which is the science of building things with ultratiny building blocks, thousands of times smaller even than the width of a human hair.
And I began to ask myself, how could nanotechnology serve tattooing?
If tattoos are just a bunch of particles in the skin, could we swap those particles out for ones that do something more interesting?
Here's my big idea: I believe that tattoos can give you superpowers.
(Laughter) Now, I don't mean they're going to make us fly, but I do think that we can have superpowers in the sense that tattoos can give us new abilities that we don't currently possess.
By upgrading the particles, we can engineer tattooing so that it will change not only the appearance of our skin, but also the function of our skin.
Let me show you.
This is a diagram of a microcapsule.
It's a tiny hollow particle with a protective outer shell, about the size of a tattoo pigment, and you can fill the inside with practically whatever you want.
So what if we put interesting materials inside of these microcapsules and made tattoo inks with them?
What sorts of things could we make a tattoo do?
What problems could we solve?
What human limitations could we overcome?
Well, here's one idea: one of our weaknesses as humans is that we can't see ultraviolet, or UV, light.
That's the high-energy part of sunlight that causes sunburn and increases our risk of skin cancer.
Many animals and insects can actually see UV light, but we can't.
If we could, we'd be able to see sunscreen when it was applied on our skin.
Unfortunately, most of us don't wear sunscreen, and those of us who do can't really tell when it wears off, because it's invisible.
It's the main reason we treat over five million cases of preventable skin cancer every year in the US alone, costing our economy over five billion dollars annually.
So how could we overcome this human weakness with a tattoo?
Well, if the problem is that we can't see UV rays, maybe we can make a tattoo detect them for us.
So I thought, why don't we take some microcapsules, load it up with a UV-sensitive, color-changing dye, and make a tattoo ink out of that?
Now, one of the troubles of being a tattoo technologist is finding willing test subjects.
(Laughter) And when it came time to test this tattoo ink, I thought it best not to torture my poor graduate students.
So I decided to tattoo a couple of spots on my own arm instead.
And It actually worked. Check it out!
I call these tattoos solar freckles because they're powered by sunshine.
And right now, they're invisible, but as soon as I expose them to a UV light, acting as the Sun -- there they are, blue spots.
Now, I'm not wearing sunscreen in this video, but if I was, those blue spots would not appear, and then when my sunscreen wore off later, the solar freckles would reappear in UV light and I would know that it was time to reapply sunscreen.
So these tattoos act as a real-time, naked-eye indicator of your skin's UV exposure.
And of course, I think there are lots of really cool, artistic things you could do with a color-changing tattoo like this, but I hope that it will also help us solve a big problem in skin protection.
(Applause) Let me give you another example.
Normal human body temperature is about 97 to 99 degrees Fahrenheit, and if you fall outside of that range, you need to seek medical attention right away.
Now, the problem is that humans can't detect our own body temperature without a thermometer.
Sure, you could try the old hand-on-the-forehead trick, but there's zero scientific evidence to back that up.
(Laughter) So what if we could create a tattooable thermometer that you could access anytime?
Well, remember how the solar freckles used a UV-sensitive dye inside of the microcapsules of the tattoo ink?
Well, you could also put heat-sensitive dyes inside of microcapsules and you could make different tattoo inks that change color at different temperatures.
Suppose it was 96, 98, and a hundred degrees Fahrenheit.
If you place those inks side by side, now you have a temperature scale tuned to the human body.
In this video, you can see the different patches of tattoos disappearing sequentially as the pigskin we tested them on is heated up.
So if you were to place a tattoo like this in a location that was stable to external temperature fluctuations -- maybe inside of the mouth, perhaps on the back of the lip? -- then you'd be able to read your body temperature anytime by just glancing at your tattoo in the mirror.
Amazing, right?
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Another limitation that we have as humans is that our skin doesn't conduct electricity, and that can be a good thing, but not necessarily -- (Laughter) if you have an electronic biomedical implant, like a pacemaker for example.
Right now, if you have a pacemaker, you need surgery every five or 10 years to replace the battery when it dies.
And wouldn't it be nice if, instead, we could simply recharge the battery through a patch of conducting skin?
Well, if you were to try to tackle that problem with a tattoo, the first step would be to make a tattoo that conducts electricity.
So we've been working on a conducting tattoo ink in my lab.
And right now, we're able to increase the conductivity of skin over 300-fold with our conducting tattoo ink.
Now, we have a long way to go before we reach the conductivity of something like a copper wire, but we're making progress and I'm really excited about this because I think that it could open up a whole new world of possibility for tattoos.
I envision a future where tattoos enable us -- tattooable wires and tattooable electronics enable us to merge our technologies with our bodies so that they feel more like extensions of ourselves rather than external devices.
So these are a few examples of the new abilities that we can gain by using nanotechnology to upgrade our tattoos, but this really is only the beginning.
I believe the sky is the limit for what we can do with high-tech tattoos.
In the future, tattoos will not only be beautiful, they'll be functional too.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I've been at MIT for 44 years.
I went to TED I.
All the other TEDs -- and I went to them all, under Ricky's regime -- I talked about what the Media Lab was doing, which today has almost 500 people in it.
And if you read the press, last week it actually said I quit the Media Lab.
I didn't quit the Media Lab, I stepped down as chairman -- which was a kind of ridiculous title, but someone else has taken it on -- and one of the things you can do as a professor is you stay on as a professor.
And I will now do for the rest of my life the One Laptop Per Child, which I've sort of been doing for a year and a half, anyway.
So I'm going to tell you about this, use my 18 minutes to tell you why we're doing it, how we're doing it and then what we're doing.
And at some point I'll even pass around what the $100 laptop might be like.
I was asked by Chris to talk about some of the big issues, and so I figured I'd start with the three that at least drove me to do this.
And the first is pretty obvious.
It's amazing when you meet a head of state, and you say, "What is your most precious natural resource?"
They will not say "children" at first, and then when you say, "children," they will pretty quickly agree with you.
And so that isn't very hard.
(Laughter) Everybody agrees that whatever the solutions are to the big problems, they include education, sometimes can be just education and can never be without some element of education.
So that's certainly part of it.
And the third is a little bit less obvious.
And that is that we all in this room learned how to walk, how to talk, not by being taught how to talk, or taught how to walk, but by interacting with the world, by having certain results as a consequence of being able to ask for something, or being able to stand up and reach it.
Whereas at about the age six, we were told to stop learning that way, and that all learning from then on would happen through teaching, whether it's people standing up, like I'm doing now, or a book, or something.
But it was really through teaching.
And one of the things in general that computers have provided to learning is that it now includes a kind of learning which is a little bit more like walking and talking, in the sense that a lot of it is driven by the learner himself or herself.
So with those as the principles -- some of you may know Seymour Papert.
This is back in 1982, when we were working in Senegal.
Because some people think that the $100 laptop just happened a year ago, or two years ago, or we were struck by lightning -- this actually has gone back a long time, and in fact, back to the '60s.
Here we're in the '80s.
Steve Jobs had given us some laptops. We were in Senegal.
It didn't scale but it at least was bringing computers to developing countries and learning pretty quickly that these kids, even though English wasn't their language, the Latin alphabet barely was their language, but they could just swim like fish.
They could play these like pianos.
A little bit more recently, I got involved personally.
And these are two anecdotes -- one was in Cambodia, in a village that has no electricity, no water, no television, no telephone, but has broadband Internet now.
And these kids, their first English word is "Google" and they only know Skype.
They just use Skype.
And they go home at night -- they've got a broadband connection in a hut that doesn't have electricity.
The parents love it, because when they open up the laptops, it's the brightest light source in the house.
And talk about where metaphors and reality mix -- this is the actual school.
In parallel with this, Seymour Papert got the governor of Maine to legislate one laptop per child in the year 2002.
Now at the time, I think it's fair to say that 80 percent of the teachers were -- let me say, apprehensive.
Really, they were actually against it.
And they really preferred that the money would be used for higher salaries, more schools, whatever.
And now, three and a half years later, guess what?
They're reporting five things: drop of truancy to almost zero, attending parent-teacher meetings -- which nobody did and now almost everybody does -- drop in discipline problems, increase in student participation.
Teachers are now saying it's kind of fun to teach.
Kids are engaged -- they have laptops! -- and then the fifth, which interests me the most, is that the servers have to be turned off at certain times at night because the teachers are getting too much email from the kids asking them for help.
So when you see that kind of thing -- this is not something that you have to test.
The days of pilot projects are over, when people say, "We'd like to do three or four thousand in our country to see how it works."
Screw you. Go to the back of the line and someone else will do it, and then when you figure out that this works, you can join as well.
And this is what we're doing.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, One Laptop Per Child was formed about a year and a half ago.
It's a nonprofit association.
It raised about 20 million dollars to do the engineering to just get this built, and then have it produced afterwards.
Scale is truly important.
And it's not important because you can buy components at a lower price, OK?
It's because you can go to a manufacturer -- and I will leave the name out -- but we wanted a small display, doesn't have to have perfect color uniformity.
It can even have a pixel or two missing.
And this particular manufacturer said, "We're not interested in that. We're interested in the living room.
We're interested in perfect color uniformity.
You're not part of our strategic plan."
And I said, "That's kind of too bad, because we need 100 million units a year."
(Laughter) And they said, "Oh, well, maybe we could become part of your strategic plan."
And that's why scale counts.
And that's why we will not launch this without five to 10 million units in the first run.
And the idea is to launch with enough scale that the scale itself helps bring the price down, and that's why I said seven to 10 million there.
And we're doing it without a sales-and-marketing team.
I mean, you're looking at the sales-and-marketing team.
We will do it by going to seven large countries and getting them to agree and launch it, and then the others can follow.
We have partners.
The others are all playing to pending.
And this has been in the press a great deal.
It's the so-called Green Machine that we introduced with Kofi Annan in November at the World Summit that was held in Tunisia.
Now once people start looking at this, they say, "Ah, this is a laptop project."
Well, no, it's not a laptop project. It's an education project.
And the fun part -- and I'm quite focused on it -- I tell people I used to be a light bulb, but now I'm a laser -- I'm just going to get that thing built, and it turns out it's not so hard.
Because laptop economics are the following: I say 50 percent here -- it's more like 60, 60 percent of the cost of your laptop is sales, marketing, distribution and profit.
Now we have none of those, OK?
None of those figure into our cost, because first of all, we sell it at cost, and the governments distribute it.
It gets distributed to the school system like a textbook.
So that piece disappears.
Now the display on your laptop costs, in rough numbers, 10 dollars a diagonal inch.
That can drop to eight; it can drop to seven but it's not going to drop to two, or to one and a half, unless we do some pretty clever things.
It's the rest -- that little brown box -- that is pretty fascinating, because the rest of your laptop is devoted to itself.
It's a little bit like an obese person having to use most of their energy to move their obesity.
(Laughter) And we have a situation today which is incredible.
I've been using laptops since their inception.
And my laptop runs slower, less reliably and less pleasantly than it ever has before.
And this year is worse.
(Applause) People clap, sometimes you even get standing ovations, and I say, "What the hell's wrong with you? Why are we all sitting there?"
And somebody -- to remain nameless -- called our laptop a "gadget" recently.
And I said, "God, our laptop's going to go like a bat out of hell.
When you open it up, it's going to go 'bing.'" It'll be on.
It'll be just like it was in 1985, when you bought an Apple Macintosh 512.
It worked really well.
And we've been going steadily downhill.
Now, people ask all the time what it is.
That's what it is.
The two pieces that are probably notable: it'll be a mesh network, so when the kids open up their laptops, they all become a network, and then just need one or two points of backhaul.
You can serve a couple of thousand kids with two megabits.
So you really can bring into a village, and then the villages can connect themselves, and you really can do it quite well.
The dual mode display -- the idea is to have a display that both works outdoors -- isn't it fun using your cell phone outdoors in the sunlight?
Well, you can't see it.
And one of the reasons you can't see it is because it's backlighting most of the time, most cell phones.
Now, what we're doing is, we're doing one that will be both frontlit and backlit.
And whether you manually switch it or you do it in the software is to be seen.
And when it's frontlit, it's black and white at three times the resolution.
That's why a lot of our people are more or less living in Taiwan right now.
And in about 30 days, we'll know for sure whether this works.
Probably the most important piece there is that the kids really can do the maintenance.
And this is again something that people don't believe, but I really think it's quite true.
That's the machine we showed in Tunis.
This is more the direction that we're going to go.
And it's something that we didn't think was possible.
Now, I'm going to pass this around.
This isn't a design, OK?
So this is just a mechanical engineering sort of embodiment of it for you to play with.
The working one is at MIT.
At least you can decide whether it goes left or -- Chris Anderson: Before you do it, for the people down in simulcast -- Nicholas Negroponte: Sorry! I forgot. CA: Just show it off a bit.
So wherever the camera is -- OK, good point. Thank you, Chris.
The idea was that it would be not only a laptop, but that it could transform into an electronic book.
So it's sort of an electronic book.
This is where when you go outside, it's in black and white.
The games buttons are missing, but it'll also be a games machine, book machine.
Set it up this way, and it's a television set.
Etc., etc. -- is that enough for simulcast? OK, sorry.
I'll let Jim decide which way to send it afterwards.
OK. Seven countries.
(Laughter) I say "maybe" for Massachusetts, because they actually have to do a bid.
By law you've got to bid, and so on and so forth.
In the other cases, they don't have to do bids.
They can decide -- it's the federal government in each case.
It's kind of agonizing, because a lot of people say, "Let's do it at the state level," because states are more nimble than the feds, just because of size.
And yet we count.
We're really dealing with the federal government.
We're really dealing with ministries of education.
And if you look at governments around the world, ministries of education tend to be the most conservative, and also the ones that have huge payrolls.
Everybody thinks they know about education, a lot of culture is built into it as well.
It's really hard. And so it's certainly the hard road.
If you look at the countries, they're pretty geoculturally distributed.
Have they all agreed? No, not completely.
Probably Thailand, Brazil and Nigeria are the three that are the most active and most agreed.
We're purposely not signing anything with anybody until we actually have the working ones.
And since I visit each one of those countries within at least every three months, I'm just going around the world every three weeks.
Here's sort of the schedule and I put at the bottom we might give some away free in two years at this meeting.
Everybody says it's a $100 laptop -- you can't do it.
We're coming in probably at 135, to start, then drift down.
And that's very important, because so many things hit the market at a price and then drift up.
It's kind of the loss leader, and then as soon as it looks interesting, it can't be afforded, or it can't be scaled out.
So we're targeting 50 dollars in 2010.
The gray market's a big issue.
And one of the ways -- just one -- but one of the ways to help in the case of the gray market is to make something that is so utterly unique -- It's a little bit like the fact that automobiles -- thousands of automobiles are stolen every day in the United States.
Not one single post-office truck is stolen.
Because there's no market for post-office trucks.
It looks like a post-office truck.
You can spray paint it. You can do anything you want.
I just learned recently: in South Africa, no white Volvos are stolen.
Period. None. Zero.
So we want to make it very much like a white Volvo.
Each government has a task force.
This perhaps is less interesting, but we're trying to get the governments to all work together and it's not easy.
The economics of this is to start with the federal governments and then later, to subsequently go to other -- whether it's child-to-child funding, so a child in this country buys one for a child in the developing world, maybe of the same gender, maybe of the same age.
An uncle gives a niece or a nephew that as a birthday present.
I mean, there are all sorts of things that will happen, and they'll be very, very exciting.
And everybody says -- I say -- it's an education project.
Are we providing the software?
The answer is: The system certainly has software, but no, we're not providing the education content.
That is really done in the countries.
But we are certainly constructionists.
And we certainly believe in learning by doing and everything from Logo, which was started in 1968, to more modern things, like Scratch, if you've ever even heard of it, are very, very much part of it.
Are we dreaming? Is this real?
The only criticism, and people really don't want to criticize this, because it is a humanitarian effort, a nonprofit effort and to criticize it is a little bit stupid, actually.
(Laughter) But the one thing that people could criticize was, "Great idea, but these guys can't do it."
And that could either mean these guys, professors and so on couldn't do it, or that it's not possible.
Well, on December 12, a company called Quanta agreed to build it, and since they make about one-third of all the laptops on the planet today, that question disappeared.
So it's not a matter of whether it's going to happen.
And if it comes out at 138 dollars, so what?
If it comes out six months late, so what?
That's a pretty soft landing.
Thank you.
You know, we're going to do things a little differently.
I'm not going to show you a presentation. I'm going to talk to you.
And at the same time, we're going to look at just images from a photo stream that is pretty close to live of things that -- snapshots from Second Life. So hopefully this will be fascinating.
You can -- I can compete for your attention with the strange pictures that you see on screen that come from there.
I thought I'd talk a little bit about some just big ideas about this, and then get John back out here so we can talk interactively a little bit more and think and ask questions.
You know, I guess the first question is, why build a virtual world at all?
And I think the answer to that is always going to be at least driven to a certain extent by the people initially crazy enough to start the project, you know.
So I can give you a little bit of first background just on me and what moved me as a -- really going back as far as a teenager and then an adult, to actually try and build this kind of thing.
I was a very creative kid who read a lot, and got into electronics first, and then later, programming computers, when I was really young.
I was just always trying to make things.
I was just obsessed with taking things apart and building things, and just anything I could do with my hands or with wood or electronics or metal or anything else.
And so, for example -- and it's a great Second Life thing -- I had a bedroom.
And every kid, you know, as a teenager, has got his bedroom he retreats to -- but I wanted my door, I thought it would be cool if my door went up rather than opened, like on Star Trek.
I thought it would be neat to do that. And so I got up in the ceiling and I cut through the ceiling joists, much to my parents' delight, and put the door, you know, being pulled up through the ceiling.
I built -- I put a garage-door opener up in the attic that would pull this door up.
You can imagine the amount of time that it took me to do this to the house and the displeasure of my parents.
The thing that was always striking to me was that we as people could have so many really amazing ideas about things we'd like to do, but are so often unable, in the real world, to actually do those things -- to actually cobble together the materials and go through the actual execution phase of building something that you imagine from a design perspective.
And so for me, I know that when the Internet came around and I was doing computer programming and just, you know, just generally trying to run my own little company and figure out what to do with the Internet and with computers, I was just immediately struck by how the ultimate thing that you would really want to do with the Internet and with computers would be to use the Internet and connected computers to simulate a world to sort of recreate the laws of physics and the rules of how things went together -- the sort of -- the idea of atoms and how to make things, and do that inside a computer so that we could all get in there and make stuff.
And so for me that was the thing that was so enticing.
I just wanted this place where you could build things.
And so I think you see that in the genesis of what has happened with Second Life, and I think it's important.
I also think that more generally, the use of the Internet and technology as a kind of a space between us for creativity and design is a general trend.
It is a -- sort of a great human progress.
Technology is just generally being used to allow us to create in as shared and social a way as possible.
And I think that Second Life and virtual worlds more generally represent the best we can do to achieve that right now.
You know, another way to look at that, and related to the content and, you know, thinking about space, is to connect sort of virtual worlds to space.
I thought that might be a fun thing to talk about for a second.
If you think about going into space, it's a fascinating thing.
So many movies, so many kids, we all sort of dream about exploring space. Now, why is that?
Stop for a moment and ask, why that conceit?
Why do we as people want to do that?
I think there's a couple of things. It's what we see in the movies -- you know, it's this dream that we all share.
One is that if you went into space you'd be able to begin again.
In some sense, you would become someone else in that journey, because there wouldn't be -- you'd leave society and life as you know it, behind.
And so inevitably, you would transform yourself -- irreversibly, in all likelihood -- as you began this exploration.
And then the second thing is that there's this tangible sense that if you travel far enough, you can find out there -- oh, yeah -- you have no idea what you're going to find once you get there, into space.
It's going to be different than here.
And in fact, it's going to be so different than what we see here on earth that anything is going to be possible.
So that's kind of the idea -- we as humans crave the idea of creating a new identity and going into a place where anything is possible.
And I think that if you really sit and think about it, virtual worlds, and where we're going with more and more computing technology, represent essentially the likely, really tactically possible version of space exploration.
We are moved by the idea of virtual worlds because, like space, they allow us to reinvent ourselves and they contain anything and everything, and probably anything could happen there.
You know, to give you a size idea about scale, you know, comparing space to Second Life, most people don't realize, kind of -- and then this is just like the Internet in the early '90s.
In fact, Second Life virtual worlds are a lot like the Internet in the early '90s today: everybody's very excited, there's a lot of hype and excitement about one idea or the next from moment to moment, and then there's despair and everybody thinks the whole thing's not going to work.
Everything that's happening with Second Life and more broadly with virtual worlds, all happened in the early '90s.
We always play a game at the office where you can take any article and find the same article where you just replace the words "Second Life" with "Web," and "virtual reality" with "Internet."
You can find exactly the same articles written about everything that people are observing.
To give you an idea of scale, Second Life is about 20,000 CPUs at this point.
It's about 20,000 computers connected together in three facilities in the United States right now, that are simulating this virtual space. And the virtual space itself -- there's about 250,000 people a day that are wandering around in there, so the kind of, active population is something like a smallish city.
The space itself is about 10 times the size of San Francisco, and it's about as densely built out.
So it gives you an idea of scale. Now, it's expanding very rapidly -- about five percent a month or so right now, in terms of new servers being added.
And so of course, radically unlike the real world, and like the Internet, the whole thing is expanding very, very quickly, and historically exponentially.
So that sort of space exploration thing is matched up here by the amount of content that's in there, and I think that amount is critical.
It was critical with the virtual world that it be this space of truly infinite possibility.
We're very sensitive to that as humans.
You know, you know when you see it. You know when you can do anything in a space and you know when you can't.
Second Life today is this 20,000 machines, and it's about 100 million or so user-created objects where, you know, an object would be something like this, possibly interactive.
Tens of millions of them are thinking all the time; they have code attached to them.
So it's a really large world already, in terms of the amount of stuff that's there and that's very important.
If anybody plays, like, World of Warcraft, World of Warcraft comes on, like, four DVDs.
Second Life, by comparison, has about 100 terabytes of user-created data, making it about 25,000 times larger.
So again, like the Internet compared to AOL, and the sort of chat rooms and content on AOL at the time, what's happening here is something very different, because the sheer scale of what people can do when they're enabled to do anything they want is pretty amazing.
The last big thought is that it is almost certainly true that whatever this is going to evolve into is going to be bigger in total usage than the Web itself.
And let me justify that with two statements.
Generically, what we use the Web for is to organize, exchange, create and consume information.
It's kind of like Irene talking about Google being data-driven.
I'd say I kind of think about the world as being information.
Everything that we interact with, all the experiences that we have, is kind of us flowing through a sea of information and interacting with it in different ways.
The Web puts information in the form of text and images.
The topology, the geography of the Web is text-to-text links for the most part.
That's one way of organizing information, but there are two things about the way you access information in a virtual world that I think are the important ways that they're very different and much better than what we've been able to do to date with the Web.
The first is that, as I said, the -- well, the first difference for virtual worlds is that information is presented to you in the virtual world using the most powerful iconic symbols that you can possibly use with human beings.
So for example, C-H-A-I-R is the English word for that, but a picture of this is a universal symbol.
Everybody knows what it means. There's no need to translate it.
It's also more memorable if I show you that picture, and I show you C-H-A-I-R on a piece of paper.
You can do tests that show that you'll remember that I was talking about a chair a couple of days later a lot better.
So when you organize information using the symbols of our memory, using the most common symbols that we've been immersed in all our lives, you maximally both excite, stimulate, are able to remember, transfer and manipulate data.
And so virtual worlds are the best way for us to essentially organize and experience information.
And I think that's something that people have talked about for 20 years -- you know, that 3D, that lifelike environments are really important in some magical way to us.
But the second thing -- and I think this one is less obvious -- is that the experience of creating, consuming, exploring that information is in the virtual world implicitly and inherently social.
You are always there with other people.
And we as humans are social creatures and must, or are aided by, or enjoy more, the consumption of information in the presence of others.
It's essential to us. You can't escape it.
When you're on Amazon.com and you're looking for digital cameras or whatever, you're on there right now, when you're on the site, with like 5,000 other people, but you can't talk to them.
You can't just turn to the people that are browsing digital cameras on the same page as you, and ask them, "Hey, have you seen one of these before? Because I'm thinking about buying it."
That experience of like, shopping together, just as a simple example, is an example of how as social creatures we want to experience information in that way.
So that second point, that we inherently experience information together or want to experience it together, is critical to essentially, kind of, this trend of where we're going to use technology to connect us.
And so I think, again, that it's likely that in the next decade or so these virtual worlds are going to be the most common way as human beings that we kind of use the electronics of the Internet, if you will, to be together, to consume information.
You know, mapping in India -- that's such a great example.
Maybe the solution there involves talking to other people in real time.
Asking for advice, rather than any possible way that you could just statically organize a map.
So I think that's another big point.
I think that wherever this is all going, whether it's Second Life or its descendants, or something broader that happens all around the world at a lot of different points -- this is what we're going to see the Internet used for, and total traffic and total unique users is going to invert, so that the Web and its bibliographic set of text and graphical information is going to become a tool or a part of that consumption pattern, but the pattern itself is going to happen mostly in this type of an environment.
Big idea, but I think highly defensible.
So let me stop there and bring John back, and maybe we can just have a longer conversation.
Thank you. John. That's great.
(Applause) John Hockenberry: Why is the creation, the impulse to create Second Life, not a utopian impulse?
Like for example, in the 19th century, any number of works of literature that imagined alternative worlds were explicitly utopian.
Philip Rosedale: I think that's great. That's such a deep question. Yeah.
Is a virtual world likely to be a utopia, would be one way I'd say it.
The answer is no, and I think the reason why is because the Web itself as a good example is profoundly bottoms-up.
That idea of infinite possibility, that magic of anything can happen, only happens in an environment where you really know that there's a fundamental freedom at the level of the individual actor, at the level of the Lego blocks, if you will, that make up the virtual world.
You have to have that level of freedom, and so I'm often asked that, you know, is there a, kind of, utopian or, is there a utopian tendency to Second Life and things like it, that you would create a world that has a grand scheme to it?
Those top-down schemes are alienating to just about everybody, even if you mean well when you build them.
And what's more, human society, when it's controlled, when you set out a grand scheme of rules, a new way of people interacting, or a new way of laying out a city, or whatever, that stuff historically has never scaled much beyond, you know -- I always laughingly say -- the Mall of America, you know, which is like, the largest piece of centrally designed architecture that, you know, has been built.
JH: The Kremlin was pretty big.
PR: The Kremlin, yeah. That's true. The whole complex.
JH: Give me a story of a tool you created at the beginning in Second Life that you were pretty sure people would want to use in the creation of their avatars or in communicating that people actually in practice said, no, I'm not interested in that at all, and name something that you didn't come up with that almost immediately people began to demand.
PR: I'm sure I can think of multiple examples of both of those.
One of my favorites. I had this feature that I built into Second Life -- I was really passionate about it.
It was an ability to kind of walk up close to somebody and have a more private conversation, but it wasn't instant messaging because you had to sort of befriend somebody.
It was just this idea that you could kind of have a private chat.
I just remember it was one of those examples of data-driven design.
I thought it was such a good idea from my perspective, and it was just absolutely never used, and we ultimately -- I think we've now turned it off, if I remember.
We finally gave up, took it out of the code.
But more generally, you know, one other example I think about this, which is great relative to the utopian idea.
Second Life originally had 16 simulators. It now has 20,000.
So when it only had 16, it was only about as big as this college campus.
And we had -- we zoned it, you know: we put a nightclub, we put a disco where you could dance, and then we had a place where you could fight with guns if you wanted to, and we had another place that was like a boardwalk, kind of a Coney Island.
And we laid out the zoning, but of course, people could build all around it however they wanted to.
And what was so amazing right from the start was that the idea that we had put out in the zoning concept, basically, was instantly and thoroughly ignored, and like, two months into the whole thing, -- which is really a small amount of time, even in Second Life time -- I remember the users, the people who were then using Second Life, the residents came to me and said, we want to buy the disco -- because I had built it -- we want to buy that land and raze it and put houses on it. And I sold it to them -- I mean, we transferred ownership and they had a big party and blew up the entire building.
And I remember that that was just so telling, you know, that you didn't know exactly what was going to happen.
When you think about stuff that people have built that's popular -- JH: CBGB's has to close eventually, you know. That's the rule.
PR: Exactly. And it -- but it closed on day one, basically, in Internet time.
You know, an example of something -- pregnancy.
You can have a baby in Second Life.
This is done entirely using, kind of, the tools that are built into Second Life, so the innate concept of becoming pregnant and having a baby, of course -- Second Life is, at the platform level, at the level of the company -- at Linden Lab -- Second Life has no game properties to it whatsoever.
There is no attempt to structure the experience, to make it utopian in that sense that we put into it.
So of course, we never would have put a mechanism for having babies or, you know, taking two avatars and merging them, or something.
But people built the ability to have babies and care for babies as a purchasable experience that you can have in Second Life and so -- I mean, that's a pretty fascinating example of, you know, what goes on in the overall economy.
And of course, the existence of an economy is another idea.
I didn't talk about it, but it's a critical feature.
When people are given the opportunity to create in the world, there's really two things they want.
One is fair ownership of the things they create.
And then the second one is -- if they feel like it, and they're not going to do it in every case, but in many they are -- they want to actually be able to sell that creation as a way of providing for their own livelihood.
True on the Web -- also true in Second Life.
And so the existence of an economy is critical.
JH: Questions for Philip Rosedale? Right here.
(Audience: Well, first an observation, which is that you look like a character.) JH: The observation is, Philip has been accused of looking like a character, an avatar, in Second Life.
Respond, and then we'll get the rest of your question.
PR: But I don't look like my avatar.
(Laughter) How many people here know what my avatar looks like?
That's probably not very many.
JH: Are you ripping off somebody else's avatar with that, sort of -- PR: No, no. I didn't. One of the other guys at work had a fantastic avatar -- a female avatar -- that I used to be once in a while.
But my avatar is a guy wearing chaps.
Spiky hair -- spikier than this. Kind of orange hair.
Handlebar mustache. Kind of a Village People sort of a character.
So, very cool.
JH: And your question?
(Audience: [Unclear].) JH: The question is, there appears to be a lack of cultural fine-tuning in Second Life.
It doesn't seem to have its own culture, and the sort of differences that exist in the real world aren't translated into the Second Life map.
PR: Well, first of all, we're very early, so this has only been going on for a few years.
And so part of what we see is the same evolution of human behavior that you see in emerging societies.
So a fair criticism -- is what it is -- of Second Life today is that it's more like the Wild West than it is like Rome, from a cultural standpoint.
That said, the evolution of, and the nuanced interaction that creates culture, is happening at 10 times the speed of the real world, and in an environment where, if you walk into a bar in Second Life, 65 percent of the people there are not in the United States, and in fact are speaking their, you know, various and different languages.
In fact, one of the ways to make money in Second Life is to make really cool translators that you drag onto your body and they basically, kind of, pop up on your screen and allow you to use Google or Babel Fish or one of the other online text translators to on-the-fly translate spoken -- I'm sorry -- typed text between individuals.
And so, the multicultural nature and the sort of cultural melting pot that's happening inside Second Life is quite -- I think, quite remarkable relative to what in real human terms in the real world we've ever been able to achieve.
So, I think that culture will fine-tune, it will emerge, but we still have some years to wait while that happens, as you would naturally expect.
JH: Other questions? Right here.
(Audience: What's your demographic?) JH: What's your demographic?
PR: So, the question is, what's the demographic.
So, the average age of a person in Second Life is 32, however, the use of Second Life increases dramatically as your physical age increases. So as you go from age 30 to age 60 -- and there are many people in their sixties using Second Life -- this is also not a sharp curve -- it's very, very distributed -- usage goes up in terms of, like, hours per week by 40 percent as you go from age 30 to age 60 in real life, so there's not -- many people make the mistake of believing that Second Life is some kind of an online game. Actually it's generally unappealing -- I'm just speaking broadly and critically -- it's not very appealing to people that play online video games, because the graphics are not yet equivalent to -- I mean, these are very nice pictures, but in general the graphics are not quite equivalent to the fine-tuned graphics that you see in a Grand Theft Auto 4.
So average age: 32. I mentioned 65 percent of the users are not in the United States.
The distribution amongst countries is extremely broad.
There's users from, you know, virtually every country in the world now in Second Life.
The dominant ones are -- if you take the UK and Europe, together they make up about 55 percent of the usage base in Second Life.
In terms of psychographic -- oh, men and women: men and women are almost equally matched in Second Life, so about 45 percent of the people online right now on Second Life are women.
Women use Second Life, though, about 30 to 40 percent more, on an hours basis, than men do, meaning that more men sign up than women, and more women stay and use it than men.
So that's another demographic fact.
In terms of psychographic, you know, the people in Second Life are remarkably dissimilar relative to what you might think, when you go in and talk to them and meet them, and I would, you know, challenge you to just do this and find out.
But it's not a bunch of programmers.
It's not easy to describe as a demographic.
If I had to just sort of paint a broad picture, I'd say, remember the people who were really getting into eBay in the first few years of eBay?
Maybe a little bit like that: in other words, people who are early adopters.
They tend to be creative. They tend to be entrepreneurial.
A lot of them -- about 55,000 people so far -- are cash-flow positive: they're making money from what -- I mean, real-world money -- from what they're doing in Second Life, so it's a very build -- still a creative, building things, build-your-own-business type of an orientation. So, that's it.
JH: You describe yourself, Philip, as someone who was really creative when you were young and, you know, liked to make things.
I mean, it's not often that you hear somebody describe themselves as really creative.
I suspect that's possibly a euphemism for C student who spent a lot of time in his room? Is it possible?
(Laughter) PR: I was a -- there were times I was a C student. You know, it's funny.
When I got to college -- I studied physics in college -- and I got really -- it was funny, because I was definitely a more antisocial kid. I read all the time.
I was shy. I don't seem like it now, but I was very shy.
Moved around a bunch -- had that experience too.
So I did, kind of, I think, live in my own world, and obviously that helps, you know, engage your real interest in something.
JH: So you're on your fifth life at this point?
PR: If you count, yeah, cities. So -- but I did -- and I didn't do -- I think I didn't do as well in school as I could have. I think you're right.
I wasn't, like, an obsessed -- you know, get A's kind of guy.
I was going to say, I had a great social experience when I went to college that I hadn't had before, a more fraternal experience, where I met six or seven other guys who I studied physics with, and I was very competitive with them, so then I started to get A's. But you're right: I wasn't an A student.
JH: Last question. Right here.
(Audience: In the pamphlet, there's a statement -- ) JH: You want to paraphrase that?
PR: Yeah, so let me restate that.
So, you're saying that in the pamphlet there's a statement that we may come to prefer our digital selves to our real ones -- our more malleable or manageable digital identities to our real identities -- and that in fact, much of human life and human experience may move into the digital realm.
And then that's kind of a horrifying thought, of course.
That's a frightening change, frightening disruption.
I guess, and you're asking, what do I think about that? How do I -- JH: What's your response to the people who would say, that's horrifying?
(Audience: If someone would say to you, I find that disturbing, what would be your response?) PR: Well, I'd say a couple of things.
One is, it's disturbing like the Internet or electricity was.
That is to say, it's a big change, but it isn't avoidable.
So, no amount of backpedaling or intentional behavior or political behavior is going to keep these technology changes from connecting us together, because the basic motive that people have -- to be creative and entrepreneurial -- is going to drive energy into these virtual worlds in the same way that it has with the Web.
So this change, I believe, is a huge disruptive change.
Obviously, I'm the optimist and a big believer in what's going on here, but I think that as -- even a sober, you know, the most sober, disconnected thinker about this, looking at it from the side, has to conclude, based on the data, that with those kinds of economic forces at play, there is definitely going to be a sea change, and that change is going to be intensely disruptive relative to our concept of our very lives and being, and our identities, as well.
I don't think we can get away from those changes.
I think generally, we were talking about this -- I think that generally being present in a virtual world and being challenged by it, being -- surviving there, having a good life there, so to speak, is a challenge because of the multiculturality of it, because of the languages, because of the entrepreneurial richness of it, the sort of flea market nature, if you will, of the virtual world today.
It puts challenges on us to rise to. We must be better than ourselves, in many ways.
We must learn things and, you know, be more tolerant, and be smarter and learn faster and be more creative, perhaps, than we are typically in our real lives.
And I think that if that is true of virtual worlds, then these changes, though scary -- and, I say, inevitable -- are ultimately for the better, and therefore something that we should ride out.
But I would say that -- and many other authors and speakers about this, other than me, have said, you know, fasten your seat belts because the change is coming. There are going to be big changes.
JH: Philip Rosedale, thank you very much.
(Applause)
It’s an increasingly common sight in hospitals around the world: a nurse measures our height, weight, blood pressure, and attaches a glowing plastic clip to our finger.
Suddenly, a digital screen reads out the oxygen level in our bloodstream.
How did that happen?
How can a plastic clip learn something about our blood… without a blood sample?
Here’s the trick: our bodies are translucent, meaning they don’t completely block and reflect light.
Rather, they allow some light to actually pass through our skin, muscles, and blood vessels.
Don’t believe it?
Hold a flashlight to your thumb.
Light, it turns out, can help probe the insides of our bodies.
Consider that medical fingerclip— it’s called a pulse oximeter.
When you inhale, your lungs transfer oxygen into hemoglobin molecules, and the pulse oximeter measures the ratio of oxygenated to oxygen-free hemoglobin.
It does this by using a tiny red LED light on one side of the fingerclip, and a small light detector on the other.
When the LED shines into your finger, oxygen-free hemoglobin in your blood vessels absorbs the red light more strongly than its oxygenated counterpart.
So the amount of light that makes it out the other side depends on the concentration ratio of the two types of hemoglobin.
But any two patients will have different-sized blood vessels in their fingers.
For one patient, a saturation reading of ninety-five percent corresponds to a healthy oxygen level, but for another with smaller arteries, the same reading could dangerously misrepresent the actual oxygen level.
This can be accounted for with a second infrared wavelength LED.
Light comes in a vast spectrum of wavelengths, and infrared light lies just beyond the visible colors.
All molecules, including hemoglobin, absorb light at different efficiencies across this spectrum.
So contrasting the absorbance of red to infrared light provides a chemical fingerprint to eliminate the blood vessel size effect.
Today, an emerging medical sensor industry is exploring all-new degrees of precision chemical fingerprinting, using tiny light-manipulating devices no larger than a tenth of a millimeter.
This microscopic technology, called integrated photonics, is made from wires of silicon that guide light— like water in a pipe— to redirect, reshape, even temporarily trap it.
A ring resonator device, which is a circular wire of silicon, is a light trapper that enhances chemical fingerprinting.
When placed close to a silicon wire, a ring siphons off and temporarily stores only certain waves of light— those whose periodic wavelength fits a whole number of times along the ring’s circumference.
It’s the same effect at work when we pluck guitar strings.
Only certain vibrating patterns dominate a string of a particular length, to give a fundamental note and its overtones.
Ring resonators were originally designed to efficiently route different wavelengths of light— each a channel of digital data— in fiber optics communication networks.
But some day this kind of data traffic routing may be adapted for miniature chemical fingerprinting labs, on chips the size of a penny.
These future labs-on-a-chip may easily, rapidly, and non-invasively detect a host of illnesses, by analyzing human saliva or sweat in a doctor’s office or the convenience of our homes.
Human saliva in particular mirrors the composition of our bodies’ proteins and hormones, and can give early-warning signals for certain cancers and infectious and autoimmune diseases.
To accurately identify an illness, labs-on-a-chip may rely on several methods, including chemical fingerprinting, to sift through the large mix of trace substances in a sample of spit.
Various biomolecules in saliva absorb light at the same wavelength— but each has a distinct chemical fingerprint.
In a lab-on-a-chip, after the light passes through a saliva sample, a host of fine-tuned rings may each siphon off a slightly different wavelength of light and send it to a partner light detector.
Together, this bank of detectors will resolve the cumulative chemical fingerprint of the sample.
From this information, a tiny on-chip computer, containing a library of chemical fingerprints for different molecules, may figure out their relative concentrations, and help diagnose a specific illness.
From globe-trotting communications to labs-on-a-chip, humankind has repurposed light to both carry and extract information.
Its ability to illuminate continues to astonish us with new discoveries.
People love their automobiles.
They're a form of entertainment, they're a form of art, a pride of ownership.
Songs are written about cars.
Prince wrote a great song: "Little Red Corvette."
He didn't write "Little Red Laptop Computer" or "Little Red Dirt Devil."
He wrote about a car.
One of my favorites has always been: "Make Love to Your Man in a Chevy Van," because that was my vehicle when I was in college.
The fact is, when we do our market research around the world, we see there's a nearly universal aspiration on the part of people to own an automobile -- 750 million people in the world today own a car.
And you say, boy, that's a lot.
But you know what?
We really have to ask the question: Can the world sustain that number of automobiles?
And if you look at projections over the next 10 to 15 to 20 years, it looks like the world car park could grow to on the order of 1.1 billion vehicles.
If you park those end to end and wrap them around the Earth, that would stretch around the Earth 125 times.
Now, we've made great progress with automobile technology over the last 100 years.
Cars are dramatically cleaner, dramatically safer, more efficient and radically more affordable than they were 100 years ago.
But the fact remains: the fundamental DNA of the automobile has stayed pretty much the same.
If we were to reinvent the automobile today, rather than 100 years ago, knowing what we know about the issues associated with our product and about the technologies that exist today, what would we do?
We wanted something that was really affordable.
The fuel cell looked great: one-tenth as many moving parts, a fuel-cell propulsion system as an internal combustion engine, and it emits just water.
And we wanted to take advantage of Moore's Law with electronic controls and software, and we absolutely wanted our car to be connected.
So we embarked upon the reinvention around an electrochemical engine, the fuel cell, and hydrogen as the energy carrier.
First was Autonomy.
Autonomy really set the vision for where we wanted to head.
We embodied all of the key components of a fuel-cell propulsion system.
We then had Autonomy drivable with Hy-Wire, and we showed Hy-Wire here at this conference last year.
Hy-Wire is the world's first drivable fuel cell, and we have followed up that now with Sequel.
And Sequel truly is a real car.
So if we could run the video -- (Futuristic music) [Reinventing the Automobile] (Video) It truly is my great pleasure to introduce Sequel.
[Acceleration] [Cruising] [Steering] [Braking] But the real key question I'm sure that's on your mind: Where is the hydrogen going to come from?
And secondly, when are these kinds of cars going to be available?
So let me talk about hydrogen first.
The beauty of hydrogen is it can come from so many different sources: it can come from fossil fuels, it can come from any way that you can create electricity, including renewables.
And it can come from biofuels.
And that's quite exciting.
The vision here is to have each local community play to its natural strength in creating the hydrogen.
A lot of hydrogen is produced today in the world.
It's produced to get sulfur out of gasoline -- which I find is somewhat ironic.
It's produced in the fertilizer industry; it's produced in the chemical manufacturing industry.
That hydrogen is being made because there's a good business reason for its use.
But it tells us that we know how to create it, we know how to create it cost-effectively, we know how to handle it safely.
We did an analysis where you would have a station in each city with each of the 100 largest cities in the United States, and located the stations so you'd be no more than two miles from a station at any time.
We put one every 25 miles on the freeway, and it turns out that translates into about 12,000 stations.
And at a million dollars each, that would be about 12 billion dollars.
That's a lot of money.
But if you built the Alaskan pipeline today, that's half of what the Alaskan pipeline would cost.
But the real exciting vision that we see, truly, is home refueling, much like recharging your laptop or recharging your cell phone.
So we're pretty excited about the future of hydrogen.
We think it's a question of not whether, but a question of when.
What we've targeted for ourselves -- and we're making great progress toward this goal -- is to have a propulsion system based on hydrogen and fuel cells, designed and validated, that can go head-to-head with the internal combustion engine.
We're talking about obsoleting the internal combustion engine, and doing it in terms of affordability at scale volumes, its performance and its durability.
So that's what we're driving to for 2010.
We haven't seen anything yet in our development work that says that isn't possible.
We actually think the future is going to be event-driven.
So since we can't predict the future, we want to spend a lot of our time trying to create that future.
I'm very, very intrigued by the fact that our cars and trucks sit idle 90 percent of the time: they're parked all around us.
They're usually parked within 100 feet of the people that own them.
Now, if you take the power-generating capability of an automobile and you compare that to the electric grid in the United States, it turns out that the power in four percent of the automobiles equals that of the electric grid of the US.
That's a huge power-generating capability, a mobile power-generating capability.
And hydrogen and fuel cells give us that opportunity to actually use our cars and trucks when they're parked to generate electricity for the grid.
We talked about swarm networks earlier.
Talk about the ultimate swarm -- having all of the processors and all of the cars when they're sitting idle being part of a global grid for computing capability.
We find that premise quite exciting.
The automobile becomes, then, an appliance -- not in a commodity sense, but an appliance, mobile power, mobile platform for information and computing and communication, as well as a form of transportation.
And the key to all of this is to make it affordable, to make it exciting, to get it on a pathway where there's a way to make money doing it.
And again, this is a pretty big march to take here.
A lot of people say: How do you sleep at night when you're wrestling with a problem of that magnitude?
I tell them I sleep like a baby: I wake up crying every two hours.
(Laughter) Actually, the theme of this conference, I think, has hit on one of the major keys to pull that off, and that's relationships and working together.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Larry, Larry -- wait, wait, wait. Larry, wait one sec.
I've got so many questions I could ask you.
I just want to ask one.
You know, I could be wrong about this, but my sense is that in the public mind today, GM is not viewed as as serious about some of these environmental ideas as some of your Japanese competitors, maybe even as Ford.
Are you serious about it, and not just, you know, when the consumers want it, when the regulators force us to do it, we will go there?
Will you guys really try and show leadership on this?
Larry Burns: Absolutely. We're absolutely serious.
We're into this over a billion dollars already, so I would hope people would think we're serious when we're spending that kind of money.
And secondly, it's a fundamental business proposition.
I'll be honest with you; we're into it for business growth opportunities.
The growth of the auto industry will be capped by sustainability issues if we don't solve the problems.
And there's a simple principle of strategy that says: Do unto yourself before others do unto you.
If we can see this possible future, others can, too.
And we want to be the first one to create it, Chris.
Thank you very much.
Well, I would like to start with testicles.
(Laughter) Men who sleep five hours a night have significantly smaller testicles than those who sleep seven hours or more.
(Laughter) In addition, men who routinely sleep just four to five hours a night will have a level of testosterone which is that of someone 10 years their senior.
So a lack of sleep will age a man by a decade in terms of that critical aspect of wellness.
And we see equivalent impairments in female reproductive health caused by a lack of sleep.
This is the best news that I have for you today.
(Laughter) From this point, it may only get worse.
Not only will I tell you about the wonderfully good things that happen when you get sleep, but the alarmingly bad things that happen when you don't get enough, both for your brain and for your body.
Let me start with the brain and the functions of learning and memory, because what we've discovered over the past 10 or so years is that you need sleep after learning to essentially hit the save button on those new memories so that you don't forget.
But recently, we discovered that you also need sleep before learning to actually prepare your brain, almost like a dry sponge ready to initially soak up new information.
And without sleep, the memory circuits of the brain essentially become waterlogged, as it were, and you can't absorb new memories.
So let me show you the data.
Here in this study, we decided to test the hypothesis that pulling the all-nighter was a good idea.
So we took a group of individuals and we assigned them to one of two experimental groups: a sleep group and a sleep deprivation group.
Now the sleep group, they're going to get a full eight hours of slumber, but the deprivation group, we're going to keep them awake in the laboratory, under full supervision.
There's no naps or caffeine, by the way, so it's miserable for everyone involved.
And then the next day, we're going to place those participants inside an MRI scanner and we're going to have them try and learn a whole list of new facts as we're taking snapshots of brain activity.
And then we're going to test them to see how effective that learning has been.
And that's what you're looking at here on the vertical axis.
And when you put those two groups head to head, what you find is a quite significant, 40-percent deficit in the ability of the brain to make new memories without sleep.
I think this should be concerning, considering what we know is happening to sleep in our education populations right now.
In fact, to put that in context, it would be the difference in a child acing an exam versus failing it miserably -- 40 percent.
And we've gone on to discover what goes wrong within your brain to produce these types of learning disabilities.
And there's a structure that sits on the left and the right side of your brain, called the hippocampus.
And you can think of the hippocampus almost like the informational inbox of your brain.
It's very good at receiving new memory files and then holding on to them.
And when you look at this structure in those people who'd had a full night of sleep, we saw lots of healthy learning-related activity.
Yet in those people who were sleep-deprived, we actually couldn't find any significant signal whatsoever.
So it's almost as though sleep deprivation had shut down your memory inbox, and any new incoming files -- they were just being bounced.
You couldn't effectively commit new experiences to memory.
So that's the bad that can happen if I were to take sleep away from you, but let me just come back to that control group for a second.
Do you remember those folks that got a full eight hours of sleep?
Well, we can ask a very different question: What is it about the physiological quality of your sleep when you do get it that restores and enhances your memory and learning ability each and every day?
And by placing electrodes all over the head, what we've discovered is that there are big, powerful brainwaves that happen during the very deepest stages of sleep that have riding on top of them these spectacular bursts of electrical activity that we call sleep spindles.
And it's the combined quality of these deep-sleep brainwaves that acts like a file-transfer mechanism at night, shifting memories from a short-term vulnerable reservoir to a more permanent long-term storage site within the brain, and therefore protecting them, making them safe.
And it is important that we understand what during sleep actually transacts these memory benefits, because there are real medical and societal implications.
And let me just tell you about one area that we've moved this work out into, clinically, which is the context of aging and dementia.
Because it's of course no secret that, as we get older, our learning and memory abilities begin to fade and decline.
But what we've also discovered is that a physiological signature of aging is that your sleep gets worse, especially that deep quality of sleep that I was just discussing.
And only last year, we finally published evidence that these two things, they're not simply co-occurring, they are significantly interrelated.
And it suggests that the disruption of deep sleep is an underappreciated factor that is contributing to cognitive decline or memory decline in aging, and most recently we've discovered, in Alzheimer's disease as well.
Now, I know this is remarkably depressing news.
It's in the mail. It's coming at you.
But there's a potential silver lining here.
Unlike many of the other factors that we know are associated with aging, for example changes in the physical structure of the brain, that's fiendishly difficult to treat.
But that sleep is a missing piece in the explanatory puzzle of aging and Alzheimer's is exciting because we may be able to do something about it.
And one way that we are approaching this at my sleep center is not by using sleeping pills, by the way.
Unfortunately, they are blunt instruments that do not produce naturalistic sleep.
Instead, we're actually developing a method based on this.
It's called direct current brain stimulation.
You insert a small amount of voltage into the brain, so small you typically don't feel it, but it has a measurable impact.
Now if you apply this stimulation during sleep in young, healthy adults, as if you're sort of singing in time with those deep-sleep brainwaves, not only can you amplify the size of those deep-sleep brainwaves, but in doing so, we can almost double the amount of memory benefit that you get from sleep.
The question now is whether we can translate this same affordable, potentially portable piece of technology into older adults and those with dementia.
Can we restore back some healthy quality of deep sleep, and in doing so, can we salvage aspects of their learning and memory function?
That is my real hope now.
That's one of our moon-shot goals, as it were.
So that's an example of sleep for your brain, but sleep is just as essential for your body.
We've already spoken about sleep loss and your reproductive system.
Or I could tell you about sleep loss and your cardiovascular system, and that all it takes is one hour.
Because there is a global experiment performed on 1.6 billion people across 70 countries twice a year, and it's called daylight saving time.
Now, in the spring, when we lose one hour of sleep, we see a subsequent 24-percent increase in heart attacks that following day.
In the autumn, when we gain an hour of sleep, we see a 21-percent reduction in heart attacks.
Isn't that incredible?
And you see exactly the same profile for car crashes, road traffic accidents, even suicide rates.
But as a deeper dive, I want to focus on this: sleep loss and your immune system.
And here, I'll introduce these delightful blue elements in the image.
They are called natural killer cells, and you can think of natural killer cells almost like the secret service agents of your immune system.
They are very good at identifying dangerous, unwanted elements and eliminating them.
In fact, what they're doing here is destroying a cancerous tumor mass.
So what you wish for is a virile set of these immune assassins at all times, and tragically, that's what you don't have if you're not sleeping enough.
So here in this experiment, you're not going to have your sleep deprived for an entire night, you're simply going to have your sleep restricted to four hours for one single night, and then we're going to look to see what's the percent reduction in immune cell activity that you suffer.
And it's not small -- it's not 10 percent, it's not 20 percent.
There was a 70-percent drop in natural killer cell activity.
That's a concerning state of immune deficiency, and you can perhaps understand why we're now finding significant links between short sleep duration and your risk for the development of numerous forms of cancer.
Currently, that list includes cancer of the bowel, cancer of the prostate and cancer of the breast.
In fact, the link between a lack of sleep and cancer is now so strong that the World Health Organization has classified any form of nighttime shift work as a probable carcinogen, because of a disruption of your sleep-wake rhythms.
So you may have heard of that old maxim that you can sleep when you're dead.
Well, I'm being quite serious now -- it is mortally unwise advice.
We know this from epidemiological studies across millions of individuals.
There's a simple truth: the shorter your sleep, the shorter your life.
Short sleep predicts all-cause mortality.
And if increasing your risk for the development of cancer or even Alzheimer's disease were not sufficiently disquieting, we have since discovered that a lack of sleep will even erode the very fabric of biological life itself, your DNA genetic code.
So here in this study, they took a group of healthy adults and they limited them to six hours of sleep a night for one week, and then they measured the change in their gene activity profile relative to when those same individuals were getting a full eight hours of sleep a night.
And there were two critical findings.
First, a sizable and significant 711 genes were distorted in their activity, caused by a lack of sleep.
The second result was that about half of those genes were actually increased in their activity.
The other half were decreased.
Now those genes that were switched off by a lack of sleep were genes associated with your immune system, so once again, you can see that immune deficiency.
In contrast, those genes that were actually upregulated or increased by way of a lack of sleep, were genes associated with the promotion of tumors, genes associated with long-term chronic inflammation within the body, and genes associated with stress, and, as a consequence, cardiovascular disease.
There is simply no aspect of your wellness that can retreat at the sign of sleep deprivation and get away unscathed.
It's rather like a broken water pipe in your home.
Sleep loss will leak down into every nook and cranny of your physiology, even tampering with the very DNA nucleic alphabet that spells out your daily health narrative.
And at this point, you may be thinking, "Oh my goodness, how do I start to get better sleep?
What are you tips for good sleep?"
Well, beyond avoiding the damaging and harmful impact of alcohol and caffeine on sleep, and if you're struggling with sleep at night, avoiding naps during the day, I have two pieces of advice for you.
The first is regularity.
Go to bed at the same time, wake up at the same time, no matter whether it's the weekday or the weekend.
Regularity is king, and it will anchor your sleep and improve the quantity and the quality of that sleep.
The second is keep it cool.
Your body needs to drop its core temperature by about two to three degrees Fahrenheit to initiate sleep and then to stay asleep, and it's the reason you will always find it easier to fall asleep in a room that's too cold than too hot.
So aim for a bedroom temperature of around 65 degrees, or about 18 degrees Celsius.
That's going to be optimal for the sleep of most people.
And then finally, in taking a step back, then, what is the mission-critical statement here?
Well, I think it may be this: sleep, unfortunately, is not an optional lifestyle luxury.
Sleep is a nonnegotiable biological necessity.
It is your life-support system, and it is Mother Nature's best effort yet at immortality.
And the decimation of sleep throughout industrialized nations is having a catastrophic impact on our health, our wellness, even the safety and the education of our children.
It's a silent sleep loss epidemic, and it's fast becoming one of the greatest public health challenges that we face in the 21st century.
I believe it is now time for us to reclaim our right to a full night of sleep, and without embarrassment or that unfortunate stigma of laziness.
And in doing so, we can be reunited with the most powerful elixir of life, the Swiss Army knife of health, as it were.
And with that soapbox rant over, I will simply say, good night, good luck, and above all ...
I do hope you sleep well.
Thank you very much indeed.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you so much.
David Biello: No, no, no. Stay there for a second.
Good job not running away, though. I appreciate that.
So that was terrifying.
Matt Walker: You're welcome. DB: Yes, thank you, thank you.
Since we can't catch up on sleep, what are we supposed to do?
What do we do when we're, like, tossing and turning in bed late at night or doing shift work or whatever else?
MW: So you're right, we can't catch up on sleep.
Sleep is not like the bank.
You can't accumulate a debt and then hope to pay it off at a later point in time.
I should also note the reason that it's so catastrophic and that our health deteriorates so quickly, first, it's because human beings are the only species that deliberately deprive themselves of sleep for no apparent reason.
DB: Because we're smart.
MW: And I make that point because it means that Mother Nature, throughout the course of evolution, has never had to face the challenge of this thing called sleep deprivation.
So she's never developed a safety net, and that's why when you undersleep, things just sort of implode so quickly, both within the brain and the body.
So you just have to prioritize.
DB: OK, but tossing and turning in bed, what do I do?
MW: So if you are staying in bed awake for too long, you should get out of bed and go to a different room and do something different.
The reason is because your brain will very quickly associate your bedroom with the place of wakefulness, and you need to break that association.
So only return to bed when you are sleepy, and that way you will relearn the association that you once had, which is your bed is the place of sleep.
So the analogy would be, you'd never sit at the dinner table, waiting to get hungry, so why would you lie in bed, waiting to get sleepy?
DB: Well, thank you for that wake-up call.
Great job, Matt.
MW: You're very welcome. Thank you very much.
In 1962, Buckminster Fuller presented the particularly audacious proposal for the Geoscope.
It was a 200-foot diameter geodesic sphere to be suspended over the East River in New York City, in full view of the United Nations.
It was a big idea, for sure, and it was one that he felt could truly inform and deeply affect the decision making of this body through animations of global data, trends and other information regarding the globe, on this sphere.
And today, 45 years later, we clearly have no less need for this kind of clarity and perspective, but what we do have is improved technology.
Today we don't need one million light bulbs to create a spherical display.
We can use LEDs.
LEDs are smaller, they're cheaper, they're longer lasting, they're more efficient.
Most importantly for this, they're faster.
And this speed, combined with today's high-performance micro-controllers, allows us to actually simulate, in this piece, over 17,000 LEDs -- using just 64.
And the way this happens is through the phenomenon of persistence of vision.
But as this ring rotates at about 1,700 rpm -- that's 28 times per second.
The equator's speed is actually about 60 miles per hour.
There are four on-board micro-controllers that, each time this ring rotates it, as it passes the rear of the display, it picks up a position signal.
And from that, the on-board micro-controllers can extrapolate the position of the ring at all points around the revolution and display arbitrary bitmap images and animations.
But this is really just the beginning.
In addition to higher resolution versions of this display, my father and I are working on a new patent-pending design for a fully volumetric display using the same phenomenon.
It achieves this by rotating LEDs about two axes.
So as you can see here, this is a, eleven-inch diameter circuit board.
These blocks represent LEDs.
And so you could see that as this disc rotates about this axis, it will create a disc of light that we can control.
That's nothing new: that's a propeller clock; that's the rims that you can buy for your car.
But what is new is that, when we rotate this disc about this axis, this disc of light actually becomes a sphere of light.
And so we can control that with micro-controllers and create a fully volumetric, three-dimensional display with just 256 LEDs.
Now this piece is currently in process -- due out in May -- but what we've done is we've put together a small demo, just to show the geometric translation of points into a sphere.
I've got a little video to show you, but keep in mind that this is with no electronic control, and this is also with only four LEDs.
This is actually only about 1.5 percent of what the final display will be in May.
So, take a look.
And here you can see it's rotating about the vertical axis only, creating circles.
And then, as the other axis kicks in, those actually blur into a volume.
And the shutter speed of the camera actually makes it slightly less effective in this case.
But this piece is due out in May.
It'll be on display at the Interactive Telecommunications Spring Show in Greenwich Village in New York City -- that's open to the public, definitely invite you all to come and attend -- it's a fantastic show.
There are hundreds of student innovators with fantastic projects.
This piece, actually, will be on display down in the Sierra Simulcast Lounge in the breaks between now and the end of the show.
So I'd love to talk to you all, and invite you to come down and take a closer look.
It's an honor to be here. Thanks very much.
(Applause)
In 1995, the British Medical Journal published an astonishing report about a 29-year-old builder.
He accidentally jumped onto a 15-centimeter nail, which pierced straight through his steel-toed boot.
He was in such agonizing pain that even the smallest movement was unbearable.
But when the doctors took off his boot, they faced a surprising sight: the nail had never touched his foot at all.
For hundreds of years, scientists thought that pain was a direct response to damage.
By that logic, the more severe an injury is, the more pain it should cause.
But as we’ve learned more about the science of pain, we’ve discovered that pain and tissue damage don’t always go hand in hand, even when the body’s threat signaling mechanisms are fully functioning.
We’re capable of experiencing severe pain out of proportion to an actual injury, and even pain without any injury, like the builder, or the well-documented cases of male partners of pregnant women experiencing pain during the pregnancy or labor.
What’s going on here?
There are actually two phenomena at play: the experience of pain, and a biological process called nociception.
Nociception is part of the nervous system’s protective response to harmful or potentially harmful stimuli.
Sensors in specialized nerve endings detect mechanical, thermal, and chemical threats.
If enough sensors are activated, electrical signals shoot up the nerve to the spine and on to the brain.
The brain weighs the importance of these signals and produces pain if it decides the body needs protection.
Typically, pain helps the body avoid further injury or damage.
But there are a whole set of factors besides nociception that can influence the experience of pain— and make pain less useful.
First, there are biological factors that amplify nociceptive signals to the brain.
If nerve fibers are activated repeatedly, the brain may decide they need to be more sensitive to adequately protect the body from threats.
More stress sensors can be added to nerve fibers until they become so sensitive that even light touches to the skin spark intense electrical signals.
In other cases, nerves adapt to send signals more efficiently, amplifying the message.
These forms of amplification are most common in people experiencing chronic pain, which is defined as pain lasting more than 3 months.
When the nervous system is nudged into an ongoing state of high alert, pain can outlast physical injury.
This creates a vicious cycle in which the longer pain persists, the more difficult it becomes to reverse.
Psychological factors clearly play a role in pain too, potentially by influencing nociception and by influencing the brain directly.
A person’s emotional state, memories, beliefs about pain and expectations about treatment can all influence how much pain they experience.
In one study, children who reported believing they had no control over pain actually experienced more intense pain than those who believed they had some control.
Features of the environment matter too: In one experiment, volunteers with a cold rod placed on the back of their hand reported feeling more pain when they were shown a red light than a blue one, even though the rod was the same temperature each time.
Finally, social factors like the availability of family support can affect perception of pain.
All of this means that a multi-pronged approach to pain treatment that includes pain specialists, physical therapists, clinical psychologists, nurses and other healthcare professionals is often most effective.
We’re only beginning to uncover the mechanisms behind the experience of pain, but there are some promising areas of research.
Until recently, we thought the glial cells surrounding neurons were just support structures, but now we know they have a huge role in influencing nociception.
Studies have shown that disabling certain brain circuits in the amygdala can eliminate pain in rats.
And genetic testing in people with rare disorders that prevent them from feeling pain have pinpointed several other possible targets for drugs and perhaps eventually gene therapy.
Hello.
I'm not a real person.
I'm actually a copy of a real person.
Although, I feel like a real person.
It's kind of hard to explain.
Hold on -- I think I saw a real person ... there's one.
Let's bring him onstage.
Hello.
(Applause) What you see up there is a digital human.
I'm wearing an inertial motion capture suit that's figuring what my body is doing.
And I've got a single camera here that's watching my face and feeding some machine-learning software that's taking my expressions, like, "Hm, hm, hm," and transferring it to that guy.
We call him "DigiDoug."
He's actually a 3-D character that I'm controlling live in real time.
So, I work in visual effects.
And in visual effects, one of the hardest things to do is to create believable, digital humans that the audience accepts as real.
People are just really good at recognizing other people.
Go figure!
So, that's OK, we like a challenge.
Over the last 15 years, we've been putting humans and creatures into film that you accept as real.
If they're happy, you should feel happy.
And if they feel pain, you should empathize with them.
We're getting pretty good at it, too.
But it's really, really difficult.
Effects like these take thousands of hours and hundreds of really talented artists.
But things have changed.
Over the last five years, computers and graphics cards have gotten seriously fast.
And machine learning, deep learning, has happened.
So we asked ourselves: Do you suppose we could create a photo-realistic human, like we're doing for film, but where you're seeing the actual emotions and the details of the person who's controlling the digital human in real time?
In fact, that's our goal: If you were having a conversation with DigiDoug one-on-one, is it real enough so that you could tell whether or not I was lying to you?
So that was our goal.
About a year and a half ago, we set off to achieve this goal.
What I'm going to do now is take you basically on a little bit of a journey to see exactly what we had to do to get where we are.
We had to capture an enormous amount of data.
In fact, by the end of this thing, we had probably one of the largest facial data sets on the planet.
Of my face.
(Laughter) Why me?
Well, I'll do just about anything for science.
I mean, look at me!
I mean, come on.
We had to first figure out what my face actually looked like.
Not just a photograph or a 3-D scan, but what it actually looked like in any photograph, how light interacts with my skin.
Luckily for us, about three blocks away from our Los Angeles studio is this place called ICT.
They're a research lab that's associated with the University of Southern California.
They have a device there, it's called the "light stage."
It has a zillion individually controlled lights and a whole bunch of cameras.
And with that, we can reconstruct my face under a myriad of lighting conditions.
We even captured the blood flow and how my face changes when I make expressions.
This let us build a model of my face that, quite frankly, is just amazing.
It's got an unfortunate level of detail, unfortunately.
(Laughter) You can see every pore, every wrinkle.
But we had to have that.
Reality is all about detail.
And without it, you miss it.
We are far from done, though.
This let us build a model of my face that looked like me.
But it didn't really move like me.
And that's where machine learning comes in.
And machine learning needs a ton of data.
So I sat down in front of some high-resolution motion-capturing device.
And also, we did this traditional motion capture with markers.
We created a whole bunch of images of my face and moving point clouds that represented that shapes of my face.
Man, I made a lot of expressions, I said different lines in different emotional states ...
We had to do a lot of capture with this.
Once we had this enormous amount of data, we built and trained deep neural networks.
And when we were finished with that, in 16 milliseconds, the neural network can look at my image and figure out everything about my face.
It can compute my expression, my wrinkles, my blood flow -- even how my eyelashes move.
This is then rendered and displayed up there with all the detail that we captured previously.
We're far from done.
This is very much a work in progress.
This is actually the first time we've shown it outside of our company.
And, you know, it doesn't look as convincing as we want; I've got wires coming out of the back of me, and there's a sixth-of-a-second delay between when we capture the video and we display it up there.
Sixth of a second -- that's crazy good!
But it's still why you're hearing a bit of an echo and stuff.
And you know, this machine learning stuff is brand-new to us, sometimes it's hard to convince to do the right thing, you know?
It goes a little sideways.
(Laughter) But why did we do this?
Well, there's two reasons, really.
First of all, it is just crazy cool.
(Laughter) How cool is it?
Well, with the push of a button, I can deliver this talk as a completely different character.
This is Elbor.
We put him together to test how this would work with a different appearance.
And the cool thing about this technology is that, while I've changed my character, the performance is still all me.
I tend to talk out of the right side of my mouth; so does Elbor.
(Laughter) Now, the second reason we did this, and you can imagine, is this is going to be great for film.
This is a brand-new, exciting tool for artists and directors and storytellers.
It's pretty obvious, right?
I mean, this is going to be really neat to have.
But also, now that we've built it, it's clear that this is going to go way beyond film.
But wait.
Didn't I just change my identity with the push of a button?
Isn't this like "deepfake" and face-swapping that you guys may have heard of?
Well, yeah.
In fact, we are using some of the same technology that deepfake is using.
Deepfake is 2-D and image based, while ours is full 3-D and way more powerful.
But they're very related.
And now I can hear you thinking, "Darn it!
I though I could at least trust and believe in video.
If it was live video, didn't it have to be true?"
Well, we know that's not really the case, right?
Even without this, there are simple tricks that you can do with video like how you frame a shot that can make it really misrepresent what's actually going on.
And I've been working in visual effects for a long time, and I've known for a long time that with enough effort, we can fool anyone about anything.
What this stuff and deepfake is doing is making it easier and more accessible to manipulate video, just like Photoshop did for manipulating images, some time ago.
I prefer to think about how this technology could bring humanity to other technology and bring us all closer together.
Now that you've seen this, think about the possibilities.
Right off the bat, you're going to see it in live events and concerts, like this.
Digital celebrities, especially with new projection technology, are going to be just like the movies, but alive and in real time.
And new forms of communication are coming.
You can already interact with DigiDoug in VR.
And it is eye-opening.
It's just like you and I are in the same room, even though we may be miles apart.
Heck, the next time you make a video call, you will be able to choose the version of you you want people to see.
It's like really, really good makeup.
I was scanned about a year and a half ago.
I've aged.
DigiDoug hasn't.
On video calls, I never have to grow old.
And as you can imagine, this is going to be used to give virtual assistants a body and a face.
A humanity.
I already love it that when I talk to virtual assistants, they answer back in a soothing, humanlike voice.
Now they'll have a face.
And you'll get all the nonverbal cues that make communication so much easier.
It's going to be really nice.
You'll be able to tell when a virtual assistant is busy or confused or concerned about something.
Now, I couldn't leave the stage without you actually being able to see my real face, so you can do some comparison.
So let me take off my helmet here.
Yeah, don't worry, it looks way worse than it feels.
(Laughter) So this is where we are.
Let me put this back on here.
(Laughter) Doink!
So this is where we are.
We're on the cusp of being able to interact with digital humans that are strikingly real, whether they're being controlled by a person or a machine.
And like all new technology these days, it's going to come with some serious and real concerns that we have to deal with.
But I am just so really excited about the ability to bring something that I've seen only in science fiction for my entire life into reality.
Communicating with computers will be like talking to a friend.
And talking to faraway friends will be like sitting with them together in the same room.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A cold January day of 2005, I took one of my most important drives of my life.
I was on this road in upstate New York, trying to find this old factory.
The day before, I received a flyer in the mail that said, "Fully equipped yogurt plant for sale."
I threw it in the garbage can.
And 20 minutes later, I picked it up and called the number.
The plant was 85 years old, and it was closing.
So I decided to go see it.
At this time, I wasn't sure where this road or my life was going.
I owned a small cheese shop but really hated business.
But the hills and the roads and the smells are all familiar.
I grew up in Turkey, in a similar environment, near the Kurdish mountains.
My family made cheese and yogurt; I grew up listening to shepherd's stories.
We didn't have much, but we had the moon and the stars, simple food, each other.
Eventually, I came to America.
I didn't even know New York had farms.
I made it to upstate, and I never left.
Now I'm lost.
I passed the road sign that said "Dead end."
Then soon after, there it was: the factory.
The smell hit me first.
It was a like a milk container left out in the sun.
The walls were so thick, paints were peeling, there were cracks everywhere.
The factory was so old, the owners thought it was worthless.
I thought they left a zero off, I couldn't believe the price.
As I entered in, I stopped noticing things.
All I could see were the people.
There were 55 of them.
Just quiet.
Their only job was to break the plant apart and close it forever.
I was met with a guy named Rich, the production manager.
He offered to take me around, show me around.
He didn't say much, but around every corner, he would point out some stories.
Rich worked there for 20 years.
His father made yogurt before him, and his grandfather made cream cheese before that.
You could tell that Rich felt guilty that this factory was closing on his watch.
What hit me the hardest at that time was that this wasn't just an old factory.
This was a time machine.
This is where people built lives, they left for wars, they bragged about home runs and report cards.
But now, it was closing.
And the company wasn't just giving up on yogurt, it was giving up on them.
As if they were not good enough.
And I was shocked how these people were behaving.
There was no anger, there were no tears.
Just silence.
With grace, they were closing this factory.
I was so angry that the CEO was far away, in a tower or somewhere, looking at the spreadsheets and closing the factory.
Spreadsheets are lazy.
They don't tell you about people, they don't tell you about communities.
But unfortunately, this is how too many business decisions are made today.
I was never the same person after what I saw.
On my way back home, I called Mario, my lawyer.
I called Mario, I said, "Mario, I want to buy this place."
Mario said, "Hamdi, one of the largest food companies in the world is closing this place, and they're getting out of the yogurt business.
Who the hell are you to make it work?"
I said, "You're right."
But the next day, I called him again, and I said, "Mario, really, I really want to buy this place."
He said, "Hamdi, you have no money.
(Laughter) You haven't even paid me in six months."
(Laughter) Which was true.
(Laughter) But I got a loan, another loan.
By August 2005, I had the keys for this factory.
The first thing I did was to hire four of the original 55 people.
I had Maria, the office manager.
I had Frank, the wastewater guy.
I had Mike, the maintenance guy.
And Rich, who showed me the plant, the production guy.
And we had our first board meeting.
Mike says, "Hamdi, what are we going to do now?"
They look at me as if I have the magic answer.
So I said, "Mike, we're going to go to Ace Hardware store, and we're going to get some paints.
And we're going to paint the walls outside."
Mike wasn't impressed.
He looked at me.
He said, "Hamdi, that's fine, we’ll do that, but tell me you have more ideas than that."
(Laughter) I said, "I do.
We'll paint the walls white."
(Laughter) Honest to God, that was the only idea I had.
(Laughter) But we painted those walls that summer.
I sometimes wonder what they would have said to me if I told them, "See these walls we're painting?
In two years, we're going to launch a yogurt here that Americans have never seen and never tasted before.
It will be delicious, it will be natural.
And we're going to call it 'Chobani' -- it means 'shepherd' in Turkish."
And if I said, "We are going to hire all of the 55 employees back, or most of them back.
And then 100 more after, and then 100 more after, and then 1,000 more after that."
But if I told them, "You see that town over there?
Every person we hire, 10 more local jobs will be created.
The town will come back to life, the trucks will be all over the roads.
And the first money we make, we're going to build one of the best Little League baseball fields for our children.
And five years after that, we're going to be the number one Greek yogurt brand in the country."
Would they have believed me?
Of course not.
But that's exactly what happened.
(Applause) In painting those walls, we got to know each other.
We believed in each other.
And we figured it out together.
Five years, me and all my colleagues, we never left the factory.
We worked day and night, through the holidays, to fix that plant.
The best part of Chobani for me is this: the same exact people who were given up on were the ones who built it back 100 times better than before.
And they all have a financial stake in the company today.
(Applause) And all this time, I kept wondering -- you see, I'm not a businessman, I don't come from that tradition -- I just kept wondering: What is this all about?
Corporate America says it's about profits.
Mainstream business says it's about money.
The CEO playbook says it's about shareholders.
And so much is sacrificed for it -- it's factories, communities, jobs.
But not by CEOs.
CEOs have their employees suffer for them.
But yet, the CEOs's pay goes up and up and up.
And so many people are left behind.
I'm here to tell you: no more.
It's not right, it's never been right.
It's time to admit that the playbook that guided businesses and CEOs for the last 40 years is broken.
(Applause) It tells you everything about business except how to be a noble leader.
We need a new playbook.
We need a new playbook that sees people again.
That sees above and beyond profits.
In the movies, they have a name for people who take a different path to do things right.
They call them "antiheroes."
I think we need the same idea in business.
We need anti-CEOs, and we need an anti-CEO playbook.
So let me tell you about what this anti-CEO playbook is all about.
An anti-CEO playbook is about gratitude.
Today's business book says: business exists to maximize profit for the shareholders.
I think that's the dumbest idea I've ever heard in my life.
(Laughter) In reality, business should take care of their employees first.
(Applause) You know, a few years ago, when we announced that we are giving shares to all our 2,000 employees, some people said it's PR, some said it's a gift.
I said, it's not a gift.
I watched it, I've been part of it.
They earned it with their talent and with their hard work, and I don't see any other way.
The new way of business -- it's your employees you take care of first.
Not the profits.
The new anti-CEO playbook is about community.
Today, the businesses that have it all ask communities, "What kind of tax breaks and incentives can you give me?"
The reality is, businesses should go to the struggling communities and ask, "How can I help you?"
(Applause) When we wanted to build our second yogurt plant, Idaho was on nobody's radar screen.
It was too rural, too far away, didn't have much incentives.
So I went there.
I met with the local people, I met with the farmers.
We shook hands, we broke bread.
I said, "I want to build it right here."
I don't need to see financial studies.
And the result -- its community is thriving.
There's new schools that open every year.
New food companies are coming up every year.
And they told me, "You're not going to find any trained workers here."
I said, "It's OK, we'll teach them."
We partnered with the local community college, and while we were building the plant, we trained hundreds of hundreds of people for advanced manufacturing.
And today, our factory is one of the largest yogurt plants in the world.
(Applause) The new way of business -- communities.
Go search for communities that you can be part of.
Ask for permission.
And be with them, open the walls and succeed together.
The anti-CEO playbook is about responsibility.
Today's playbook says, the businesses should stay out of politics.
The reality is businesses, as citizens, must take a side.
When we were growing in New York and looking for more people to hire, I remembered that in Utica, an hour away, there were refugees from Southeast Asia and Africa, who were looking for a place to work.
"They don't speak English," someone told me.
I said, "I don't really, either. Let's get translators."
(Laughter) "They don't have transportation."
I said, "Let's get buses, it's not a rocket science."
Today, in one of America's rural areas, 30 percent of the Chobani workforce are immigrants and refugees.
(Applause) (Cheers) And it changed us for better.
The new way of business -- it's business, not government, in the best position to make a change in today's world: in gun violence, in climate change, in income inequality, in refugees, in race.
It's business that must take a side.
(Applause) And lastly, an anti-CEO playbook is about accountability.
Today's playbook says, the CEO reports to the corporate boards.
In my opinion, CEO reports to consumer.
In the first few years of Chobani, the 1-800 number on the cup was my personal number.
(Laughter) When somebody called and wrote, I responded personally.
Sometimes I made changes based on what I heard, because consumer is in power.
That's the reason the business exists.
It's you -- every single one of you is in power to make changes today.
If you don't like the brand and the companies, what they are doing with their business, you can throw them into the garbage can.
And if you see the ones that are doing it right, you can reward them.
In the end, this is all in our responsibility.
The new way of business -- it's the consumer we report to, not to the corporate boards.
You see, if you are right with your people, if you are right with your community, if you are right with your product, you will be more profitable, you will be more innovative, you will have more passionate people working for you and a community that supports you.
And that's what the anti-CEO playbook is all about.
The treasure that I found in that factory -- dignity of work, strength of character, human spirit -- is what we need to unleash all across the world.
Brothers and sisters, there are people and places all around the world left out and left behind.
But their spirit is still strong.
They just want another chance, they want someone to give them a chance again, not to just build it back, but build it better than before.
And this is the difference between return on investment and return on kindness.
This is the difference between profit and true wealth.
And if it can happen in a small town in upstate New York and Idaho, it can happen in every city and town and village across the world.
This is not the time to build walls, this is a time to start painting the walls.
I leave the colors all up to you.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Sunning themselves on rocks or waddling awkwardly across the beach, it’s easy to think of these immobile mammals less as sea lions, and more as sea house cats.
But don’t be fooled by their beachside behavior.
Under the waves, sea lions are incredible endurance hunters.
Hurtling around at speeds from 4 to 18 miles an hour and hunting for up to 30 hours at a time, these majestic mammals live up to their name.
And thanks to a suite of physical adaptations, finely tuned over millions of years, they make for resourceful foragers.
To find their favorite food, sea lions hunt much deeper than many of their semi-aquatic peers.
With some species diving to depths of nearly 400 meters, they’re able to cope with the mounting pressure by collapsing their pliable rib cage, and compressing a pair of springy lungs.
This pushes air up through the smaller airways, collapsing rings of cartilage as oxygen travels out from the lungs, to be held in the larger, upper airways.
Upon surfacing, this air will be used to re-inflate the lungs, but for now their heart slows down to preserve oxygen.
Blood flow is redirected towards only the most essential organs like the heart, lungs, and brain, which rely on reserve oxygen stored in blood and muscle.
Once they arrive at their hunting ground, sea lions depend on their superior vision to find their prey.
Most mammal eyes have a structure called a lens– a transparent, convex structure whose shape refracts light to enable sight.
In humans, this lens is curved to process light waves traveling through air.
But sea lions need to see their best at hundreds of meters deep.
To accommodate, their eyes have a much rounder lens to refract light underwater, as well as teardrop-shaped pupils which can expand to 25 times their original size.
This lets in as much light as possible, helping them pinpoint their prey in even the dimmest conditions.
But once they’ve closed in, they rely on something akin to a sixth sense to actually catch their meal.
Their whiskers, or vibrissae, are composed of keratin and full of nerve fibers that run deep into the connective tissue of their face.
Sea lions have full directional control over these whiskers, which can lie flat against their face, or stick out at a 90-degree angle.
When properly tuned, these whiskers can sense the slim trails of moving water fish leave in their wake.
And they’re precise enough to let blindfolded sea lions tell the difference between objects less than two centimeters different in size.
With these tools a healthy sea lion can catch generous helpings of fish such as anchovy, mackerel, and squid on every outing.
And with their exceptional memories, they can remember multiple hunting grounds, including those they haven’t visited in decades.
This memory also extends to breeding territories and birthing areas, as well as which neighbors are friend and foe.
There’s even evidence that sea lions can remember how to perform tasks after 10 years with no practice in between, letting them navigate old stomping grounds with ease.
Yet despite these incredible adaptations, there are changes unfolding in their habitats too rapidly for sea lions to handle.
As climate change warms the oceans, certain toxic algae species thrive.
This algae is harmless to the fish who eat it, but for the sea lions which ingest those fish, the algae’s domoic acid can trigger seizures and brain damage.
Changing ocean conditions keep this algae blooming year round, causing more and more sea lions to wash up on beaches.
This tragic discovery is just one of the many ways the health of aquatic animal communities can help us better understand Earth’s oceans.
These red flags help us take action to protect ourselves and other maritime mammals.
And the more we can learn about the changing ocean that sea lions inhabit, the better equipped we’ll be to help these clever creatures thrive.
This is Aunt Zip from Sodom, North Carolina.
She was 105 years old when I took this picture.
She was always saying things that made me stop and think, like, "Time may be a great healer, but it ain't no beauty specialist."
(Laughter) She said, "Be good to your friends.
Why, without them, you'd be a total stranger."
(Laughter) This is one of her songs.
Let's see if we can get into the flow here and all do this one together.
And I'm going to have Michael Manring play bass with me.
Give him a big old hand.
(Applause) One, two, three, four.
(Music) Well, my true love's a black-eyed daisy; if I don't see her, I go crazy.
My true love lives up the river; a few more jumps and I'll be with her.
Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie! Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie!
Hey, hey black-eyed Susie, hey.
Now you've got to picture Aunt Zip at 105 years old in Sodom, North Carolina.
I'd go up and learn these old songs from her.
She couldn't sing much, couldn't play anymore.
And I'd pull her out on the front porch.
Down below, there was her grandson plowing the tobacco field with a mule.
A double outhouse over here on the side.
And we'd sing this old song. She didn't have a whole lot of energy, so I'd sing, "Hey, hey!" and she'd just answer back with, "Black-eyed Susie."
Oh, hey, hey, black-eyed Susie! Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie!
Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie, hey.
Well, she and I went blackberry picking.
She got mad; I took a licking.
Ducks on the millpond, geese in the ocean, Devil in the pretty girl when she takes a notion.
Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie! Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie!
Hey, hey black-eyed Susie, hey.
Let's have the banjo.
Well, we'll get married next Thanksgiving.
I'll lay around; she'll make a living.
She'll cook blackjacks, I'll cook gravy; we'll have chicken someday, maybe.
Hey, hey, hey, hey. Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie, hey!
One more time now.
Oh, hey, hey, black-eyed Susie! Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie!
Hey, hey, black-eyed Susie, hey.
(Applause) Thank you, Michael.
This is Ralph Stanley.
When I was going to college at University of California at Santa Barbara in the College of Creative Studies, taking majors in biology and art, he came to the campus.
This was in 1968, I guess it was.
And he played his bluegrass style of music, but near the end of the concert, he played the old timing style of banjo picking that came from Africa, along with the banjo.
It's called claw-hammer style, that he had learned from his mother and grandmother.
I fell in love with that.
I went up to him and said, how can I learn that?
He said, well, you can go back to Clinch Mountain, where I'm from, or Asheville or Mount Airy, North Carolina -- some place that has a lot of music.
Because there's a lot of old people still living that play that old style.
So I went back that very summer.
I just fell in love with the culture and the people.
And you know, I came back to school, I finished my degrees and told my parents I wanted to be a banjo player.
You can imagine how excited they were.
So I thought I would just like to show you some of the pictures I've taken of some of my mentors.
Just a few of them, but maybe you'll get just a little hint of some of these folks.
And play a little banjo. Let's do a little medley.
(Music) (Applause) Those last few pictures were of Ray Hicks, who just passed away last year.
He was one of the great American folk tale-tellers.
The Old Jack tales that he had learned -- he talked like this, you could hardly understand him. But it was really wonderful.
And he lived in that house that his great-grandfather had built.
No running water, no electricity. A wonderful, wonderful guy.
And you can look at more pictures.
I've actually got a website that's got a bunch of photos that I've done of some of the other folks I didn't get a chance to show you.
This instrument came up in those pictures. It's called the mouth bow.
It is definitely the first stringed instrument ever in the world, and still played in the Southern mountains.
Now, the old timers didn't take a fancy guitar string and make anything like this.
They would just take a stick and a catgut and string it up.
It was hard on the cats, but it made a great little instrument.
It sounds something like this.
(Music) Well, have you heard the many stories told by young and old with joy about the many deeds of daring that were done by the Johnson boys?
You take Kate, I'll take Sal; we'll both have a Johnson gal.
You take Kate, I'll take Sal; we'll both have a Johnson gal.
Now, they were scouts in the rebels' army, they were known both far and wide.
When the Yankees saw them coming, they'd lay down their guns and hide.
You take Kate, I'll take Sal; we'll both have a Johnson gal.
You take Kate, I'll take Sal; we'll both have a Johnson gal.
Ain't that a sound?
(Applause) Well, it was 1954, I guess it was.
We were driving in the car outside of Gatesville, Texas, where I grew up in the early part of my life.
Outside of Gatesville we were coming back from the grocery store.
My mom was driving; my brother and I were in the back seat.
We were really mad at my mom. We looked out the window.
We were surrounded by thousands of acres of cotton fields.
You see, we'd just been to the grocery store, and my mom refused to buy us the jar of Ovaltine that had the coupon for the Captain Midnight decoder ring in it.
And, buddy, that made us mad.
Well, my mom didn't put up with much either, and she was driving, and she said, "You boys! You think you can have anything you want.
You don't know how hard it is to earn money. Your dad works so hard.
You think money grows on trees. You've never worked a day in your lives.
You boys make me so mad. You're going to get a job this summer."
She pulled the car over; she said, "Get out of the car."
My brother and I stepped out of the car.
We were standing on the edge of thousands of acres of cotton.
There were about a hundred black folks out there picking.
My mom grabbed us by the shoulders. She marched us out in the field.
She went up to the foreman; she said, "I've got these two little boys never worked a day in their lives."
Of course, we were just eight and 10.
(Laughter) She said, "Would you put them to work?"
Well, that must have seemed like a funny idea to that foreman: put these two middle-class little white boys out in a cotton field in August in Texas -- it's hot.
So he gave us each a cotton sack, about 10 feet long, about that big around, and we started picking.
Now, cotton is soft but the outside of the plant is just full of stickers.
And if you don't know what you're doing, your hands are bleeding in no time.
And my brother and I started to pick it, and our hands were startin' to bleed, and then -- "Mom!"
And Mom was just sitting by the car like this.
She wasn't going to give up.
Well, the foreman could see he was in over his head, I guess.
He kind of just snuck up behind us and he sang out in a low voice.
He just sang: "Well, there's a long white robe in heaven, I know.
Don't want it to leave me behind.
Well, there's a long white robe in heaven, I know.
Don't want it to leave me behind."
And from all around as people started singing and answering back, he sang: "Good news, good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
And I don't want it to leave me behind."
Now, my brother and I had never heard anything like that in our whole lives. It was so beautiful.
We sat there all day picking cotton, without complaining, without crying, while they sang things like: "Oh, Mary, don't you weep, don't you moan" and "Wade in the water," and "I done done," "This little light of mine."
Finally, by the end of the day, we'd each picked about a quarter of a bag of cotton.
But the foreman was kind enough to give us each a check for a dollar, but my mother would never let us cash it.
I'm 57; still have the check.
Now, my mother hoped that we learned from that the value of hard work.
But if you have children, you know it doesn't often work that way.
No, we learned something else.
The first thing I learned that day was that I never ever wanted to work that hard again.
(Laughter) And pretty much never did.
But I also learned that some people in this world do have to work that hard every day, and that was an eye-opener.
And I also learned that a great song can make hard work go a little easier.
And it also can bring the group together in a way that nothing else can.
Now, I was just a little eight-year-old boy that day when my mama put me out of the car in that hot Texas cotton field.
I wasn't even aware of music -- not even aware of it.
But that day in the cotton field out there picking, when those people started singing, I realized I was in the very heart of real music, and that's where I've wanted to be ever since.
Try this old song with me. I sing: Well, there's a long white robe in heaven, I know.
You sing: Don't want it to leave me behind.
Well, there's a long white robe in heaven, I know.
Don't want it to leave me behind.
Good news, good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
And I don't want it to leave me -- It's been a while since you guys have been picking your last bale of cotton, isn't it?
Let's try it one more time.
There's a starry crown in heaven, I know.
Don't want it to leave me behind.
There's a starry crown in heaven, I know.
Don't want it to leave me behind.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
And I don't want it to leave me behind.
It was a few years ago, but I sort of remembered this story, and I told it at a concert.
My mom was in the audience.
After the -- she was glad to have a story about herself, of course, but after the concert she came up and she said, "David, I've got to tell you something.
I set that whole thing up.
I set it up with the foreman. I set it up with the owner of the land.
I just wanted you boys to learn the value of hard work.
I didn't know it was going to make you fall in love with music though."
Let's try. Good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
Good news: Chariot's coming.
And I don't want it to leave me behind.
(Applause) Well, this is the steel guitar. It's an American-made instrument.
It was originally made by the Dopyera Brothers, who later on made the Dobro, which is a wood-bodied instrument with a metal cone for -- where the sound comes from.
It's usually played flat on your lap.
It was made to play Hawaiian music back in the 1920s, before they had electric guitars, trying to make a loud guitar.
And then African-American folks figured out you could take a broken bottle neck, just like that -- a nice Merlot works very well.
That wine we had yesterday would have been perfect.
Break it off, put it on your finger, and slide into the notes.
This instrument pretty much saved my life.
Fifteen years ago, 14 years ago, I guess, this year, my wife and I lost our daughter, Sarah Jane, in a car accident, and it was the most -- it almost took me out -- it almost took me out of this world.
And I think I learned a lot about what happiness was by going through such unbelievable grief, just standing on the edge of that abyss and just wanting to jump in.
I had to make lists of reasons to stay alive.
I had to sit down and make lists, because I was ready to go; I was ready to check out of this world.
And you know, at the top of the list, of course, were Jenny, and my son, Zeb, my parents -- I didn't want to hurt them.
But then, when I thought about it beyond that, it was very simple things.
I didn't care about -- I had a radio show, I have a radio show on public radio, "Riverwalk," I didn't care about that. I didn't care about awards or money or anything.
Nothing. Nothing.
On the list it would be stuff like, seeing the daffodils bloom in the spring, the smell of new-mown hay, catching a wave and bodysurfing, the touch of a baby's hand, the sound of Doc Watson playing the guitar, listening to old records of Muddy Waters and Uncle Dave Macon.
And for me, the sound of a steel guitar, because one of my parents' neighbors just gave me one of these things.
And I would sit around with it, and I didn't know how to play it, but I would just play stuff as sad as I could play.
And it was the only instrument that, of all the ones that I play, that would really make that connection.
This is a song that came out of that.
(Music) Well, I hear you're having trouble.
Lord, I hate to hear that news.
If you want to talk about it, you know, I will listen to you through.
Words no longer say it; let me tell you what I always do.
I just break off another bottleneck and play these steel guitar blues.
People say, "Oh, snap out of it!"
Oh yeah, that's easier said than done.
While you can hardly move, they're running around having all kinds of fun.
Sometimes I think it's better just to sink way down in your funky mood 'til you can rise up humming these steel guitar blues.
Now, you can try to keep it all inside with drink and drugs and cigarettes, but you know that's not going to get you where you want to get.
But I got some medicine here that just might shake things loose.
Call me in the morning after a dose of these steel guitar blues.
Open up now.
(Applause) Oh, I think I've got time to tell you about this. My dad was an inventor.
We moved to California when Sputnik went up, in 1957.
And he was working on gyroscopes; he has a number of patents for that kind of thing.
And we moved across the street from Michael and John Whitney.
They were about my age.
John went on, and Michael did too, to become some of the inventors of computer animation.
Michael's dad was working on something called the computer.
This was 1957, I was a little 10-year-old kid; I didn't know what that was. But he took me down to see one, you know, what they were making. It was like a library, just full of vacuum tubes as far as you could see, just floors and floors of these things, and one of the engineers said, some day you're going to be able to put this thing in your pocket.
I thought, damn, those are going to be some big pants!
(Laughter) So that Christmas -- maybe I've got time for this -- that Christmas I got the Mister Wizard Fun-o-Rama chemistry set.
Well, I wanted to be an inventor just like my dad; so did Michael.
His great-granddad had been Eli Whitney, the inventor of the cotton gin.
So we looked in that -- this was a commercial chemistry set.
It had three chemicals we were really surprised to see: sulfur, potassium nitrate and charcoal.
Man, we were only 10, but we knew that made gunpowder.
We made up a little batch and we put it on the driveway and we threw a match and phew, it flared up. Ah, it was great.
Well, obviously the next thing to do was build a cannon.
So we went over into Michael's garage -- his dad had all kinds of stuff, and we put a pipe in the vice there, and screwed a cap on the end of the pipe, drilled a hole in the back of the pipe, took some of our firecrackers, pulled out the fuses, tied them together, put them in the back there, and -- down in that hole -- and then stuffed some of our gunpowder down that pipe and put three ball bearings on the top, in the garage.
(Laughter) We weren't stupid: we put up a sheet of plywood about five feet in front of it.
We stood back, we lit that thing, and they flew out of there -- they went through that plywood like it was paper.
Through the garage.
Two of them landed in the side door of his new Citroen.
(Laughter) We tore everything down and buried it in his backyard.
That was Pacific Palisades; it probably is still there, back there.
Well, my brother heard that we had made gunpowder.
He and his buddies, they were older, and they were pretty mean.
They said they were going to beat us up if we didn't make some gunpowder for them.
We said, well, what are you going to do with it?
They said, we're going to melt it down and make rocket fuel.
(Laughter) Sure. We'll make you a big batch.
(Laughter) So we made them a big batch, and it was in my -- now, we'd just moved here. We'd just moved to California.
Mom had redone the kitchen; Mom was gone that day. We had a pie tin.
It became Chris Berquist's job to do the melting down.
Michael and I were standing way at the side of the kitchen.
He said, "Yeah, hey, it's melting. Yeah, the sulfur's melting.
No problem. Yeah, you know."
It just flared up, and he turned around, and he looked like this.
No hair, no eyelashes, no nothing.
There were big welts all over my mom's kitchen cabinet; the air was the just full of black smoke.
She came home, she took that chemistry set away, and we never saw it again.
But we thought of it often, because every time she'd cook tuna surprise it made -- tasted faintly of gunpowder.
So I like to invent things too, and I think I'll close out my set with something I invented a good while back.
When drum machines were new, I got to thinking, why couldn't you take the oldest form of music, the hambone rhythms, and combine it with the newest technology?
I call this Thunderwear.
At that time, drum triggers were new.
And so I put them all together and sewed 12 of them in this suit.
I showed you some of the hambone rhythms yesterday; I'm going to be doing some of the same ones.
I have a trigger here, trigger here, here, here. Right there.
It's going to really hurt if I don't take that off. Okay.
Now, the drum triggers go out my tail here, into the drum machine, and they can make various sounds, like drums.
So let me put them all together. And also, I can change the sounds by stepping on this pedal right here, and -- let me just close out here by doing you a little hambone solo or something like this.
Thank you, folks.
(Applause)
I wanted to start off by asking a question to everyone in the room, and you can take a minute to think about this question.
I wanted to ask what do you find most beautiful?
And not in the world, like butterflies and flowers, but in a person.
What do you find the most attractive in a person?
Is it eyes?
Do you like pretty eyes?
Blue eyes?
Curly hair?
Long nails?
Big feet? Some people like big feet.
What is it about people that we find attractive?
I think that the way that we think of beauty comes from different things like: social media, the Internet, magazines, especially, if that's coming from a model.
I feel like those are kind of what define beauty today.
And personally to me, I feel that beauty is in everything.
Some people may say that big feet are not cute, but there's going to be a pair of shoes that will look better on my size 9 feet than a size 6 foot.
So, I find that there could be beauty in everything.
For example, I love your dreads!
They are amazing.
Your gorgeous hair, Talia. Oh, my god!
I wish I could get mine to be that big.
Sir, with the shiny bold head, I think that this is amazing.
That sheen, perfect!
As you can see, I find beauty in everything.
And, of course: "I find beauty in everything" is super duper cliche.
Like beauty in everything.
I don't think everyone thinks that there is beauty in everything, but the reason why I feel that there is beauty in everything is because when I was young, I was picked on for something that today I feel is amazing.
One thing about me connects millions of people around the world.
And that is something I think you can probably see, it's my skin condition, it's called vitiligo.
And vitiligo is basically my immune system that feels that my melanin which is what makes color in your skin, thinks that my melanin is a disease, something similar to the common cold, so it fights it off, and that makes my skin turn white.
I was singled out because of this skin condition.
I was bullied.
I was alienated.
Even by people who didn't mean to alienate me.
For example: we would, like everyone does, take family pictures, and my mom would bring a little top of makeup, and it was her makeup.
My mom is not the same skin color as me, she's much darker than I am.
So, could you imagine me having a dark paste of face, and the rest of me as like brown, white?
I obviously didn't feel comfortable, but my mom was trying to make me feel comfortable.
I was alienated.
In school, I changed school in about grade 3, grade 2 and it's already hard to make friends when you change school especially at such a young age, but luckily I found two girls who were willing to play with me.
They didn't really know who I was, but they wanted to play, they wanted to check me out and see if I was one of the cool kids.
And after a few weeks of being in that school and having those friends, all of the sudden, I didn't have them.
And I was kind of confused as to why I was struggling to make friends.
I finally did and now, where did they go?
They would avoid me at recess, they would avoid me at lunch, and I finally went up to them one day and was like, "Guys, what's going on? Why aren't you talking to me anymore?"
They said to me, "We can't talk to you anymore, sorry.
Our parents said that we might catch your skin condition."
Can you imagine how that made me feel in grade 2, grade 3?
That hurt.
I was alienated, I was embarrassed, to be honest.
I didn't know what this skin condition was in grade 2 or grade 3.
I wasn't asked if I wanted this skin condition.
I didn't ask for it, yet I was alienated for it.
But here's the thing, when I got a little bit older, I didn't want to be in that position anymore, I didn't want to be bullied.
So rather that taking myself out of the position, what did I do?
I became the bully.
And it's not better on one side than the other.
I can tell you, because I've been on both sides.
I didn't want to be bullied anymore so I kind of took lead with those people who were bullying and I said, "Cool, those are going to be my friends now because I don't want to be bullied, or on this side of the spectrum.
So I guess the only side is to be on this side, this must be the good side."
So I decided to go to that side.
I would pick on kids.
I would be like, "So ugly your hair!"
"Ugh, who did that?"
"Rude, right?"
But I came to a realization that I was trying to put myself into a mold that I didn't fit.
I mean, who's to say that I'm supposed to fit in a mold anyway?
I can make my own.
So, I decided that I was going to take myself away from this side and away from this side, and make my own side, and fit myself a new mold.
And that mold is so cliche, but I feel that there is beauty in everything.
So, I just want to put this idea in your head, that it takes one person to realize that there is beauty in everything.
And you don't have to be on one side of the spectrum or the other side of the spectrum, or fit into someone's mold, your mom's mold, whoever's mold that you are trying to fit into.
Be your own person.
Know for yourself what beauty is rather than looking to a magazine or to even me for what beauty is.
Know it in your heart, and make your own mold for what beauty is.
(Applause)
So when you think about a child, a close friend, or a romantic partner, the word "love" probably comes to mind, and instantly other emotions rush in: joy and hope, excitement, trust and security, and yes, sometimes sadness and disappointment.
There might not be a word in the dictionary that more of us are connected to than love.
Yet, given its central importance in our lives, isn't it interesting that we're never explicitly taught how to love?
We build friendships, navigate early romantic relationships, get married and bring babies home from the hospital with the expectation that we'll figure it out.
But the truth is, we often harm and disrespect the ones we love.
It can be subtle things like guilting a friend into spending time with you or sneaking a peak at your partner's texts or shaming a child for their lack of effort at school.
100 percent of us will be on the receiving end of unhealthy relationship behaviors and 100 percent of us will do unhealthy things.
It's part of being human.
In its worst form, the harm we inflict on loved ones shows up as abuse and violence, and relationship abuse is something that one in three women and one in four men will experience in their lifetime.
Now, if you're like most people, when you hear those stats, you'll go, "Oh, no, no, no, that would never happen to me."
It's instinctual to move away from the words "abuse" and "violence," to think that they happen to someone else somewhere else.
But the truth is, unhealthy relationships and abuse are all around us.
We just call them different things and ignore the connection.
Abuse sneaks up on us disguised in unhealthy love.
I work for an organization called One Love started by a family whose daughter Yeardley was killed by her ex-boyfriend.
This was a tragedy no one saw coming, but when they looked back, they realized the warning signs were there just no one understood what they were seeing.
Called crazy or drama or too much drinking, his actions weren't understood to be what they really were, which was clear signs of danger.
Her family realized that if anyone had been educated about these signs, her death could have been prevented.
So today we're on a mission to make sure that others have the information that Yeardley and her friends didn't.
We have three main goals: give all of us a language for talking about a subject that's quite awkward and uncomfortable to discuss; empower a whole front line, namely friends, to help; and, in the process, improve all of our ability to love better.
To do this, it's always important to start by illuminating the unhealthy signs that we frequently miss, and our work really focuses on creating content to start conversations with young people.
As you'd expect, most of our content is pretty serious, given the subject at hand, but today I'm going to use one of our more light-hearted yet still thought-provoking pieces, "The Couplets," to illuminate five markers of unhealthy love.
The first is intensity.
(Video) Blue: I haven't seen you in a couple days. I've missed you.
Orange: I've missed you too. (#thatslove) Blue: I haven't seen you in five minutes. It feels like a lifetime.
What have you been doing without me for five whole minutes?
Orange: It's been three minutes. (#thatsnotlove) Katie Hood: Anybody recognize that? I don't know. I do.
Abusive relationships don't start out abusive.
They start out exciting and exhilarating.
There's an intensity of affection and emotion, a rush.
It feels really good.
You feel so lucky, like you've hit the jackpot.
But in unhealthy love, these feelings shift over time from exciting to overwhelming and maybe a little bit suffocating.
You feel it in your gut.
Maybe it's when your new boyfriend or girlfriend says "I love you" faster than you were ready for or starts showing up everywhere, texting and calling a lot.
Maybe they're impatient when you're slow to respond, even though they know you had other things going on that day.
It's important to remember that it's not how a relationship starts that matters, it's how it evolves.
It's important in the early days of a new relationship to pay attention to how you're feeling.
Are you comfortable with the pace of intimacy?
Do you feel like you have space and room to breathe?
It's also really important to start practicing using your voice to talk about your own needs.
Are your requests respected?
A second marker is isolation.
(Video) Orange 2: Want to hang out?
Orange 1: Me and my boyfriend always have Monday Funday.
Orange 2: Want to hang out?
Orange 1: Me and my boyfriend always have Monday Funday.
Orange 2: Tomorrow? Orange 1: It's our Tuesday Snooze Day.
Orange 2: Wednesday? Orange 1: No Friends Day.
KH: If you ask me, isolation is one of the most frequently missed and misunderstood signs of unhealthy love.
Why?
Because every new relationship starts out with this intense desire to spend time together, it's easy to miss when something shifts.
Isolation creeps in when your new boyfriend or girlfriend starts pulling you away from your friends and family, your support system, and tethering you more tightly to them.
They might say things like, "Why do you hang out with them? They're such losers" about your best friends, or, "They want us to break up. They're totally against us" about your family.
Isolation is about sowing seeds of doubt about everyone from your prerelationship life.
Healthy love includes independence, two people who love spending time together but who stay connected to the people and activities they cared about before.
While at first you might spend every waking minute together, over time maintaining independence is key.
You do this by making plans with friends and sticking to them and encouraging your partner to do the same.
A third marker of unhealthy love is extreme jealousy.
(Video) Blue 2: What are you so happy about?
Blue 1: She just started following me on Instagram!
Blue 2: What are you so nervous about?
Blue 1: She, she just started following me, like, everywhere.
(#thatsnotlove) KH: As the honeymoon period begins to fade, extreme jealousy can creep in.
Your partner might become more demanding, needing to know where you are and who you're with all the time, or they might start following you everywhere, online and off.
Extreme jealousy also brings with it possessiveness and mistrust, frequent accusations of flirting with other people or cheating, and refusal to listen to you when you tell them they have nothing to worry about and that you only love them.
Jealousy is a part of any human relationship, but extreme jealousy is different.
There's a threatening, desperate and angry edge to it.
Love shouldn't feel like this.
A fourth marker is belittling.
(Video) Blue: Wanna hang out? Orange: I gotta study.
Blue: You'll get an A anyway, A for amazing. (#thatslove) Blue: Wanna hang out? Orange: I gotta study.
Blue: You'll get an F anyway, F for, F for... stupid. (#thatsnotlove) KH: Yeah, hmm.
In unhealthy love, words are used as weapons.
Conversations that used to be fun and lighthearted turn mean and embarrassing.
Maybe your partner makes fun of you in a way that hurts, or maybe they tell stories and jokes for laughs at your expense.
When you try to explain that your feelings have been hurt, they shut you down and accuse you of overreacting.
"Why are you so sensitive? What's your problem. Give me a break."
You are silenced by these words.
It seems pretty obvious, but your partner should have your back.
Their words should build you up, not break you down.
They should keep your secrets and be loyal.
They should make you feel more confident, not less.
Finally, a fifth marker: volatility.
(Video) Orange 1: I'd be sad if we broke up.
Orange 2: I'd be sad too. (#thatslove) Orange 1: I'd so depressed if we ever broke up.
I'd throw myself off this step.
I would! Don't try to stop me!
(#thatsnotlove) KH: Frequent breakups and makeups, high highs and low lows: as tension rises, so does volatility.
Tearful, frustrated fights followed by emotional makeups, hateful and hurtful comments like, "You're worthless, I'm not even sure why I'm with you!"
followed quickly by apologies and promises it will never happen again.
By this point, you've been so conditioned to this relationship roller coaster that you may not realize how unhealthy and maybe even dangerous your relationship has become.
It can be really hard to see when unhealthy love turns towards abuse, but it's fair to say that the more of these markers your relationship might have, the more unhealthy and maybe dangerous your relationship could be.
And if your instinct is to break up and leave, which is advice so many of us give our friends when they're in unhealthy relationships, that's not always the best advice.
Time of breakup can be a real trigger for violence.
If you fear you might be headed towards abuse or in abuse, you need to consult with experts to get the advice on how to leave safely.
But it's not just about romantic relationships and it's not just about violence.
Understanding the signs of unhealthy love can help you audit and understand nearly every relationship in your life.
For the first time, you might understand why you're disappointed in a friendship or why every interaction with a certain family member leaves you discouraged and anxious.
You might even begin to see how your own intensity and jealousy is causing problems with colleagues at work.
Understanding is the first step to improving, and while you can't make every unhealthy relationship healthy -- some you're going to have to leave behind -- you can do your part every day to do relationships better.
And here's the exciting news: it's actually not rocket science.
Open communication, mutual respect, kindness, patience -- we can practice these things every day.
And while practice will definitely make you better, I have to promise you it's also not going to make you perfect.
I do this for a living and every day I think and talk about healthy relationships, and still I do unhealthy things.
Just the other day as I was trying to shuttle my four kids out the door amidst quarreling, squabbling and complaints about breakfast, I completely lost it.
With an intentionally angry edge, I screamed, "Everybody just shut up and do what I say!
You are the worst!
I am going to take away screen time and dessert and anything else you could possibly ever enjoy in life!"
(Laughter) Anybody been there?
(Applause) Volatility, belittling.
My oldest son turned around and looked at me, and said, "Mom, that's not love."
(Laughter) For a minute, I really wanted to kill him for calling me out.
Trust me.
But then I gathered myself and I thought, you know what, I'm actually proud.
I'm proud that he has a language to make me pause.
I want all of my kids to understand what the bar should be for how they're treated and to have a language and a voice to use when that bar is not met versus just accepting it.
For too long, we've treated relationships as a soft topic, when relationship skills are one of the most important and hard to build things in life.
Not only can understanding unhealthy signs help you avoid the rabbit hole that leads to unhealthy love, but understanding and practicing the art of being healthy can improve nearly every aspect of your life.
I'm completely convinced that while love is an instinct and an emotion, the ability to love better is a skill we can all build and improve on over time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
On the red tiles in my family's den I would dance and sing to the made-for-TV movie "Gypsy," starring Bette Midler.
(Singing) "I had a dream.
A wonderful dream, papa."
I would sing it with the urgency and the burning desire of a nine-year-old who did, in fact, have a dream.
My dream was to be an actress.
And it's true that I never saw anyone who looked like me in television or in films, and sure, my family and friends and teachers all constantly warned me that people like me didn't make it in Hollywood.
But I was an American.
I had been taught to believe that anyone could achieve anything, regardless of the color of their skin, the fact that my parents immigrated from Honduras, the fact that I had no money.
I didn't need my dream to be easy, I just needed it to be possible.
And when I was 15, I got my first professional audition.
It was a commercial for cable subscriptions or bail bonds, I don't really remember.
(Laughter) What I do remember is that the casting director asked me, "Could you do that again, but just this time, sound more Latina."
"Um, OK.
So you want me to do it in Spanish?" I asked.
"No, no, do it in English, just sound Latina."
"Well, I am a Latina, so isn't this what a Latina sounds like?"
There was a long and awkward silence, and then finally, "OK, sweetie, never mind, thank you for coming in, bye!"
It took me most of the car ride home to realize that by "sound more Latina" she was asking me to speak in broken English.
And I couldn't figure out why the fact that I was an actual, real-life, authentic Latina didn't really seem to matter.
Anyway, I didn't get the job.
I didn't get a lot of the jobs people were willing to see me for: the gang-banger's girlfriend, the sassy shoplifter, pregnant chola number two.
(Laughter) These were the kinds of roles that existed for someone like me.
Someone they looked at and saw as too brown, too fat, too poor, too unsophisticated.
These roles were stereotypes and couldn't have been further from my own reality or from the roles I dreamt of playing.
I wanted to play people who were complex and multidimensional, people who existed in the center of their own lives.
Not cardboard cutouts that stood in the background of someone else's.
But when I dared to say that to my manager -- that's the person I pay to help me find opportunity -- his response was, "Someone has to tell that girl she has unrealistic expectations."
And he wasn't wrong.
I mean, I fired him, but he wasn't wrong.
(Laughter) (Applause) Because whenever I did try to get a role that wasn't a poorly written stereotype, I would hear, "We're not looking to cast this role diversely."
Or, "We love her, but she's too specifically ethnic."
Or, "Unfortunately, we already have one Latino in this movie."
I kept receiving the same message again and again and again.
That my identity was an obstacle I had to overcome.
And so I thought, "Come at me, obstacle.
I'm an American. My name is America.
I trained my whole life for this, I'll just follow the playbook, I'll work harder."
And so I did, I worked my hardest to overcome all the things that people said were wrong with me.
I stayed out of the sun so that my skin wouldn't get too brown, I straightened my curls into submission.
I constantly tried to lose weight, I bought fancier and more expensive clothes.
All so that when people looked at me, they wouldn't see a too fat, too brown, too poor Latina.
They would see what I was capable of.
And maybe they would give me a chance.
And in an ironic twist of fate, when I finally did get a role that would make all my dreams come true, it was a role that required me to be exactly who I was.
Ana in "Real Women Have Curves" was a brown, poor, fat Latina.
I had never seen anyone like her, anyone like me, existing in the center of her own life story.
I traveled throughout the US and to multiple countries with this film where people, regardless of their age, ethnicity, body type, saw themselves in Ana.
A 17-year-old chubby Mexican American girl struggling against cultural norms to fulfill her unlikely dream.
In spite of what I had been told my whole life, I saw firsthand that people actually did want to see stories about people like me.
And that my unrealistic expectations to see myself authentically represented in the culture were other people’s expectations, too.
"Real Women Have Curves" was a critical, cultural and financial success.
"Great," I thought, "We did it!
We proved our stories have value.
Things are going to change now."
But I watched as very little happened.
There was no watershed.
No one in the industry was rushing to tell more stories about the audience that was hungry and willing to pay to see them.
Four years later, when I got to play Ugly Betty, I saw the same phenomenon play out.
"Ugly Betty" premiered in the US to 16 million viewers and was nominated for 11 Emmys in its first year.
(Applause) But in spite of "Ugly Betty's" success, there would not be another television show led by a Latina actress on American television for eight years.
It's been 12 years since I became the first and only Latina to ever win an Emmy in a lead category.
That is not a point of pride.
That is a point of deep frustration.
Not because awards prove our worth, but because who we see thriving in the world teaches us how to see ourselves, how to think about our own value, how to dream about our futures.
And anytime I begin to doubt that, I remember that there was a little girl, living in the Swat Valley of Pakistan.
And somehow, she got her hands on some DVDs of an American television show in which she saw her own dream of becoming a writer reflected.
In her autobiography, Malala wrote, "I had become interested in journalism after seeing how my own words could make a difference and also from watching the "Ugly Betty" DVDs about life at an American magazine."
(Applause) For 17 years of my career, I have witnessed the power our voices have when they can access presence in the culture.
I've seen it.
I've lived it, we've all seen it.
In entertainment, in politics, in business, in social change.
We cannot deny it -- presence creates possibility.
But for the last 17 years, I've also heard the same excuses for why some of us can access presence in the culture and some of us can't.
Our stories don't have an audience, our experiences won't resonate in the mainstream, our voices are too big a financial risk.
Just a few years ago, my agent called to explain to me why I wasn't getting a role in a movie.
He said, "They loved you and they really, really do want to cast diversely, but the movie isn't financeable until they cast the white role first."
He delivered the message with a broken heart and with a tone that communicated, "I understand how messed up this is."
But nonetheless, just like hundreds of times before, I felt the tears roll down my face.
And the pang of rejection rise up in me and then the voice of shame scolding me, "You are a grown woman, stop crying over a job."
I went through this process for years of accepting the failure as my own and then feeling deep shame that I couldn't overcome the obstacles.
But this time, I heard a new voice.
A voice that said, "I'm tired.
I've had enough."
A voice that understood my tears and my pain were not about losing a job.
They were about what was actually being said about me.
What had been said about me my whole life by executives and producers and directors and writers and agents and managers and teachers and friends and family.
That I was a person of less value.
I thought sunscreen and straightening irons would bring about change in this deeply entrenched value system.
But what I realized in that moment was that I was never actually asking the system to change.
I was asking it to let me in, and those aren't the same thing.
I couldn't change what a system believed about me, while I believed what the system believed about me.
And I did.
I, like everyone around me, believed that it wasn't possible for me to exist in my dream as I was.
And I went about trying to make myself invisible.
What this revealed to me was that it is possible to be the person who genuinely wants to see change while also being the person whose actions keep things the way they are.
And what it's led me to believe is that change isn't going to come by identifying the good guys and the bad guys.
That conversation lets us all off the hook.
Because most of us are neither one of those.
Change will come when each of us has the courage to question our own fundamental values and beliefs.
And then see to it that our actions lead to our best intentions.
I am just one of millions of people who have been told that in order to fulfill my dreams, in order to contribute my talents to the world I have to resist the truth of who I am.
I for one, am ready to stop resisting and to start existing as my full and authentic self.
If I could go back and say anything to that nine-year-old, dancing in the den, dreaming her dreams, I would say, my identity is not my obstacle.
My identity is my superpower.
Because the truth is, I am what the world looks like.
You are what the world looks like.
Collectively, we are what the world actually looks like.
And in order for our systems to reflect that, they don't have to create a new reality.
They just have to stop resisting the one we already live in.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I understand that this meeting was planned, and the slogan was From Was to Still.
And I am illustrating Still.
Which, of course, I am not agreeing with because, although I am 94, I am not still working.
And anybody who asks me, "Are you still doing this or that?"
I don't answer because I'm not doing things still, I'm doing it like I always did.
I still have -- or did I use the word still? I didn't mean that.
(Laughter) I have my file which is called To Do. I have my plans.
I have my clients. I am doing my work like I always did.
So this takes care of my age.
I want to show you my work so you know what I am doing and why I am here.
This was about 1925.
All of these things were made during the last 75 years.
(Laughter) (Applause) But, of course, I'm working since 25, doing more or less what you see here. This is Castleton China.
This was an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art.
This is now for sale at the Metropolitan Museum.
This is still at the Metropolitan Museum now for sale.
This is a portrait of my daughter and myself.
(Applause) These were just some of the things I've made.
I made hundreds of them for the last 75 years.
I call myself a maker of things.
I don't call myself an industrial designer because I'm other things.
Industrial designers want to make novel things.
Novelty is a concept of commerce, not an aesthetic concept.
The industrial design magazine, I believe, is called "Innovation."
Innovation is not part of the aim of my work.
Well, makers of things: they make things more beautiful, more elegant, more comfortable than just the craftsmen do.
I have so much to say. I have to think what I am going to say.
Well, to describe our profession otherwise, we are actually concerned with the playful search for beauty.
That means the playful search for beauty was called the first activity of Man.
Sarah Smith, who was a mathematics professor at MIT, wrote, "The playful search for beauty was Man's first activity -- that all useful qualities and all material qualities were developed from the playful search for beauty."
These are tiles. The word, "playful" is a necessary aspect of our work because, actually, one of our problems is that we have to make, produce, lovely things throughout all of life, and this for me is now 75 years.
So how can you, without drying up, make things with the same pleasure, as a gift to others, for so long?
The playful is therefore an important part of our quality as designer.
Let me tell you some about my life.
As I said, I started to do these things 75 years ago.
My first exhibition in the United States was at the Sesquicentennial exhibition in 1926 -- that the Hungarian government sent one of my hand-drawn pieces as part of the exhibit.
My work actually took me through many countries, and showed me a great part of the world.
This is not that they took me -- the work didn't take me -- I made the things particularly because I wanted to use them to see the world.
I was incredibly curious to see the world, and I made all these things, which then finally did take me to see many countries and many cultures.
I started as an apprentice to a Hungarian craftsman, and this taught me what the guild system was in Middle Ages.
The guild system: that means when I was an apprentice, I had to apprentice myself in order to become a pottery master.
In my shop where I studied, or learned, there was a traditional hierarchy of master, journeyman and learned worker, and apprentice, and I worked as the apprentice.
The work as an apprentice was very primitive.
That means I had to actually learn every aspect of making pottery by hand.
We mashed the clay with our feet when it came from the hillside.
After that, it had to be kneaded. It had to then go in, kind of, a mangle.
And then finally it was prepared for the throwing.
And there I really worked as an apprentice.
My master took me to set ovens because this was part of oven-making, oven-setting, in the time.
And finally, I had received a document that I had accomplished my apprenticeship successfully, that I had behaved morally, and this document was given to me by the Guild of Roof-Coverers, Rail-Diggers, Oven-Setters, Chimney Sweeps and Potters.
(Laughter) I also got at the time a workbook which explained my rights and my working conditions, and I still have that workbook.
First I set up a shop in my own garden, and made pottery which I sold on the marketplace in Budapest.
And there I was sitting, and my then-boyfriend -- I didn't mean it was a boyfriend like it is meant today -- but my boyfriend and I sat at the market and sold the pots.
My mother thought that this was not very proper, so she sat with us to add propriety to this activity.
(Laughter) However, after a while there was a new factory being built in Budapest, a pottery factory, a large one.
And I visited it with several ladies, and asked all sorts of questions of the director.
Then the director asked me, why do you ask all these questions?
I said, I also have a pottery.
So he asked me, could he please visit me, and then finally he did, and explained to me that what I did now in my shop was an anachronism, that the industrial revolution had broken out, and that I rather should join the factory.
There he made an art department for me where I worked for several months.
However, everybody in the factory spent his time at the art department.
The director there said there were several women casting and producing my designs now in molds, and this was sold also to America.
I remember that it was quite successful.
However, the director, the chemist, model maker -- everybody -- concerned himself much more with the art department -- that means, with my work -- than making toilets, so finally they got a letter from the center, from the bank who owned the factory, saying, make toilet-setting behind the art department, and that was my end.
So this gave me the possibility because now I was a journeyman, and journeymen also take their satchel and go to see the world.
So as a journeyman, I put an ad into the paper that I had studied, that I was a down-to-earth potter's journeyman and I was looking for a job as a journeyman.
And I got several answers, and I accepted the one which was farthest from home and practically, I thought, halfway to America.
And that was in Hamburg.
Then I first took this job in Hamburg, at an art pottery where everything was done on the wheel, and so I worked in a shop where there were several potters.
And the first day, I was coming to take my place at the turntable -- there were three or four turntables -- and one of them, behind where I was sitting, was a hunchback, a deaf-mute hunchback, who smelled very bad.
So I doused him in cologne every day, which he thought was very nice, and therefore he brought bread and butter every day, which I had to eat out of courtesy.
The first day I came to work in this shop there was on my wheel a surprise for me.
My colleagues had thoughtfully put on the wheel where I was supposed to work a very nicely modeled natural man's organs.
(Laughter) After I brushed them off with a hand motion, they were very -- I finally was now accepted, and worked there for some six months.
This was my first job.
If I go on like this, you will be here till midnight.
(Laughter) (Applause) So I will try speed it up a little (Laughter) Moderator: Eva, we have about five minutes.
(Laughter) Eva Zeisel: Are you sure?
Moderator: Yes, I am sure.
EZ: Well, if you are sure, I have to tell you that within five minutes I will talk very fast.
And actually, my work took me to many countries because I used my work to fill my curiosity.
And among other things, other countries I worked, was in the Soviet Union, where I worked from '32 to '37 -- actually, to '36.
I was finally there, although I had nothing to do -- I was a foreign expert.
I became art director of the china and glass industry, and eventually under Stalin's purges -- at the beginning of Stalin's purges, I didn't know that hundreds of thousands of innocent people were arrested.
So I was arrested quite early in Stalin's purges, and spent 16 months in a Russian prison.
The accusation was that I had successfully prepared an Attentat on Stalin's life.
This was a very dangerous accusation.
And if this is the end of my five minutes, I want to tell you that I actually did survive, which was a surprise.
But since I survived and I'm here, and since this is the end of the five minutes, I will -- Moderator: Tell me when your last trip to Russia was.
Weren't you there recently?
EZ: Oh, this summer, in fact, the Lomonosov factory was bought by an American company, invited me.
They found out that I had worked in '33 at this factory, and they came to my studio in Rockland County, and brought the 15 of their artists to visit me here.
And they invited myself to come to the Russian factory last summer, in July, to make some dishes, design some dishes.
And since I don't like to travel alone, they also invited my daughter, son-in-law and granddaughter, so we had a lovely trip to see Russia today, which is not a very pleasant and happy view.
Here I am now, if this is the end? Thank you.
(Applause)
The Devil has come to town.
But don’t worry – all he wants to do is stage a magic show.
This absurd premise forms the central plot of Mikhail Bulgakov’s masterpiece, "The Master and Margarita."
Written in Moscow during the 1930s, this surreal blend of political satire, historical fiction, and occult mysticism has earned a legacy as one of the 20th century’s greatest novels– and one of its strangest.
The story begins when a meeting between two members of Moscow’s literary elite is interrupted by a strange gentleman named Woland, who presents himself as a foreign scholar invited to give a presentation on black magic.
As the stranger engages the two companions in a philosophical debate and makes ominous predictions about their fates, the reader is suddenly transported to 1st century Jerusalem.
There a tormented Pontius Pilate reluctantly sentences Jesus of Nazareth to death.
With the narrative shifting between the two settings, Woland and his entourage– Azazello, Koroviev, Hella, and a giant cat named Behemoth– are seen to have uncanny magical powers, which they use to stage their performance while leaving a trail of havoc and confusion in their wake.
Much of the novel’s dark humor comes not only from this demonic mischief, but also the backdrop against which it occurs.
Bulgakov’s story takes place in the same setting where it was written– the USSR at the height of the Stalinist period.
There, artists and authors worked under strict censorship, subject to imprisonment, exile, or execution if they were seen as undermining state ideology.
Even when approved, their work– along with housing, travel, and everything else– was governed by a convoluted bureaucracy.
In the novel, Woland manipulates this system along with the fabric of reality, to hilarious results.
As heads are separated from bodies and money rains from the sky, the citizens of Moscow react with petty-self interest, illustrating how Soviet society bred greed and cynicism despite its ideals.
And the matter-of-fact narration deliberately blends the strangeness of the supernatural events with the everyday absurdity of Soviet life.
So how did Bulgakov manage to publish such a subversive novel under an oppressive regime?
Well… he didn’t.
He worked on "The Master and Margarita" for over ten years.
But while Stalin’s personal favor may have kept Bulgakov safe from severe persecution, many of his plays and writings were kept from production, leaving him safe but effectively silenced.
Upon the author’s death in 1940, the manuscript remained unpublished.
A censored version was eventually printed in the 1960s, while copies of the unabridged manuscript continued to circulate among underground literary circles.
The full text was only published in 1973, over 30 years after its completion.
Bulgakov’s experiences with censorship and artistic frustration lend an autobiographical air to the second part of the novel, when we are finally introduced to its namesake.
"The Master" is a nameless author who’s worked for years on a novel but burned the manuscript after it was rejected by publishers– just as Bulgakov had done with his own work.
Yet the true protagonist is the Master’s mistress Margarita.
Her devotion to her lover’s abandoned dream bears a strange connection to the diabolical company’s escapades– and carries the story to its surreal climax.
Despite its dark humor and complex structure, "The Master and Margarita" is, at its heart, a meditation on art, love, and redemption, that never loses itself in cynicism.
And the book’s long overdue publication and survival against the odds is a testament to what Woland tells the Master: “Manuscripts don’t burn.”
One simple vitamin can reduce your risk of heart disease.
Eating chocolate reduces stress in students.
New drug prolongs lives of patients with rare disease.
Health headlines like these are published every day, sometimes making opposite claims from each other.
There can be a disconnect between broad, attention-grabbing headlines and the often specific, incremental results of the medical research they cover.
So how can you avoid being misled by grabby headlines?
The best way to assess a headline’s credibility is to look at the original research it reports on.
We’ve come up with a hypothetical research scenario for each of these three headlines.
Keep watching for the explanation of the first example; then pause at the headline to answer the question.
These are simplified scenarios.
A real study would detail many more factors and how it accounted for them, but for the purposes of this exercise, assume all the information you need is included.
Let’s start by considering the cardiovascular effects of a certain vitamin, Healthium.
The study finds that participants taking Healthium had a higher level of healthy cholesterol than those taking a placebo.
Their levels became similar to those of people with naturally high levels of this kind of cholesterol.
Previous research has shown that people with naturally high levels of healthy cholesterol have lower rates of heart disease.
So what makes this headline misleading: "Healthium reduces risk of heart disease."
The problem with this headline is that the research didn’t actually investigate whether Healthium reduces heart disease.
It only measured Healthium’s impact on levels of a particular kind of cholesterol.
The fact that people with naturally high levels of that cholesterol have lower risk of heart attacks doesn’t mean that the same will be true of people who elevate their cholesterol levels using Healthium.
Now that you’ve cracked the case of Healthium, try your hand at a particularly alluring mystery: the relationship between eating chocolate and stress.
This hypothetical study recruits ten students.
Half begin consuming a daily dose of chocolate, while half abstain.
As classmates, they all follow the same schedule.
By the end of the study, the chocolate eaters are less stressed than their chocolate-free counterparts.
What’s wrong with this headline: "Eating chocolate reduces stress in students" It’s a stretch to draw a conclusion about students in general from a sample of ten.
That’s because the fewer participants are in a random sample, the less likely it is that the sample will closely represent the target population as a whole.
For example, if the broader population of students is half male and half female, the chance of drawing a sample of 10 that’s skewed 70% male and 30% is about 12%.
In a sample of 100 that would be less than a .0025% chance, and for a sample of 1000, the odds are less than 6 x 10^-36.
Similarly, with fewer participants, each individual’s outcome has a larger impact on the overall results— and can therefore skew big-picture trends.
Still, there are a lot of good reasons for scientists to run small studies.
By starting with a small sample, they can evaluate whether the results are promising enough to run a more comprehensive, expensive study.
And some research requires very specific participants that may be impossible to recruit in large numbers.
The key is reproducibility— if an article draws a conclusion from one small study, that conclusion may be suspect— but if it’s based on many studies that have found similar results, it’s more credible.
We’ve still got one more puzzle.
In this scenario, a study tests a new drug for a rare, fatal disease.
In a sample of 2,000 patients, the ones who start taking the drug upon diagnosis live longer than those who take the placebo.
This time, the question is slightly different.
What’s one more thing you’d like to know before deciding if the headline, "New drug prolongs lives of patients with rare disease", is justified?
Before making this call, you’d want to know how much the drug prolonged the patients’ lives.
Sometimes, a study can have results that, while scientifically valid, don’t have much bearing on real world outcomes.
For example, one real-life clinical trial of a pancreatic cancer drug found an increase in life expectancy— of ten days.
The next time you see a surprising medical headline, take a look at the science it’s reporting on.
Even when full papers aren’t available without a fee, you can often find summaries of experimental design and results in freely available abstracts, or even within the text of a news article.
It’s exciting to see scientific research covered in the news, and important to understand the studies’ findings.
What I'd like you to do is, just really quickly, is just, sort of, nod to the person on your right, and then nod to the person on your left.
(Laughter) Now, chances are that over the last winter, if you had been a beehive, either you or one of the two people you just nodded at would have died.
Now, that's an awful lot of bees.
And this is the second year in a row we have lost over 30 percent of the colonies, or we estimate we've lost 30 percent of the colonies over the winter.
Now, that's a lot, a lot of bees, and that's really important.
And most of those losses are because of things we know.
We know that there are these varroa mites that have introduced and caused a lot of losses, and we also have this new phenomenon, which I talked about last year, Colony Collapse Disorder.
And here we see a picture on top of a hill in Central Valley last December.
And below, you can see all these out yards, or temporary yards, where the colonies are brought in until February, and then they're shipped out to the almonds.
And one documentary writer, who was here and looked at this two months after I was here, described this not as beehives but as a graveyard, with these empty white boxes with no bees left in them.
Now, I'm going to sum up a year's worth of work in two sentences to say that we have been trying to figure out what the cause of this is.
And what we know is that it's as if the bees have caught a flu.
And this flu has wiped through the population of bees.
In some cases, and in fact in most cases in one year, this flu was caused by a new virus to us, or newly identified by us, called Israeli Acute Paralysis virus.
It was called that because a guy in Israel first found it, and he now regrets profoundly calling it that disease, because, of course, there's the implication.
But we think this virus is pretty ubiquitous.
It's also pretty clear that the bees sometimes catch other viruses or other flus, and so the question we're still struggling with, and the question that keeps us up at night, is why have the bees suddenly become so susceptible to this flu, and why are they so susceptible to these other diseases?
And we don't have the answer to that yet, and we spend a lot of time trying to figure that out.
We think perhaps it's a combination of factors.
We know from the work of a very large and dynamic working team that, you know, we're finding a lot of different pesticides in the hive, and surprisingly, sometimes the healthiest hives have the most pesticides. And so we discover all these very strange things that we can't begin to understand.
And so this opens up the whole idea of looking at colony health.
Now of course, if you lose a lot of colonies, beekeepers can replace them very quickly.
And that's why we've been able to recover from a lot of loss.
If we lost one in every three cows in the winter, you know, the National Guard would be out.
But what beekeepers can do is, if they have one surviving colony, they can split that colony in two.
And then the one half that doesn't have a queen, they can buy a queen.
It comes in the mail; it can come from Australia or Hawaii or Florida, and you can introduce that queen.
And in fact, America was the first country that ever did mail-delivery queens and in fact, it's part of the postal code that you have to deliver queens by mail in order to make sure that we have enough bees in this country.
If you don't just want a queen, you can buy, actually, a three-pound package of bees, which comes in the mail, and of course, the Postal Office is always very concerned when they get, you know, your three-pound packages of bees.
And you can install this in your hive and replace that dead-out.
So it means that beekeepers are very good at replacing dead-outs, and so they've been able to cover those losses.
So even though we've lost 30 percent of the colonies every year, the same number of colonies have existed in the country, at about 2.4 million colonies.
Now, those losses are tragic on many fronts, and one of those fronts is for the beekeeper.
And it's really important to talk about beekeepers first, because beekeepers are among the most fascinating people you'll ever meet.
If this was a group of beekeepers, you would have everyone from the card-carrying NRA member who's, you know, live free or die, to the, you know, the self-expressed quirky San Francisco backyard pig farmer.
(Laughter) And you get all of these people in the same room, and they're all engaged and they're getting along, and they're all there because of the passion for bees.
Now, there's another part of that community which are the commercial beekeepers, the ones who make their livelihood from beekeeping alone.
And these tend to be some of the most independent, tenacious, intuitive, you know, inventive people you will ever meet.
They're just fascinating. And they're like that all over the world.
I had the privilege of working in Haiti just for two weeks earlier this year.
And Haiti, if you've ever been there, is just a tragedy.
I mean, there may be 100 explanations for why Haiti is the impoverished nation it is, but there is no excuse to see that sort of squalor.
But you meet this beekeeper, and I met this beekeeper here, and he is one of the most knowledgeable beekeepers I've ever met.
No formal education, but very knowledgeable.
We needed beeswax for a project we were working on; he was so capable, he was able to render the nicest block of beeswax I have ever seen from cow dung, tin cans and his veil, which he used as a screening, right in this meadow. And so that ingenuity is inspiring.
We also have Dave Hackenberg, who is the poster child of CCD.
He's the one who first identified this condition and raised the alarm bells.
And he has a history of these trucks, and he's moved these bees up and down the coast.
And a lot of people talk about trucks and moving bees, and that being bad, but we've done that for thousands of years.
The ancient Egyptians used to move bees up and down the Nile on rafts, so this idea of a movable bee force is not new at all.
And one of our real worries with Colony Collapse Disorder is the fact that it costs so much money to replace those dead-out colonies.
And you can do that one year in a row, you may be able to do it two years in a row.
But if you're losing 50 percent to 80 percent of your colonies, you can't survive three years in a row. And we're really worried about losing this segment of our industry.
And that's important for many fronts, and one of them is because of that culture that's in agriculture.
And these migratory beekeepers are the last nomads of America.
You know, they pick up their hives; they move their families once or twice in a year.
And if you look at Florida, in Dade City, Florida, that's where all the Pennsylvania beekeepers go.
And then 20 miles down the road is Groveland, and that's where all the Wisconsin beekeepers go.
And if you're ever in Central Valley in February, you go to this café at 10 o'clock in the morning, Kathy and Kate's.
And that's where all the beekeepers come after a night of moving bees into the almond groves.
They all have their breakfast and complain about everyone right there. And it's a great experience, and I really encourage you to drop in at that diner during that time, because that's quite essential American experience.
And we see these families, these nomadic families, you know, father to son, father to son, and these guys are hurting.
And they're not people who like to ask for help, although they are the most helpful people ever.
If there's one guy who loses all his bees because of a truck overhaul, everyone pitches in and gives 20 hives to help him replace those lost colonies.
And so, it's a very dynamic, and I think, historic and exciting community to be involved with.
Of course, the real importance for bees is not the honey.
And although I highly encourage you, all use honey.
I mean, it's the most ethical sweetener, and you know, it's a dynamic and fun sweetener.
But we estimate that about one in three bites of food we eat is directly or indirectly pollinated by honeybees.
Now, I want to just illustrate that in the fact that if we look at the breakfast I had yesterday morning -- a little cranberry juice, some fruits, some granola, I should have had whole wheat bread, I realized, but you know, jam on my Wonderbread, and some coffee -- and had we taken out all those ingredients, -- except for the almonds I wasn't going to pick out from the granola -- if we had taken out all those ingredients the bees had indirectly or directly pollinated, we wouldn't have much on our plate.
So if we did not have bees, it's not like we would starve, but clearly our diet would be diminished.
It's said that for bees, the flower is the fountain of life, and for flowers bees are the messengers of love.
And that's a really great expression, because really, bees are the sex workers for flowers. They are, you know -- they get paid for their services.
They get paid by pollen and nectar, to move that male sperm, the pollen, from flower to flower.
And there are flowers that are self-infertile. That means they can't -- the pollen in their bloom can't fertilize themselves.
So in an apple orchard, for instance, you'll have rows of 10 apples of one variety, and then you have another apple tree that's a different type of pollen.
And bees are very faithful.
When they're out pollinating or gathering pollen from one flower, they stay to that crop exclusively, in order to help generate.
And of course, they're made to carry this pollen.
They build up a static electric charge and the pollen jumps on them and helps spread that pollen from bloom to bloom.
However, honeybees are a minority.
Honeybees are not native to America; they were introduced with the colonialists.
And there are actually more species of bees than there are mammals and birds combined.
In Pennsylvania alone, we have been surveying bees for 150 years, and very intensely in the last three years.
We have identified over 400 species of bees in Pennsylvania.
Thirty-two species have not been identified or found in the state since 1950.
Now, that could be because we haven't been sampling right, but it does, I think, suggest that something's wrong with the pollinator force. And these bees are fascinating.
We have bumblebees on the top.
And bumblebees are what we call eusocial: they're not truly social, because only the queen is, over winter.
We also have the sweat bees, and these are little gems flying around.
They're like tiny little flies and they fly around.
And then you have another type of bee, which we call kleptoparasites, which is a very fancy way of saying, bad-minded, murdering -- what's the word I'm looking for? Murdering -- Audience: Bee?
Dennis vanEngelsdorp: Bee. Okay, thanks.
(Laughter) What these bees do is, they sit there. These solitary bees, they drill a hole in the ground or drill a hole in a branch, and they collect pollen and make it into a ball, and they lay an egg on it.
Well, these bees hang out at that hole, and they wait for that mother to fly away, they go in, eat the egg, and lay their own egg there. So they don't do any work.
And so, in fact, if you know you have these kleptoparasitic bees, you know that your environment is healthy, because they're top-of-the-food-chain bees.
And in fact, there is now a red list of pollinators that we're worried have disappeared, and on top of that list are a lot of these kleptoparasites, but also these bumblebees.
And in fact, if you guys live on the West Coast, go to these websites here, and they're really looking for people to look for some of these bumblebees, because we think some have gone extinct. Or some, the population has declined.
And so it's not just honeybees that are in trouble, but we don't understand these native pollinators or all those other parts of our community.
And of course, bees are not the only important factor here.
There are other animals that pollinate, like bats, and bats are in trouble too.
And I'm glad I'm a bee man and not a bat man, because there's no money to research the bat problems.
And bats are dying at an extraordinary rate.
White-nose syndrome has wiped out populations of bats.
If there's a cave in New York that had 15,000 bats in it, and there are 1,000 left. That's like San Francisco becoming the population of half of this county in three years.
And so that's incredible. And there's no money to do that.
But I'm glad to say that I think we know the cause of all these conditions, and that cause is NDD: Nature Deficit Disorder.
And that is that I think that what we have in our society is, we forgot our connection with nature.
And I think if we reconnect to nature, we'll be able to have the resources and that interest to solve these problems.
And I think that there is an easy cure for NDD.
And that is, make meadows and not lawns.
And I think we have lost our connection, and this is a wonderful way of reconnecting to our environment.
I've had the privilege of living by a meadow for the last little while, and it is terribly engaging.
And if we look at the history of lawns, it's actually rather tragic.
It used to be, two, three hundred years ago, that a lawn was a symbol of prestige, and so it was only the very rich that could keep these green actually, deserts: they're totally sterile.
Americans spent, in 2001 -- 11 percent of all pesticide use was done on lawns.
Five percent of our greenhouse gases are produced by mowing our lawns.
And so it's incredible the amount of resources we've spent keeping our lawns, which are these useless biosystems.
And so we need to rethink this idea.
In fact, you know, the White House used to have sheep in front in order to help fund the war effort in World War I, which probably is not a bad idea; it wouldn't be a bad idea.
I want to say this not because I'm opposed completely to mowing lawns.
I think that there is perhaps some advantage to keeping lawns at a limited scale, and I think we're encouraged to do that.
But I also want to reinforce some of the ideas we've heard here, because having a meadow or living by a meadow is transformational.
That it is amazing that connection we can have with what's there.
These milkweed plants have grown up in my meadow over the last four years. Add to watch the different plants, or insects, that come to these flowers, to watch that -- and we've heard about, you know, this relationship you can have with wine, this companion you can have as it matures and as it has these different fragrances.
And this is a companion, and this is a relationship that never dries up.
You never run out of that companion as you drink this wine, too.
And I encourage you to look at that.
Now, not all of us have meadows, or lawns that we can convert, and so you can always, of course, grow a meadow in a pot.
Bees apparently, can be the gateway to, you know, other things.
So I'm not saying that you should plant a meadow of pot, but a pot in a meadow.
But you can also have this great community of city or building-top beekeepers, these beekeepers that live -- This is in Paris where these beekeepers live.
And everyone should open a beehive, because it is the most amazing, incredible thing.
And if we want to cure ourselves of NDD, or Nature Deficit Disorder, I think this is a great way of doing it.
Get a beehive and grow a meadow, and watch that life come back into your life.
And so with that, I think that what we can do, if we do this, we can make sure that our future -- our more perfect future -- includes beekeepers and it includes bees and it includes those meadows.
And that journey -- that journey of transformation that occurs as you grow your meadow and as you keep your bees or you watch those native bees there -- is an extremely exciting one.
And I hope that you experience it and I hope you tell me about it one day.
So thank you very much for being here. Thank you very much.
For 3 billion people around the world, seafood provides a significant source of protein and nutrition.
But recent studies show that 33% of wild fisheries are overfished, while another 60% are fished at their maximum capacity.
In fact, over half the seafood we eat– from finfish and shellfish to seaweed and algae– isn’t caught in the wild.
It’s grown through aquaculture, or aquatic farming.
Farmed seafood is one of the fastest-growing food industries, expanding in volume by 5.8% each year.
But different methods of aquaculture come with different advantages and issues– some of which echo the serious problems we’ve seen in industrial agriculture.
So how can we avoid repeating the mistakes we’ve made on land, at sea?
What aquaculture approaches are we currently using, and what does a sustainable way to farm the ocean really look like?
One of the most common aquaculture methods involves large pens made of nets, where fish are farmed offshore in floating cages roughly 1000 square meters in size.
Commonly employed off the coast of Chile and in the fjords of Norway, these fish, like many industrially farmed animals, occupy stressful, overcrowded pens.
They produce massive amounts of waste, polluting the surrounding areas and potentially spreading diseases to wild species.
Worse still, since the antibiotics employed to fight disease aren’t fully absorbed by the fish, they get excreted back into the environment.
Net pens are also susceptible to escapes, unleashing huge numbers of fish which compete for resources and weaken the local gene pool with genes adapted for captivity.
Escaped fish can even disrupt local ecosystems as invasive species.
Other techniques, such as man-made coastal ponds commonly used for shrimp farming in Southeast Asia, create additional environmental problems.
Just like net pens, these ponds are prone to spreading pollution and disease.
Their construction also frequently destroys important ecosystems like mangroves and marshes, which protect coastal areas from storms, provide habitats, and absorb tons of greenhouse gases.
One way to solve these problems is to farm fish on land in completely contained systems.
Tanks and raceways can recirculate and filter water to prevent pollution.
But even fully contained facilities still contend with another major hurdle: fishmeal.
About 10% of the seafood caught globally is used to feed animals, including carnivorous farmed fish.
Researchers are working on fish feed made of insects and plant-based proteins, but for now many inland fish farms are connected to overfishing.
All these obstacles can make sustainable aquaculture feel a long way off, but innovative farmers are finding new ways to responsibly farm the seas.
The most promising solution of all may be to look lower on the food chain.
Instead of cramming large, carnivorous fish into pens, we can work with natural ocean systems to produce huge amounts of shellfish and seaweeds.
These low-maintenance flora and fauna don’t need to be fed at all.
In fact, they naturally improve water quality, filtering it as they feed off of sunlight and nutrients in the seawater.
By absorbing carbon through photosynthesis, these farms help battle climate change, and reduce local ocean acidification while creating habitats for other species to thrive.
Shifting to restorative ocean farming could provide good jobs for coastal communities, and support healthy plant and shellfish-based diets that have an incredibly low carbon footprint.
In just 5 months, 4,000 square meters of ocean can produce 25 tons of seaweed and 250,000 of shellfish.
With the right distribution network, a series of small farms, collectively the size of Washington State could feed the planet.
Farms like these are already popping up around the globe, and a new generation of farmers is stepping up to pursue a more sustainable future.
Done properly, regenerative ocean farming could play a vital role in helping our oceans, our climate, and ourselves.
"The Opposites Game" For Patricia Maisch This day my students and I play the Opposites Game with a line from Emily Dickinson. My life had stood a loaded gun, it goes and I write it on the board, pausing so they can call out the antonyms – My Your Life Death Had stood ? Will sit A Many Loaded Empty Gun ?
Gun.
For a moment, very much like the one between lightning and its sound, the children just stare at me, and then it comes, a flurry, a hail storm of answers – Flower, says one. No, Book, says another. That's stupid, cries a third, the opposite of a gun is a pillow. Or maybe a hug, but not a book, no way is it a book. With this, the others gather their thoughts and suddenly it’s a shouting match. No one can agree, for every student there’s a final answer. It's a song, a prayer, I mean a promise, like a wedding ring, and later a baby. Or what’s that person who delivers babies?
A midwife? Yes, a midwife. No, that’s wrong. You're so wrong you’ll never be right again. It's a whisper, a star, it's saying I love you into your hand and then touching someone's ear. Are you crazy? Are you the president of Stupid-land? You should be, When's the election?
It’s a teddy bear, a sword, a perfect, perfect peach.
Go back to the first one, it's a flower, a white rose.
When the bell rings, I reach for an eraser but a girl snatches it from my hand. Nothing's decided, she says, We’re not done here. I leave all the answers on the board. The next day some of them have stopped talking to each other, they’ve taken sides.
There's a Flower club. And a Kitten club. And two boys calling themselves The Snowballs. The rest have stuck with the original game, which was to try to write something like poetry.
It's a diamond, it's a dance, the opposite of a gun is a museum in France.
It's the moon, it's a mirror, it's the sound of a bell and the hearer.
The arguing starts again, more shouting, and finally a new club. For the first time I dare to push them.
Maybe all of you are right, I say.
Well, maybe. Maybe it's everything we said. Maybe it’s everything we didn't say. It's words and the spaces for words.
They're looking at each other now. It's everything in this room and outside this room and down the street and in the sky.
It's everyone on campus and at the mall, and all the people waiting at the hospital. And at the post office. And, yeah, it's a flower, too. All the flowers. The whole garden.
The opposite of a gun is wherever you point it.
Don’t write that on the board, they say. Just say poem.
Your death will sit through many empty poems.
My parents gave me an extraordinary name: Baratunde Rafiq Thurston.
Now, Baratunde is based on a Yoruba name from Nigeria, but we're not Nigerian.
(Laughter) That's just how black my mama was.
(Laughter) "Get this boy the blackest name possible. What does the book say?"
(Laughter) Rafiq is an Arabic name, but we are not Arabs.
My mom just wanted me to have difficulty boarding planes in the 21st century.
(Laughter) She foresaw America's turn toward nativism.
She was a black futurist.
(Laughter) Thurston is a British name, but we are not British.
Shoutout to the multigenerational, dehumanizing economic institution of American chattel slavery, though.
Also, Thurston makes for a great Starbucks name.
Really expedites the process.
(Laughter) My mother was a renaissance woman.
Arnita Lorraine Thurston was a computer programmer, former domestic worker, survivor of sexual assault, an artist and an activist.
She prepared me for this world with lessons in black history, in martial arts, in urban farming, and then she sent me in the seventh grade to the private Sidwell Friends School, where US presidents send their daughters, and where she sent me looking like this.
(Laughter) I had two key tasks going to that school: don't lose your blackness and don't lose your glasses.
This accomplished both.
(Laughter) Sidwell was a great place to learn the arts and the sciences, but also the art of living amongst whiteness.
That would prepare me for life later at Harvard, or doing corporate consulting, or for my jobs at "The Daily Show" and "The Onion."
I would write down many of these lessons in my memoir, "How to Be Black," which if you haven't read yet, makes you a racist, because -- (Laughter) you've had plenty of time to read the book.
But America insists on reminding me and teaching me what it means to be black in America.
It's December 2018, I'm with my fiancé in the suburbs of Wisconsin.
We are visiting her parents, both of whom are white, which makes her white.
That's how it works. I don't make the rules.
(Laughter) She's had some drinks, so I drive us in her parents' car, and we get pulled over by the police.
I'm scared.
I turn on the flashing lights to indicate compliance.
I pull over slowly under the brightest streetlight I can find in case I need witnesses or dashcam footage.
We get out my identification, the car registration, lay it out in the open, roll down the windows, my hands are placed on the steering wheel, all before the officer exits the vehicle.
This is how to stay alive.
As we wait, I think about these headlines -- "Police shoot another unarmed black person" -- and I don't want to join them.
The good news is, our officer was friendly.
She told us our tags were expired.
So to all the white parents out there, if your child is involved with a person whose skin tone is rated Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson or darker -- (Laughter) you need to get that car inspected, update the paperwork every time we visit.
That's just common courtesy.
(Laughter) (Applause) I got lucky.
I got a law enforcement professional.
I survived something that should not require survival.
And I think about this series of stories -- "Police shoot another unarmed black person" -- and that season when those stories popped up everywhere.
I would scroll through my feed and I would see a baby announcement photo.
I'd see an ad for a product I had just whispered to a friend about yesterday.
I would see a video of a police officer gunning down someone who looked just like me.
And I'd see a think piece about how millennials have replaced sex with avocado toast.
(Laughter) It was a confusing time.
Those stories kept popping up, but in 2018, those stories got changed out for a different type of story, stories like, "White Woman Calls Cops On Black Woman Waiting For An Uber."
That was Brooklyn Becky.
Then there was, "White Woman Calls Police On Eight-Year-Old Black Girl Selling Water."
That was Permit Patty.
Then there was, "Woman Calls Police On Black Family BBQing At Lake In Oakland."
That was now infamous BBQ Becky.
And I contend that these stories of living while black are actually progress.
We used to find out after the extrajudicial police killings.
Now, we're getting video of people calling 911.
We're moving upstream, closer to the problem and closer to the solution.
So I started a collection of as many of these stories as I could find.
I built an evolving, still-growing database at baratunde.com/livingwhileblack.
Seeking understanding, I realized the process was really diagramming sentences to understand these headlines.
And I want to thank my Sidwell English teacher Erica Berry and all English teachers.
You have given us tools to fight for our own freedom.
What I found was a process to break down the headline and understand the consistent layers in each one: a subject takes an action against a target engaged in some activity, so that "White Woman Calls Police On Eight-Year-Old Black Girl" is the same as "White Man Calls Police On Black Woman Using Neighborhood Pool" is the same as "Woman Calls Cops On Black Oregon Lawmaker Campaigning In Her District."
They're the same.
Diagramming the sentences allowed me to diagram the white supremacy which allowed such sentences to be true, and I will pause to define my terms.
When I say "white supremacy," I'm not just talking about Nazis or white power activists, and I'm definitely not saying that all white people are racist.
What I'm referring to is a system of structural advantage that favors white people over others in social, economic and political arenas.
It's what Bryan Stevenson at the Equal Justice Initiative calls the narrative of racial difference, the story we told ourselves to justify slavery and Jim Crow and mass incarceration and beyond.
So when I saw this pattern repeating, I got angry, but I also got inspired to create a game, a game of words that would allow me to transform this traumatic exposure into more of a healing experience.
I'm going to talk you through the game.
The first level is a training level, and I need your participation.
Our objective: to determine if this is real or fake.
Did this happen or not?
Here is the example: "Catholic University Law Librarian Calls Police On Student For 'Being Argumentative.'" Clap your hands if you think this is real.
(Applause) Clap your hands if you think this is fake.
(Applause) The reals have it, unfortunately, and a point of information, being argumentative in a law library is the exact right place to do that.
(Laughter) This student should be promoted to professor.
Training level complete, so we move on to the real levels.
Level one, our objective is simple: reverse the roles.
That means "Woman Calls Cops On Black Oregon Lawmaker" becomes "Black Oregon Lawmaker Calls Cops On Woman."
That means "White Man Calls Police On Black Woman Using Neighborhood Pool" becomes "Black Woman Calls Police On White Man Using Neighborhood Pool."
How do you like them reverse racist apples?
That's it, level one complete, and so we level up to level two, where our objective is to increase the believability of the reversal.
Let's face it, a black woman calling police on a white man using a pool isn't absurd enough, but what if that white man was trying to touch her hair without asking, or maybe he was making oat milk while riding a unicycle, or maybe he's just talking over everyone in a meeting.
(Laughter) We've all been there, right?
Seriously, we've all been there.
So that's it, level two complete.
But it comes with a warning: simply reversing the flow of injustice is not justice.
That is vengeance, that is not our mission, that's a different game so we level up to level three, where the objective is to change the action, also known as "calling the police is not your only option OMG, what is wrong with you people!"
(Applause) And I need to pause the game to remind us of the structure.
A subject takes an action against a target engaged in some activity.
"White Woman Calls Police On Black Real Estate Investor Inspecting His Own Property."
"California Safeway Calls Cops On Black Woman Donating Food To The Homeless."
"Gold Club Twice Calls Cops On Black Women For Playing Too Slow."
In all these cases, the subject is usually white, the target is usually black, and the activities are anything, from sitting in a Starbucks to using the wrong type of barbecue to napping to walking "agitated" on the way to work, which I just call "walking to work."
(Laughter) And, my personal favorite, not stopping his dog from humping her dog, which is clearly a case for dog police, not people police.
All of these activities add up to living.
Our existence is being interpreted as crime.
Now, this is the obligatory moment in the presentation where I have to say, not everything is about race.
Crime is a thing, should be reported, but ask yourself, do we need armed men to show up and resolve this situation, because when they show up for me, it's different.
We know that police officers use force more with black people than with white people, and we are learning the role of 911 calls in this.
Thanks to preliminary research from the Center for Policing Equity, we're learning that in some cities, most of the interactions between cops and citizens is due to 911 calls, not officer-initiated stops, and most of the violence, the use of force by police on citizens, is in response to those calls.
Further, when those officers responding to calls use force, that increases in areas where the percentage of the white population has also increased, aka gentrification, aka unicycles and oat milk, aka when BBQ Becky feels threatened, she becomes a threat to me in my own neighborhood, which forces me and people like me to police ourselves.
We quiet ourselves, we walk on eggshells, we maybe pull over to the side of the road under the brightest light we can find so that our murder might be caught cleanly on camera, and we do this because we live in a system in which white people can too easily call on deadly force to ensure their comfort.
(Applause) The California Safeway didn't just call cops on black woman donating food to homeless.
They ordered armed, unaccountable men upon her.
They essentially called in a drone strike.
This is weaponized discomfort, and it is not new.
From 1877 to 1950, there were at least 4,400 documented racial terror lynchings of black people in the United States.
They had headlines as well.
"Rev. T.A. Allen was lynched in Hernando, Mississippi for organizing local sharecroppers."
"Oliver Moore was lynched in Edgecomb County, North Carolina, for frightening a white girl."
"Nathan Bird was lynched near Luling, Texas, for refusing to turn his son over to a mob."
We need to change the action, whether that action is "lynches" or "calls police."
And now that I have shortened the distance between those two, let's get back to our game, to our mission.
Our objective in level three is to change the action.
So what if, instead of "Calls Cops On Black Woman Donating Food To Homeless," that California Safeway simply thanks her.
Thanking is far cheaper than bringing law enforcement to the scene.
(Applause) Or, instead, they could give the food they would have wasted to her, upped their civic cred.
Or, the white woman who called the police on the eight-year-old black girl, she could have bought all the inventory from that little black girl, support a small business.
And the white woman who called the police on the black real estate investor, we would all be better off, the cops agree, if she had simply ignored him and minded her own damn business.
(Laughter) Minding one's own damn business is an excellent choice, excellent choice.
Choose it more often.
Level three is complete, but there is a final bonus level, where the objective is inclusion.
We have also seen headlines like this: "Powerful Man Masturbates In Front Of Young Women Visiting His Office."
What an odd choice for powerful man to make.
So many other actions available to him.
(Laughter) Like, such as, "listens to," "mentors," "inspired by, starts joint venture, everybody rich now."
(Laughter) I want to live in that world of everybody rich now, but because of his poor choice, we are all in a poorer world.
Doesn't have to be this way.
This word game reminded me that there is a structure to white supremacy, as there is to misogyny, as there is to all systemic abuses of power.
Structure is what makes them systemic.
I'm asking people here to see the structure, where the power is in it, and even more importantly to see the humanity of those of us made targets by this structure.
I am here because I was loved and invested in and protected and lucky, because I went to the right schools, I'm semifamous, mostly happy, meditate twice a day, and yet, I walk around in fear, because I know that someone seeing me as a threat can become a threat to my life, and I am tired.
I am tired of carrying this invisible burden of other people's fears, and many of us are, and we shouldn't have to, because we can change this, because we can change the action, which changes the story, which changes the system that allows those stories to happen.
Systems are just collective stories we all buy into.
When we change them, we write a better reality for us all to be a part of.
I am asking us to use our power to choose.
I am asking us to level up.
Thank you.
I am Baratunde Rafiq Thurston.
(Applause)
This is a strange and wonderful brain, one that gives rise to an idea of a kind of alternative intelligence on this planet.
This is a brain that is formed in a very strange body, one that has the equivalent of small satellite brains distributed throughout that body.
How different is it from the human brain?
Very different, so it seems, so much so that my colleagues and I are struggling to understand how that brain works.
But what I can tell you for certain is that this brain is capable of some amazing things.
So, who does this brain belong to?
Well, join me for a little bit of diving into the ocean, where life began, and let's have a look.
You may have seen some of this before, but we're behind a coral reef, and there's this rock out there, a lot of sand, fishes swimming around ...
And all of a sudden this octopus appears, and now it flashes white, inks in my face and jets away.
In slow motion reverse, you see the ring develop around the eye, and then the pattern develops in the skin.
And now watch the 3-D texture of the skin change to really create this beautiful, 3-D camouflage.
So there are 25 million color organs called "chromatophores" in the skin, and all those bumps out there, which we call "papillae," and they're all neurally controlled and can change instantaneously.
I would argue that dynamic camouflage is a form of "intelligence."
The level of complexity of the skin with fast precision change is really quite astonishing.
So what can you do with this skin?
Well, let's think a little bit about other things besides camouflage that they can do with their skin.
Here you see the mimic octopus and a pattern.
All of a sudden, it changes dramatically -- that's signaling, not camouflage.
And then it goes back to the normal pattern.
Then you see the broadclub cuttlefish showing this passing cloud display as it approaches a crab prey.
And finally, you see the flamboyant cuttlefish in camouflage and it can shift instantly to this bright warning display.
What we have here is a sliding scale of expression, a continuum, if you will, between conspicuousness and camouflage.
And this requires a lot of control.
Well, guess what?
Brains are really good for control.
The brain of the octopus shown here has 35 lobes to the brain, 80 million tiny cells.
And even though that's interesting, what's really odd is that the skin of this animal has many more neurons, as illustrated here, especially in the yellow.
There are 300 million neurons in the skin and only 80 million in the brain itself -- four times as many.
Now, if you look at that, there's actually one of those little satellite brains and the equivalent of the spinal cord for each of the eight arms.
This is a very unusual way to construct a nervous system in a body.
Well, what is that brain good for?
That brain has to outwit other big, smart brains that are trying to eat it, and that includes porpoises and seals and barracudas and sharks and even us humans.
So decision-making is one of the things that this brain has to do, and it does a very good job of it.
Shown here, you see this octopus perambulating along, and then it suddenly stops and creates that perfect camouflage.
And it's really marvelous, because when these animals forage in the wild, they have to make over a hundred camouflaging decisions in a two-hour forage, and they do that twice a day.
So, decision-making.
They're also figuring out where to go and how to get back home.
So it's a decision-making thing.
We can test this camouflage, like that cuttlefish you see behind me, where we pull the rug out from under it and give it a checkerboard, and it even uses that strange visual information and does its best to match the pattern with a little ad-libbing.
So other cognitive skills are important, too.
The squids have a different kind of smarts, if you will.
They have an extremely complex, interesting sex life.
They have fighting and flirting and courting and mate-guarding and deception.
Sound familiar?
(Laughter) And it's really quite amazing that these animals have this kind of intuitive ability to do these behaviors.
Here you see a male and a female.
The male, on the left, has been fighting off other males to pair with the female, and now he's showing a dual pattern.
He shows courtship and love on her side, fighting on the other.
Watch him when she shifts places -- (Laughter) and you see that he has fluidly changed the love-courtship pattern to the side of the female.
So this kind of dual signaling simultaneously with a changing behavioral context is really extraordinary.
It takes a lot of brain power.
Now, another way to look at this is that, hmm, maybe we have 50 million years of evidence for the two-faced male.
(Laughter) All right, let's move on.
(Laughter) An octopus on a coral reef has a tough job in front it to go to so many places, remember and find its den.
And they do this extremely well.
They have short- and long-term memory, they learn things in three to five trials -- it's a good brain.
And the spatial memory is unusually good.
They will even end their forage and make a beeline all the way back to their den.
The divers watching them are completely lost, but they can get back, so it's really quite refined memory capability.
Now, in terms of cognitive skills, look at this sleeping behavior in the cuttlefish.
Especially on the right, you see the eye twitching.
This is rapid eye movement kind of dreaming that we only thought mammals and birds did.
And you see the false color we put in there to see the skin patterning flashing, and this is what's happening a lot.
But it's not normal awake behaviors; it's all different.
Well, dreaming is when you have memory consolidation, and so this is probably what's happening in the cuttlefish.
Now, another form of memory that's really unusual is episodic-like memory.
This is something that humans need four years of brain development to do to remember what happened during a particular event, where it happened and when it happened.
The "when" part is particularly difficult, and these children can do that.
But guess what?
We find recently that the wily cuttlefish also has this ability, and in experiments last summer, when you present a cuttlefish with different foods at different times, they have to match that with where it was exactly and when was the last time they saw it.
Then they have to guide their foraging to the rate of replenishment of each food type in a different place.
Sound complicated?
It's so complicated, I hardly understood the experiment.
So this is really high-level cognitive processing.
Now, speaking of brains and evolution at the moment, you look on the right, there's the pathway of vertebrate brain evolution, and we all have good brains.
I think everyone will acknowledge that.
But if you look on the left side, some of the evolutionary pathway outlined here to the octopus, they have both converged, if you will, to complex behaviors and some form of intelligence.
The last common denominator in these two lines was 600 million years ago, and it was a worm with very few neurons, so very divergent paths but convergence of complicated behavior.
Here is the fundamental question: Is the brain structure of an octopus basically different down to the tiniest level from the vertebrate line?
Now, we don't know the answer, but if it turns out to be yes, then we have a different evolutionary pathway to create intelligence on planet Earth, and one might think that the artificial intelligence community might be interested in those mechanisms.
Well, let's talk genetics just for a moment.
We have genomes, we have DNA, DNA is transcripted into RNA, RNA translates that into a protein, and that's how we come to be.
Well, the cephalopods do it differently.
They have big genomes, they have DNA, they transcript it into RNA, but now something dramatically different happens.
They edit that RNA at an astronomical weird rate, a hundredfold more than we as humans or other animals do.
And it produces scores of proteins.
And guess where most of them are for?
The nervous system.
So perhaps this is an unorthodox way for an animal to evolve behavioral plasticity.
This is a lot of conjecture, but it's food for thought.
Now, I'd like to share with you for a moment my experience, and using my smarts and that of my colleagues, to try and get this kind of information.
We're diving, we can't stay underwater forever because we can't breathe it, so we have to be efficient in what we do.
The total sensory immersion into that world is what helps us understand what these animals are really doing, and I have to tell you that it's really an amazing experience to be down there and having this communication with an octopus and a diver when you really begin to understand that this is a thinking, cogitating, curious animal.
And this is the kind of thing that really inspires me endlessly.
Let's go back to that smart skin for a few moments.
Here's a squid and a camouflage pattern.
We zoom down and we see there's beautiful pigments and reflectors.
There are the chromatophores opening and closing very quickly.
And then, in the next layer of skin, it's quite interesting.
The chromatophores are closed, and you see this magical iridescence just come out of the skin.
This is also neurally controlled, so it's the combination of the two, as seen here in the high-resolution skin of the cuttlefish, where you get this beautiful pigmentary structural coloration and even the faint blushing that is so beautiful.
Well, how can we make use of some of this information?
I talked about those skin bumps, the papillae.
Here's the giant Australian cuttlefish.
It's got smooth skin and a conspicuous pattern.
I took five pictures in a row one second apart, and just watch this animal morph -- one, two, three, four, five -- and now I'm a seaweed.
And then we can come right back out of it to see the smooth skin and the conspicuousness.
So this is really marvelous, morphing skin.
You can see it in more detail here.
Periscope up, and you've got those beautiful papillae.
And then we look in a little more detail, you can see the individual papillae come up, and there are little ridges on there, so it's a papilla on papilla and so forth.
Every individual species out there has more than a dozen shapes and sizes of those bumps to create fine-tuned, neurally controlled camouflage.
So now, my colleagues at Cornell, engineers, watched our work and said, "We think we can make some of those."
Because in industry and society, this kind of soft materials under control of shape are really very rare.
And they went ahead, worked with us and made the first samples of artificial papillae, soft materials, shown here.
And you see them blown up into different shapes, And then you can press your finger on them to see that they're a little bit malleable as they are.
And so this is an example of how that might work.
Well, I want to segue from this into the color of fabrics, and I imagine that could have a lot of applications as well.
Just look at this kaleidoscope of color of dynamically controlled pigments and reflectors that we see in the cephalopods.
We know enough about the mechanics of how they work that we can begin to translate this not only into fabrics but perhaps even into changeable cosmetics.
And moreover, there's been the recent discovery of light-sensing molecules in the skin of octopus which may pave the way to, eventually, smart materials that sense and respond on their own.
Well, this form of biotechnology, or biomimicry, if you will, could change the way we look at the world even above water.
Take, for example, artificial intelligence that might be inspired by the body-distributed brain and behavior of the octopus or the smart skin of a cuttlefish translated into cutting-edge fashion.
Well, how do we get there?
Maybe all we have to do is to begin to be a little bit smarter about how smart the cephalopods are.
Thank you.
(Applause)
These rocks have been hitting our earth for about three billion years, and are responsible for much of what’s gone on on our planet.
This is an example of a real meteorite, and you can see all the melting of the iron from the speed and the heat when a meteorite hits the earth, and just how much of it survives and melts.
From a meteorite from space, we’re over here with an original Sputnik.
This is one of the seven surviving Sputniks that was not launched into space.
This is not a copy.
The space age began 50 years ago in October, and that’s exactly what Sputnik looked like.
And it wouldn’t be fun to talk about the space age without seeing a flag that was carried to the moon and back, on Apollo 11.
The astronauts each got to carry about ten silk flags in their personal kits.
They would bring them back and mount them.
So this has actually been carried to the moon and back.
So that’s for fun.
The dawn of books is, of course, important.
And it wouldn’t be interesting to talk about the dawn of books without having a copy of a Guttenberg Bible.
You can see how portable and handy it was to have your own Guttenberg in 1455.
But what’s interesting about the Guttenberg Bible, and the dawn of this technology, is not the book.
You see, the book was not driven by reading.
In 1455, nobody could read.
So why did the printing press succeed?
This is an original page of a Guttenberg Bible.
So you’re looking here at one of the first printed books using movable type in the history of man, 550 years ago.
We are living at the age here at the end of the book, where electronic paper will undoubtedly replace it.
But why is this so interesting? Here’s the quick story.
It turns out that in the 1450s, the Catholic Church needed money, and so they actually hand-wrote these things called indulgences, which were forgiveness’s on pieces of paper.
They traveled all around Europe and sold by the hundreds or by the thousands.
They got you out of purgatory faster.
And when the printing press was invented what they found was they could print indulgences, which was the equivalent of printing money.
And so all of Western Europe started buying printing presses in 1455 -- to print out thousands, and then hundreds of thousands, and then ultimately millions of single, small pieces of paper that got you out of middle hell and into heaven.
That is why the printing press succeeded, and that is why Martin Luther nailed his 90 theses to the door: because he was complaining that the Catholic Church had gone amok in printing out indulgences and selling them in every town and village and city in all of Western Europe.
So the printing press, ladies and gentlemen, was driven entirely by the printing of forgivenesses and had nothing to do with reading.
More tomorrow. I also have pictures coming of the library for those of you that have asked for pictures.
We’re going to have some tomorrow.
(Applause) Instead of showing an object from the stage I’m going to do something special for the first time.
We are going to show, actually, what the library looks like, OK?
So, I am married to the most wonderful woman in the world.
You’re going to find out why in a minute, because when I went to see Eileen, this is what I said I wanted to build.
This is the Library of Human Imagination.
The room itself is three stories tall.
In the glass panels are 5,000 years of human imagination that are computer controlled.
The room is a theatre. It changes colors.
And all throughout the library are different objects, different spaces.
It’s designed like an Escher print.
Here is some of the lower level of the library, where the exhibits constantly change.
You can walk through. You can touch.
You can see exactly how many of these types of items would fit in a room.
There’s my very own Saturn V.
Everybody should have one, OK? (Laughter) So you can see here in the lower level of the library the books and the objects.
In the glass panels all along is sort of the history of imagination.
There is a glass bridge that you walk across that’s suspended in space.
So it’s a leap of imagination.
How do we create?
Part of the question that I have answered is, is we create by surrounding ourselves with stimuli: with human achievement, with history, with the things that drive us and make us human -- the passionate discovery, the bones of dinosaurs long gone, the maps of space that we’ve experienced, and ultimately the hallways that stimulate our mind and our imagination.
So hopefully tomorrow I’ll show one or two more objects from the stage, but for today I just wanted to say thank you for all the people that came and talked to us about it.
And Eileen and I are thrilled to open our home and share it with the TED community.
(Applause) TED is all about patterns in the clouds.
It’s all about connections.
It’s all about seeing things that everybody else has seen before but thinking about them in ways that nobody has thought of them before.
And that’s really what discovery and imagination is all about.
For example, we can look at a DNA molecule model here.
None of us really have ever seen one, but we know it exists because we’ve been taught to understand this molecule.
But we can also look at an Enigma machine from the Nazis in World War II that was a coding and decoding machine.
Now, you might say, what does this have to do with this?
Well, this is the code for life, and this is a code for death.
These two molecules code and decode.
And yet, looking at them, you would see a machine and a molecule.
But once you’ve seen them in a new way, you realize that both of these things really are connected.
And they’re connected primarily because of this here.
You see, this is a human brain model, OK?
And it’s rare, because we never really get to see a brain.
We get to see a skull. But there it is.
All of imagination -- everything that we think, we feel, we sense -- comes through the human brain.
And once we create new patterns in this brain, once we shape the brain in a new way, it never returns to its original shape.
And I’ll give you a quick example.
We think about the Internet; we think about information that goes across the Internet.
And we never think about the hidden connection.
But I brought along here a lump of coal -- right here, one lump of coal.
And what does a lump of coal have to do with the Internet?
You see, it takes the energy in one lump of coal to move one megabyte of information across the net.
So every time you download a file, each megabyte is a lump of coal.
What that means is, a 200-megabyte file looks like this, ladies and gentlemen. OK?
So the next time you download a gigabyte, or two gigabytes, it’s not for free, OK?
The connection is the energy it takes to run the web , and to make everything we think possible, possible.
Thanks, Chris.
(Applause)
The world is getting closer to achieving one of the most important public health goals of our time: eradicating HIV.
And to do this, we won’t even have to cure the disease.
We simply have to stop HIV from being transmitted until eventually it fizzles out.
Once, this goal would have seemed impossible.
HIV has caused millions of deaths and is one of the most devastating diseases that humanity has ever known.
But we’re now at a point where new advances such as one-pill, once-a-day medications are helping us tackle HIV in effective ways.
HIV is a retrovirus– meaning it integrates copies of itself into an infected cell’s DNA, allowing it to replicate and infect other cells.
HIV has evolved numerous ways to evade the human immune system, which makes it difficult to cure.
But by developing ways to block HIV replication, we can stop the spread of HIV itself.
That’s where antiretrovirals– a.k.a. ARVs– come in.
ARVs are a group of drugs which work in different ways to combat HIV.
Some block HIV’s access into immune cells, and others work by stopping the virus itself from replicating.
ARVs also work preventatively in people who don’t have HIV.
This type of approach is called pre-exposure prophylaxis, or PrEP.
PrEP works by accumulating in a person’s body and preventing HIV from establishing itself.
That means an HIV-negative person who may be at risk of contracting the disease can take certain ARVs to protect themselves, before they become exposed.
Here’s where it gets especially interesting: In people with HIV, ARVs can also dramatically reduce HIV transmission.
This is called “Treatment as Prevention.” On a global scale, this has the potential to end the HIV epidemic.
It’s based on the idea that someone with HIV who takes ARV’s can lower the virus level in their bodies until it becomes undetectable.
That doesn’t mean the virus is gone; it could still be lurking within cells, ready to reactivate if treatment stops.
But so long as it’s kept dormant with drugs, HIV remains undetectable.
And when HIV is undetectable, it’s untransmittable, too.
In theory this means that by testing everyone who’s at risk of HIV and treating those who test positive, we could stop transmission and eventually eradicate HIV.
In the real world, however, things are more complex.
Many at-risk HIV negative people across the world do not have access to PrEP or ARVs, and those who are HIV positive may experience challenges to taking ARVs.
These problems are often greatest in countries where the burden of HIV is highest.
Getting these medications depends on access to a functioning healthcare system– and this isn’t something everyone has.
That’s part of the reason why stopping the spread of HIV for good will require a significant investment of resources to improve those systems.
One study carried out by the UNAIDS estimated that between 20-30 billion dollars per year would be needed to achieve a nearly 90% reduction in new HIV infections by 2030.
This investment would ensure more people would get tested in the first place, and more would be able to access and maintain treatment.
Achieving this goal and improving healthcare in general is in everyone’s best interest, from individual people to society as a whole.
We have roadmaps that could allow us to bring the HIV epidemic to an end in the near future, with the possibility of eradicating the disease altogether several generations in the future.
In the period from 1996 to 2017 we almost halved the number of new HIV infections, and for the millions of people who still live with the virus, ARV treatments enable most to lead long and healthy lives.
With continued and increased investments, we can get transmission rates low enough to end HIV once and for all.
A world without HIV is no longer inconceivable: it’s closer than ever.
I'm just going to play a brief video clip.
Video: On the fifth of December 1985, a bottle of 1787 Lafitte was sold for 105,000 pounds -- nine times the previous world record.
The buyer was Kip Forbes, son of one of the most flamboyant millionaires of the 20th century.
The original owner of the bottle turned out to be one of the most enthusiastic wine buffs of the 18th century.
Château Lafitte is one of the greatest wines in the world, the prince of any wine cellar.
Benjamin Wallace: Now, that's about all the videotape that remains of an event that set off the longest-running mystery in the modern wine world.
And the mystery existed because of a gentleman named Hardy Rodenstock.
In 1985, he announced to his friends in the wine world that he had made this incredible discovery.
Some workmen in Paris had broken through a brick wall, and happened upon this hidden cache of wines -- apparently the property of Thomas Jefferson. 1787, 1784.
He wouldn't reveal the exact number of bottles, he would not reveal exactly where the building was and he would not reveal exactly who owned the building.
The mystery persisted for about 20 years.
It finally began to get resolved in 2005 because of this guy.
Bill Koch is a Florida billionaire who owns four of the Jefferson bottles, and he became suspicious.
And he ended up spending over a million dollars and hiring ex-FBI and ex-Scotland Yard agents to try to get to the bottom of this.
There's now ample evidence that Hardy Rodenstock is a con man, and that the Jefferson bottles were fakes.
But for those 20 years, an unbelievable number of really eminent and accomplished figures in the wine world were sort of drawn into the orbit of these bottles.
I think they wanted to believe that the most expensive bottle of wine in the world must be the best bottle of wine in the world, must be the rarest bottle of wine in the world.
I became increasingly, kind of voyeuristically interested in the question of you know, why do people spend these crazy amounts of money, not only on wine but on lots of things, and are they living a better life than me?
So, I decided to embark on a quest.
With the generous backing of a magazine I write for sometimes, I decided to sample the very best, or most expensive, or most coveted item in about a dozen categories, which was a very grueling quest, as you can imagine.
(Laughter) This was the first one.
A lot of the Kobe beef that you see in the U.S. is not the real thing.
It may come from Wagyu cattle, but it's not from the original, Appalachian Hyogo Prefecture in Japan.
There are very few places in the U.S. where you can try real Kobe, and one of them is Wolfgang Puck's restaurant, Cut, in Los Angeles.
I went there, and I ordered the eight-ounce rib eye for 160 dollars.
And it arrived, and it was tiny.
And I was outraged.
It was like, 160 dollars for this?
And then I took a bite, and I wished that it was tinier, because Kobe beef is so rich.
It's like foie gras -- it's not even like steak.
I almost couldn't finish it.
I was really happy when I was done.
(Laughter) Now, the photographer who took the pictures for this project for some reason posed his dog in a lot of them, so that's why you're going to see this recurring character.
Which, I guess, you know, communicates to you that I did not think that one was really worth the price.
White truffles.
One of the most expensive luxury foods by weight in the world.
To try this, I went to a Mario Batali restaurant in Manhattan -- Del Posto.
The waiter, you know, came out with the white truffle knob and his shaver, and he shaved it onto my pasta and he said, you know, "Would Signore like the truffles?"
And the charm of white truffles is in their aroma.
It's not in their taste, really. It's not in their texture.
It's in the smell.
These white pearlescent flakes hit the noodles, this haunting, wonderful, nutty, mushroomy smell wafted up.
10 seconds passed and it was gone.
And then I was left with these little ugly flakes on my pasta that, you know, their purpose had been served, and so I'm afraid to say that this was also a disappointment to me.
There were several -- several of these items were disappointments.
(Laughter) Yeah.
The magazine wouldn't pay for me to go there.
(Laughter) They did give me a tour, though.
And this hotel suite is 4,300 square feet.
It has 360-degree views.
It has four balconies.
It was designed by the architect I.M. Pei.
It comes with its own Rolls Royce and driver.
It comes with its own wine cellar that you can draw freely from.
When I took the tour, it actually included some Opus One, I was glad to see.
30,000 dollars for a night in a hotel.
This is soap that's made from silver nanoparticles, which have antibacterial properties.
I washed my face with this this morning in preparation for this.
And it, you know, tickled a little bit and it smelled good, but I have to say that nobody here has complimented me on the cleanliness of my face today.
(Laughter) But then again, nobody has complimented me on the jeans I'm wearing.
These ones GQ did spring for -- I own these -- but I will tell you, not only did I not get a compliment from any of you, I have not gotten a compliment from anybody in the months that I have owned and worn these.
I don't think that whether or not you're getting a compliment should be the test of something's value, but I think in the case of a fashion item, an article of clothing, that's a reasonable benchmark.
That said, a lot of work goes into these.
They are made from handpicked organic Zimbabwean cotton that has been shuttle loomed and then hand-dipped in natural indigo 24 times.
But no compliments.
(Laughter) Thank you.
Armando Manni is a former filmmaker who makes this olive oil from an olive that grows on a single slope in Tuscany.
And he goes to great lengths to protect the olive oil from oxygen and light.
He uses tiny bottles, the glass is tinted, he tops the olive oil off with an inert gas.
And he actually -- once he releases a batch of it, he regularly conducts molecular analyses and posts the results online, so you can go online and look at your batch number and see how the phenolics are developing, and, you know, gauge its freshness.
I did a blind taste test of this with 20 people and five other olive oils.
It tasted fine. It tasted interesting.
It was very green, it was very peppery.
But in the blind taste test, it came in last.
The olive oil that came in first was actually a bottle of Whole Foods 365 olive oil which had been oxidizing next to my stove for six months.
(Laughter) A recurring theme is that a lot of these things are from Japan -- you'll start to notice.
I don't play golf, so I couldn't actually road test these, but I did interview a guy who owns them.
Even the people who market these clubs -- I mean, they'll say these have four axis shafts which minimize loss of club speed and thereby drive the ball farther -- but they'll say, look, you know, you're not getting 57,000 dollars worth of performance from these clubs.
You're paying for the bling, that they're encrusted with gold and platinum.
The guy who I interviewed who owns them did say that he's gotten a lot of pleasure out of them, so ...
Oh, yeah, you know this one?
This is a coffee made from a very unusual process.
The luwak is an Asian Palm Civet.
It's a cat that lives in trees, and at night it comes down and it prowls the coffee plantations.
And apparently it's a very picky eater and it, you know, hones in on only the ripest coffee cherries.
And then an enzyme in its digestive tract leeches into the beans, and people with the unenviable job of collecting these cats' leavings then go through the forest collecting the, you know, results and processing it into coffee -- although you actually can buy it in the unprocessed form.
That's right.
Unrelatedly -- (Laughter) Japan is doing crazy things with toilets.
(Laughter) There is now a toilet that has an MP3 player in it.
There's one with a fragrance dispenser.
There's one that actually analyzes the contents of the bowl and transmits the results via email to your doctor.
It's almost like a home medical center -- and that is the direction that Japanese toilet technology is heading in.
This one does not have those bells and whistles, but for pure functionality it's pretty much the best -- the Neorest 600.
And to try this -- I couldn't get a loaner, but I did go into the Manhattan showroom of the manufacturer, Toto, and they have a bathroom off of the showroom that you can use, which I used.
It's fully automated -- you walk towards it, and the seat lifts.
The seat is preheated.
There's a water jet that cleans you.
There's an air jet that dries you.
You get up, it flushes by itself.
The lid closes, it self-cleans.
Not only is it a technological leap forward, but I really do believe it's a bit of a cultural leap forward.
I mean, a no hands, no toilet paper toilet.
And I want to get one of these.
(Laughter) This was another one I could not get a loaner of.
Tom Cruise supposedly owns this bed.
There's a little plaque on the end that, you know, each buyer gets their name engraved on it.
(Laughter) To try this one, the maker of it let me and my wife spend the night in the Manhattan showroom.
Lights glaring in off the street, and we had to hire a security guard and all these things.
But anyway, we had a great night's sleep.
And you spend a third of your life in bed.
I don't think it's that bad of a deal.
(Laughter) This was a fun one.
This is the fastest street-legal car in the world and the most expensive production car.
I got to drive this with a chaperone from the company, a professional race car driver, and we drove around the canyons outside of Los Angeles and down on the Pacific Coast Highway.
And, you know, when we pulled up to a stoplight the people in the adjacent cars kind of gave us respectful nods.
And it was really amazing.
It was such a smooth ride.
Most of the cars that I drive, if I get up to 80 they start to rattle.
I switched lanes on the highway and the driver, this chaperone, said, "You know, you were just going 110 miles an hour."
And I had no idea that I was one of those obnoxious people you occasionally see weaving in and out of traffic, because it was just that smooth.
And if I was a billionaire, I would get one.
(Laughter) This is a completely gratuitous video I'm just going to show of one of the pitfalls of advanced technology.
This is Tom Cruise arriving at the "Mission: Impossible III" premiere.
When he tries to open the door, you could call it "Mission: Impossible IV."
There was one object that I could not get my hands on, and that was the 1947 Cheval Blanc.
The '47 Cheval Blanc is probably the most mythologized wine of the 20th century.
And Cheval Blanc is kind of an unusual wine for Bordeaux in having a significant percentage of the Cabernet Franc grape.
And 1947 was a legendary vintage, especially in the right bank of Bordeaux.
And just together, that vintage and that chateau took on this aura that eventually kind of gave it this cultish following.
But it's 60 years old.
There's not much of it left.
What there is of it left you don't know if it's real -- it's considered to be the most faked wine in the world.
Not that many people are looking to pop open their one remaining bottle for a journalist.
So, I'd about given up trying to get my hands on one of these.
I'd put out feelers to retailers, to auctioneers, and it was coming up empty.
And then I got an email from a guy named Bipin Desai.
Bipin Desai is a U.C. Riverside theoretical physicist who also happens to be the preeminent organizer of rare wine tastings, and he said, "I've got a tasting coming up where we're going to serve the '47 Cheval Blanc."
And it was going to be a double vertical -- it was going to be 30 vintages of Cheval Blanc, and 30 vintages of Yquem.
And it was an invitation you do not refuse.
I went.
It was three days, four meals.
And at lunch on Saturday, we opened the '47.
And you know, it had this fragrant softness, and it smelled a little bit of linseed oil.
And then I tasted it, and it, you know, had this kind of unctuous, porty richness, which is characteristic of that wine -- that it sort of resembles port in a lot of ways.
There were people at my table who thought it was, you know, fantastic.
There were some people who were a little less impressed.
And I wasn't that impressed.
And I don't -- call my palate a philistine palate -- so it doesn't necessarily mean something that I wasn't impressed, but I was not the only one there who had that reaction.
And it wasn't just to that wine.
Any one of the wines served at this tasting, if I'd been served it at a dinner party, it would have been, you know, the wine experience of my lifetime, and incredibly memorable.
But drinking 60 great wines over three days, they all just blurred together, and it became almost a grueling experience.
And I just wanted to finish by mentioning a very interesting study which came out earlier this year from some researchers at Stanford and Caltech.
And they gave subjects the same wine, labeled with different price tags.
A lot of people, you know, said that they liked the more expensive wine more -- it was the same wine, but they thought it was a different one that was more expensive.
But what was unexpected was that these researchers did MRI brain imaging while the people were drinking the wine, and not only did they say they enjoyed the more expensively labeled wine more -- their brain actually registered as experiencing more pleasure from the same wine when it was labeled with a higher price tag.
Thank you.
Alright, so I want you to imagine that you get a text from a friend, and it reads ...
"You will NOT believe what just happened. I'm SO MAD right now!"
So you do the dutiful thing as a friend, and you ask for details.
And they tell you a story about what happened to them at the gym or at work or on their date last night.
And you listen and you try to understand why they're so mad.
Maybe even secretly judge whether or not they should be so mad.
(Laughter) And maybe you even offer some suggestions.
Now, in that moment, you are doing essentially what I get to do every day, because I'm an anger researcher, and as an anger researcher, I spend a good part of my professional life -- who am I kidding, also my personal life -- studying why people get mad.
I study the types of thoughts they have when they get mad, and I even study what they do when they get mad, whether it's getting into fights or breaking things, or even yelling at people in all caps on the internet.
(Laughter) And as you can imagine, when people hear I'm an anger researcher, they want to talk to me about their anger, they want to share with me their anger stories.
And it's not because they need a therapist, though that does sometimes happen, it's really because anger is universal.
It's something we all feel and it's something they can relate to.
We've been feeling it since the first few months of life, when we didn't get what we wanted in our cries of protests, things like, "What do you mean you won't pick up the rattle, Dad, I want it!"
(Laughter) We feel it throughout our teenage years, as my mom can certainly attest to with me.
Sorry, Mom.
We feel it to the very end.
In fact, anger has been with us at some of the worst moments of our lives.
It's a natural and expected part of our grief.
But it's also been with us in some of the best moments of our lives, with those special occasions like weddings and vacations often marred by these everyday frustrations -- bad weather, travel delays -- that feel horrible in the moment, but then are ultimately forgotten when things go OK.
I have a lot of conversations with people about their anger and it's through those conversations that I've learned that many people, and I bet many people in this room right now, you see anger as a problem.
You see the way it interferes in your life, the way it damages relationships, maybe even the ways it's scary.
And while I get all of that, I see anger a little differently, and today, I want to tell you something really important about your anger, and it's this: anger is a powerful and healthy force in your life.
It's good that you feel it.
You need to feel it.
But to understand all that, we actually have to back up and talk about why we get mad in the first place.
A lot of this goes back to the work of an anger researcher named Dr. Jerry Deffenbacher, who wrote about this back in 1996 in a book chapter on how to deal with problematic anger.
Now, for most of us, and I bet most of you, it feels as simple as this: I get mad when I'm provoked.
You hear it in the language people use.
They say things like, "It makes me so mad when people drive this slow," or, "I got mad because she left the milk out again."
Or my favorite, "I don't have an anger problem -- people just need to stop messing with me."
(Laughter) Now, in the spirit of better understanding those types of provocations, I ask a lot of people, including my friends and colleagues and even family, "What are the things that really get to you?
What makes you mad?"
By the way, now is a good time to point out one of the advantages of being an anger researcher is that I've spent more than a decade generating a comprehensive list of all the things that really irritate my colleagues.
Just in case I need it.
(Laughter) But their answers are fascinating, because they say things like, "when my sports team loses," "people who chew too loudly."
That is surprisingly common, by the way.
"People who walk too slowly," that one's mine.
And of course, "roundabouts."
Roundabouts -- (Laughter) I can tell you honestly, there is no rage like roundabout rage.
(Laughter) Sometimes their answers aren't minor at all.
Sometimes they talk about racism and sexism and bullying and environmental destruction -- big, global problems we all face.
But sometimes, their answers are very specific, maybe even oddly specific.
"That wet line you get across your shirt when you accidentally lean against the counter of a public bathroom."
(Laughter) Super gross, right?
(Laughter) Or "Flash drives: there's only two ways to plug them in, so why does it always take me three tries?"
(Laughter) Now whether it's minor or major, whether it's general or specific, we can look at these examples and we can tease out some common themes.
We get angry in situations that are unpleasant, that feel unfair, where our goals are blocked, that could have been avoided, and that leave us feeling powerless.
This is a recipe for anger.
But you can also tell that anger is probably not the only thing we're feeling in these situations.
Anger doesn't happen in a vacuum.
We can feel angry at the same time that we're scared or sad, or feeling a host of other emotions.
But here's the thing: these provocations -- they aren't making us mad.
At least not on their own, and we know that, because if they were, we'd all get angry over the same things, and we don't.
The reasons I get angry are different than the reasons you get angry, so there's got to be something else going on.
What is that something else?
Well, we know what we're doing and feeling at the moment of that provocation matters.
We call this the pre-anger state -- are you hungry, are you tired, are you anxious about something else, are you running late for something?
When you're feeling those things, those provocations feel that much worse.
But what matters most is not the provocation, it's not the pre-anger state, it's this: it's how we interpret that provocation, it's how we make sense of it in our lives.
When something happens to us, we first decide, is this good or bad?
Is it fair or unfair, is it blameworthy, is it punishable?
That's primary appraisal, it's when you evaluate the event itself.
We decide what it means in the context of our lives and once we've done that, we decide how bad it is.
That's secondary appraisal.
We say, "Is this the worst thing that's ever happened, or can I cope with this?
Now, to illustrate that, I want you to imagine you are driving somewhere.
And before I go any further, I should tell you, if I were an evil genius and I wanted to create a situation that was going to make you mad, that situation would look a lot like driving.
(Laughter) It's true.
You are, by definition, on your way somewhere, so everything that happens -- traffic, other drivers, road construction -- it feels like it's blocking your goals.
There are all these written and unwritten rules of the road, and those rules are routinely violated right in front of you, usually without consequence.
And who's violating those rules?
Anonymous others, people you will never see again, making them a very easy target for your wrath.
(Laughter) So you're driving somewhere, thus teed up to be angry, and the person in front of you is driving well below the speed limit.
And it's frustrating because you can't really see why they're driving so slow.
That's primary appraisal.
You've looked at this and you've said it's bad and it's blameworthy.
But maybe you also decide it's not that big a deal.
That's secondary appraisal -- you don't get angry.
But now imagine you're on your way to a job interview.
What that person is doing, it hasn't changed, right?
So primary appraisal doesn't change; still bad, still blameworthy.
But your ability to cope with it sure does.
Because all of a sudden, you're going to be late to that job interview.
All of a sudden, you are not going to get your dream job, the one that was going to give you piles and piles of money.
(Laughter) Somebody else is going to get your dream job and you're going to be broke.
You're going to be destitute.
Might as well stop now, turn around, move in with your parents.
(Laughter) Why?
"Because of this person in front of me.
This is not a person, this is a monster."
(Laughter) And this monster is here just to ruin your life.
(Laughter) Now that thought process, it's called catastrophizing, the one where we make the worst of things.
And it's one of the primary types of thoughts that we know is associated with chronic anger.
But there's a couple of others.
Misattributing causation.
Angry people tend to put blame where it doesn't belong.
Not just on people, but actually inanimate objects as well.
And if you think that sound ridiculous, think about the last time you lost your car keys and you said, "Where did those car keys go?"
Because you know they ran off on their own.
(Laughter) They tend to overgeneralize, they use words like "always," "never," "every," "this always happens to me," "I never get what I want" or "I hit every stoplight on the way here today."
Demandingness: they put their own needs ahead of the needs of others: "I don't care why this person is driving so slow, they need to speed up or move over so I can get to this job interview."
And finally, inflammatory labeling.
They call people fools, idiots, monsters, or a whole bunch of things I've been told I'm not allowed to say during this TED Talk.
(Laughter) So for a long time, psychologists have referred to these as cognitive distortions or even irrational beliefs.
And yeah, sometimes they are irrational.
Maybe even most of the time.
But sometimes, these thoughts are totally rational.
There is unfairness in the world.
There are cruel, selfish people, and it's not only OK to be angry when we're treated poorly, it's right to be angry when we're treated poorly.
If there's one thing I want you to remember from my talk today, it's this: your anger exists in you as an emotion because it offered your ancestors, both human and nonhuman, with an evolutionary advantage.
Just as your fear alerts you to danger, your anger alerts you to injustice.
It's one of the ways your brain communicates to you that you have had enough.
What's more, it energizes you to confront that injustice.
Think for a second about the last time you got mad.
Your heart rate increased.
Your breathing increased, you started to sweat.
That's your sympathetic nervous system, otherwise known as your fight-or-flight system, kicking in to offer you the energy you need to respond.
And that's just the stuff you noticed.
At the same time, your digestive system slowed down so you could conserve energy.
That's why your mouth went dry.
And your blood vessels dilated to get blood to your extremities.
That's why your face went red.
It's all part of this complex pattern of physiological experiences that exist today because they helped your ancestors deal with cruel and unforgiving forces of nature.
And the problem is that the thing your ancestors did to deal with their anger, to physically fight, they are no longer reasonable or appropriate.
You can't and you shouldn't swing a club every time you're provoked.
(Laughter) But here's the good news.
You are capable of something your nonhuman ancestors weren't capable of.
And that is the capacity to regulate your emotions.
Even when you want to lash out, you can stop yourself and you can channel that anger into something more productive.
So often when we talk about anger, we talk about how to keep from getting angry.
We tell people to calm down or relax.
We even tell people to let it go.
And all of that assumes that anger is bad and that it's wrong to feel it.
But instead, I like to think of anger as a motivator.
The same way your thirst motivates you to get a drink of water, the same way your hunger motivates you to get a bite to eat, your anger can motivate you to respond to injustice.
Because we don't have to think too hard to find things we should be mad about.
When we go back to the beginning, yeah, some of those things, they're silly and not worth getting angry over.
But racism, sexism, bullying, environmental destruction, those things are real, those things are terrible, and the only way to fix them is to get mad first and then channel that anger into fighting back.
And you don't have to fight back with aggression or hostility or violence.
There are infinite ways that you can express your anger.
You can protest, you can write letters to the editor, you can donate to and volunteer for causes, you can create art, you can create literature, you can create poetry and music, you can create a community that cares for one another and does not allow those atrocities to happen.
So the next time you feel yourself getting angry, instead of trying to turn it off, I hope you'll listen to what that anger is telling you.
And then I hope you'll channel it into something positive and productive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If you take 10,000 people at random, 9,999 have something in common: their interests in business lie on or near the Earth's surface.
The odd one out is an astronomer, and I am one of that strange breed.
(Laughter) My talk will be in two parts. I'll talk first as an astronomer, and then as a worried member of the human race.
But let's start off by remembering that Darwin showed how we're the outcome of four billion years of evolution.
And what we try to do in astronomy and cosmology is to go back before Darwin's simple beginning, to set our Earth in a cosmic context.
And let me just run through a few slides.
This was the impact that happened last week on a comet.
If they'd sent a nuke, it would have been rather more spectacular than what actually happened last Monday.
So that's another project for NASA.
That's Mars from the European Mars Express, and at New Year.
This artist's impression turned into reality when a parachute landed on Titan, Saturn's giant moon.
It landed on the surface. This is pictures taken on the way down.
That looks like a coastline.
It is indeed, but the ocean is liquid methane -- the temperature minus 170 degrees centigrade.
If we go beyond our solar system, we've learned that the stars aren't twinkly points of light.
Each one is like a sun with a retinue of planets orbiting around it.
And we can see places where stars are forming, like the Eagle Nebula. We see stars dying.
In six billion years, the sun will look like that.
And some stars die spectacularly in a supernova explosion, leaving remnants like that.
On a still bigger scale, we see entire galaxies of stars.
We see entire ecosystems where gas is being recycled.
And to the cosmologist, these galaxies are just the atoms, as it were, of the large-scale universe.
This picture shows a patch of sky so small that it would take about 100 patches like it to cover the full moon in the sky.
Through a small telescope, this would look quite blank, but you see here hundreds of little, faint smudges.
Each is a galaxy, fully like ours or Andromeda, which looks so small and faint because its light has taken 10 billion light-years to get to us.
The stars in those galaxies probably don't have planets around them.
There's scant chance of life there -- that's because there's been no time for the nuclear fusion in stars to make silicon and carbon and iron, the building blocks of planets and of life.
We believe that all of this emerged from a Big Bang -- a hot, dense state. So how did that amorphous Big Bang turn into our complex cosmos?
I'm going to show you a movie simulation 16 powers of 10 faster than real time, which shows a patch of the universe where the expansions have subtracted out.
But you see, as time goes on in gigayears at the bottom, you will see structures evolve as gravity feeds on small, dense irregularities, and structures develop.
And we'll end up after 13 billion years with something looking rather like our own universe.
And we compare simulated universes like that -- I'll show you a better simulation at the end of my talk -- with what we actually see in the sky.
Well, we can trace things back to the earlier stages of the Big Bang, but we still don't know what banged and why it banged.
That's a challenge for 21st-century science.
If my research group had a logo, it would be this picture here: an ouroboros, where you see the micro-world on the left -- the world of the quantum -- and on the right the large-scale universe of planets, stars and galaxies.
We know our universes are united though -- links between left and right.
The everyday world is determined by atoms, how they stick together to make molecules.
Stars are fueled by how the nuclei in those atoms react together.
And, as we've learned in the last few years, galaxies are held together by the gravitational pull of so-called dark matter: particles in huge swarms, far smaller even than atomic nuclei.
But we'd like to know the synthesis symbolized at the very top.
The micro-world of the quantum is understood.
On the right hand side, gravity holds sway. Einstein explained that.
But the unfinished business for 21st-century science is to link together cosmos and micro-world with a unified theory -- symbolized, as it were, gastronomically at the top of that picture. (Laughter) And until we have that synthesis, we won't be able to understand the very beginning of our universe because when our universe was itself the size of an atom, quantum effects could shake everything.
And so we need a theory that unifies the very large and the very small, which we don't yet have.
One idea, incidentally -- and I had this hazard sign to say I'm going to speculate from now on -- is that our Big Bang was not the only one.
One idea is that our three-dimensional universe may be embedded in a high-dimensional space, just as you can imagine on these sheets of paper.
You can imagine ants on one of them thinking it's a two-dimensional universe, not being aware of another population of ants on the other.
So there could be another universe just a millimeter away from ours, but we're not aware of it because that millimeter is measured in some fourth spatial dimension, and we're imprisoned in our three.
And so we believe that there may be a lot more to physical reality than what we've normally called our universe -- the aftermath of our Big Bang. And here's another picture.
Bottom right depicts our universe, which on the horizon is not beyond that, but even that is just one bubble, as it were, in some vaster reality.
Many people suspect that just as we've gone from believing in one solar system to zillions of solar systems, one galaxy to many galaxies, we have to go to many Big Bangs from one Big Bang, perhaps these many Big Bangs displaying an immense variety of properties.
Well, let's go back to this picture.
There's one challenge symbolized at the top, but there's another challenge to science symbolized at the bottom.
You want to not only synthesize the very large and the very small, but we want to understand the very complex.
And the most complex things are ourselves, midway between atoms and stars.
We depend on stars to make the atoms we're made of.
We depend on chemistry to determine our complex structure.
We clearly have to be large, compared to atoms, to have layer upon layer of complex structure.
We clearly have to be small, compared to stars and planets -- otherwise we'd be crushed by gravity. And in fact, we are midway.
It would take as many human bodies to make up the sun as there are atoms in each of us.
The geometric mean of the mass of a proton and the mass of the sun is 50 kilograms, within a factor of two of the mass of each person here.
Well, most of you anyway.
The science of complexity is probably the greatest challenge of all, greater than that of the very small on the left and the very large on the right.
And it's this science, which is not only enlightening our understanding of the biological world, but also transforming our world faster than ever.
And more than that, it's engendering new kinds of change.
And I now move on to the second part of my talk, and the book "Our Final Century" was mentioned.
If I was not a self-effacing Brit, I would mention the book myself, and I would add that it's available in paperback.
(Laughter) And in America it was called "Our Final Hour" because Americans like instant gratification.
(Laughter) But my theme is that in this century, not only has science changed the world faster than ever, but in new and different ways.
Targeted drugs, genetic modification, artificial intelligence, perhaps even implants into our brains, may change human beings themselves. And human beings, their physique and character, has not changed for thousands of years.
It may change this century.
It's new in our history.
And the human impact on the global environment -- greenhouse warming, mass extinctions and so forth -- is unprecedented, too.
And so, this makes this coming century a challenge.
Bio- and cybertechnologies are environmentally benign in that they offer marvelous prospects, while, nonetheless, reducing pressure on energy and resources.
But they will have a dark side.
In our interconnected world, novel technology could empower just one fanatic, or some weirdo with a mindset of those who now design computer viruses, to trigger some kind on disaster.
Indeed, catastrophe could arise simply from technical misadventure -- error rather than terror.
And even a tiny probability of catastrophe is unacceptable when the downside could be of global consequence.
In fact, some years ago, Bill Joy wrote an article expressing tremendous concern about robots taking us over, etc.
I don't go along with all that, but it's interesting that he had a simple solution.
It was what he called "fine-grained relinquishment."
He wanted to give up the dangerous kind of science and keep the good bits. Now, that's absurdly naive for two reasons.
First, any scientific discovery has benign consequences as well as dangerous ones.
And also, when a scientist makes a discovery, he or she normally has no clue what the applications are going to be.
And so what this means is that we have to accept the risks if we are going to enjoy the benefits of science.
We have to accept that there will be hazards.
And I think we have to go back to what happened in the post-War era, post-World War II, when the nuclear scientists who'd been involved in making the atomic bomb, in many cases were concerned that they should do all they could to alert the world to the dangers.
And they were inspired not by the young Einstein, who did the great work in relativity, but by the old Einstein, the icon of poster and t-shirt, who failed in his scientific efforts to unify the physical laws.
He was premature. But he was a moral compass -- an inspiration to scientists who were concerned with arms control.
And perhaps the greatest living person is someone I'm privileged to know, Joe Rothblatt.
Equally untidy office there, as you can see.
He's 96 years old, and he founded the Pugwash movement.
He persuaded Einstein, as his last act, to sign the famous memorandum of Bertrand Russell.
And he sets an example of the concerned scientist.
And I think to harness science optimally, to choose which doors to open and which to leave closed, we need latter-day counterparts of people like Joseph Rothblatt.
We need not just campaigning physicists, but we need biologists, computer experts and environmentalists as well.
And I think academics and independent entrepreneurs have a special obligation because they have more freedom than those in government service, or company employees subject to commercial pressure.
I wrote my book, "Our Final Century," as a scientist, just a general scientist. But there's one respect, I think, in which being a cosmologist offered a special perspective, and that's that it offers an awareness of the immense future.
The stupendous time spans of the evolutionary past are now part of common culture -- outside the American Bible Belt, anyway -- (Laughter) but most people, even those who are familiar with evolution, aren't mindful that even more time lies ahead.
The sun has been shining for four and a half billion years, but it'll be another six billion years before its fuel runs out.
On that schematic picture, a sort of time-lapse picture, we're halfway.
And it'll be another six billion before that happens, and any remaining life on Earth is vaporized.
There's an unthinking tendency to imagine that humans will be there, experiencing the sun's demise, but any life and intelligence that exists then will be as different from us as we are from bacteria.
The unfolding of intelligence and complexity still has immensely far to go, here on Earth and probably far beyond.
So we are still at the beginning of the emergence of complexity in our Earth and beyond.
If you represent the Earth's lifetime by a single year, say from January when it was made to December, the 21st-century would be a quarter of a second in June -- a tiny fraction of the year.
But even in this concertinaed cosmic perspective, our century is very, very special, the first when humans can change themselves and their home planet.
As I should have shown this earlier, it will not be humans who witness the end point of the sun; it will be creatures as different from us as we are from bacteria.
When Einstein died in 1955, one striking tribute to his global status was this cartoon by Herblock in the Washington Post.
The plaque reads, "Albert Einstein lived here."
And I'd like to end with a vignette, as it were, inspired by this image.
We've been familiar for 40 years with this image: the fragile beauty of land, ocean and clouds, contrasted with the sterile moonscape on which the astronauts left their footprints.
But let's suppose some aliens had been watching our pale blue dot in the cosmos from afar, not just for 40 years, but for the entire 4.5 billion-year history of our Earth.
What would they have seen?
Over nearly all that immense time, Earth's appearance would have changed very gradually.
The only abrupt worldwide change would have been major asteroid impacts or volcanic super-eruptions.
Apart from those brief traumas, nothing happens suddenly.
The continental landmasses drifted around.
Ice cover waxed and waned.
Successions of new species emerged, evolved and became extinct.
But in just a tiny sliver of the Earth's history, the last one-millionth part, a few thousand years, the patterns of vegetation altered much faster than before.
This signaled the start of agriculture.
Change has accelerated as human populations rose.
Then other things happened even more abruptly.
Within just 50 years -- that's one hundredth of one millionth of the Earth's age -- the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere started to rise, and ominously fast.
The planet became an intense emitter of radio waves -- the total output from all TV and cell phones and radar transmissions. And something else happened.
Metallic objects -- albeit very small ones, a few tons at most -- escaped into orbit around the Earth.
Some journeyed to the moons and planets.
A race of advanced extraterrestrials watching our solar system from afar could confidently predict Earth's final doom in another six billion years.
But could they have predicted this unprecedented spike less than halfway through the Earth's life?
These human-induced alterations occupying overall less than a millionth of the elapsed lifetime and seemingly occurring with runaway speed?
If they continued their vigil, what might these hypothetical aliens witness in the next hundred years?
Will some spasm foreclose Earth's future?
Or will the biosphere stabilize?
Or will some of the metallic objects launched from the Earth spawn new oases, a post-human life elsewhere?
The science done by the young Einstein will continue as long as our civilization, but for civilization to survive, we'll need the wisdom of the old Einstein -- humane, global and farseeing.
And whatever happens in this uniquely crucial century will resonate into the remote future and perhaps far beyond the Earth, far beyond the Earth as depicted here.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
We all make decisions every day; we want to know what the right thing is to do -- in domains from the financial to the gastronomic to the professional to the romantic.
And surely, if somebody could really tell us how to do exactly the right thing at all possible times, that would be a tremendous gift.
It turns out that, in fact, the world was given this gift in 1738 by a Dutch polymath named Daniel Bernoulli.
And what I want to talk to you about today is what that gift is, and I also want to explain to you why it is that it hasn't made a damn bit of difference.
Now, this is Bernoulli's gift. This is a direct quote.
And if it looks like Greek to you, it's because, well, it's Greek.
But the simple English translation -- much less precise, but it captures the gist of what Bernoulli had to say -- was this: The expected value of any of our actions -- that is, the goodness that we can count on getting -- is the product of two simple things: the odds that this action will allow us to gain something, and the value of that gain to us.
In a sense, what Bernoulli was saying is, if we can estimate and multiply these two things, we will always know precisely how we should behave.
Now, this simple equation, even for those of you who don't like equations, is something that you're quite used to.
Here's an example: if I were to tell you, let's play a little coin toss game, and I'm going to flip a coin, and if it comes up heads, I'm going to pay you 10 dollars, but you have to pay four dollars for the privilege of playing with me, most of you would say, sure, I'll take that bet. Because you know that the odds of you winning are one half, the gain if you do is 10 dollars, that multiplies to five, and that's more than I'm charging you to play. So, the answer is, yes.
This is what statisticians technically call a damn fine bet.
Now, the idea is simple when we're applying it to coin tosses, but in fact, it's not very simple in everyday life.
People are horrible at estimating both of these things, and that's what I want to talk to you about today.
There are two kinds of errors people make when trying to decide what the right thing is to do, and those are errors in estimating the odds that they're going to succeed, and errors in estimating the value of their own success.
Now, let me talk about the first one first.
Calculating odds would seem to be something rather easy: there are six sides to a die, two sides to a coin, 52 cards in a deck.
You all know what the likelihood is of pulling the ace of spades or of flipping a heads.
But as it turns out, this is not a very easy idea to apply in everyday life. That's why Americans spend more -- I should say, lose more -- gambling than on all other forms of entertainment combined.
The reason is, this isn't how people do odds.
The way people figure odds requires that we first talk a bit about pigs.
Now, the question I'm going to put to you is whether you think there are more dogs or pigs on leashes observed in any particular day in Oxford.
And of course, you all know that the answer is dogs.
And the way that you know that the answer is dogs is you quickly reviewed in memory the times you've seen dogs and pigs on leashes.
It was very easy to remember seeing dogs, not so easy to remember pigs. And each one of you assumed that if dogs on leashes came more quickly to your mind, then dogs on leashes are more probable.
That's not a bad rule of thumb, except when it is.
So, for example, here's a word puzzle.
Are there more four-letter English words with R in the third place or R in the first place?
Well, you check memory very briefly, make a quick scan, and it's awfully easy to say to yourself, Ring, Rang, Rung, and very hard to say to yourself, Pare, Park: they come more slowly.
But in fact, there are many more words in the English language with R in the third than the first place.
The reason words with R in the third place come slowly to your mind isn't because they're improbable, unlikely or infrequent.
It's because the mind recalls words by their first letter.
You kind of shout out the sound, S -- and the word comes.
It's like the dictionary; it's hard to look things up by the third letter.
So, this is an example of how this idea that the quickness with which things come to mind can give you a sense of their probability -- how this idea could lead you astray. It's not just puzzles, though.
For example, when Americans are asked to estimate the odds that they will die in a variety of interesting ways -- these are estimates of number of deaths per year per 200 million U.S. citizens.
And these are just ordinary people like yourselves who are asked to guess how many people die from tornado, fireworks, asthma, drowning, etc.
Compare these to the actual numbers.
Now, you see a very interesting pattern here, which is first of all, two things are vastly over-estimated, namely tornadoes and fireworks.
Two things are vastly underestimated: dying by drowning and dying by asthma. Why?
When was the last time that you picked up a newspaper and the headline was, "Boy dies of Asthma?"
It's not interesting because it's so common.
It's very easy for all of us to bring to mind instances of news stories or newsreels where we've seen tornadoes devastating cities, or some poor schmuck who's blown his hands off with a firework on the Fourth of July.
Drownings and asthma deaths don't get much coverage.
They don't come quickly to mind, and as a result, we vastly underestimate them.
Indeed, this is kind of like the Sesame Street game of "Which thing doesn't belong?" And you're right to say it's the swimming pool that doesn't belong, because the swimming pool is the only thing on this slide that's actually very dangerous.
The way that more of you are likely to die than the combination of all three of the others that you see on the slide.
The lottery is an excellent example, of course -- an excellent test-case of people's ability to compute probabilities.
And economists -- forgive me, for those of you who play the lottery -- but economists, at least among themselves, refer to the lottery as a stupidity tax, because the odds of getting any payoff by investing your money in a lottery ticket are approximately equivalent to flushing the money directly down the toilet -- which, by the way, doesn't require that you actually go to the store and buy anything.
Why in the world would anybody ever play the lottery?
Well, there are many answers, but one answer surely is, we see a lot of winners. Right? When this couple wins the lottery, or Ed McMahon shows up at your door with this giant check -- how the hell do you cash things that size, I don't know.
We see this on TV; we read about it in the paper.
When was the last time that you saw extensive interviews with everybody who lost?
Indeed, if we required that television stations run a 30-second interview with each loser every time they interview a winner, the 100 million losers in the last lottery would require nine-and-a-half years of your undivided attention just to watch them say, "Me? I lost." "Me? I lost."
Now, if you watch nine-and-a-half years of television -- no sleep, no potty breaks -- and you saw loss after loss after loss, and then at the end there's 30 seconds of, "and I won," the likelihood that you would play the lottery is very small.
Look, I can prove this to you: here's a little lottery.
There's 10 tickets in this lottery.
Nine of them have been sold to these individuals.
It costs you a dollar to buy the ticket and, if you win, you get 20 bucks. Is this a good bet?
Well, Bernoulli tells us it is.
The expected value of this lottery is two dollars; this is a lottery in which you should invest your money.
And most people say, "OK, I'll play."
Now, a slightly different version of this lottery: imagine that the nine tickets are all owned by one fat guy named Leroy.
Leroy has nine tickets; there's one left.
Do you want it? Most people won't play this lottery.
Now, you can see the odds of winning haven't changed, but it's now fantastically easy to imagine who's going to win.
It's easy to see Leroy getting the check, right?
You can't say to yourself, "I'm as likely to win as anybody," because you're not as likely to win as Leroy.
The fact that all those tickets are owned by one guy changes your decision to play, even though it does nothing whatsoever to the odds.
Now, estimating odds, as difficult as it may seem, is a piece of cake compared to trying to estimate value: trying to say what something is worth, how much we'll enjoy it, how much pleasure it will give us.
I want to talk now about errors in value.
How much is this Big Mac worth? Is it worth 25 dollars?
Most of you have the intuition that it's not -- you wouldn't pay that for it.
But in fact, to decide whether a Big Mac is worth 25 dollars requires that you ask one, and only one question, which is: What else can I do with 25 dollars?
If you've ever gotten on one of those long-haul flights to Australia and realized that they're not going to serve you any food, but somebody in the row in front of you has just opened the McDonald's bag, and the smell of golden arches is wafting over the seat, you think, I can't do anything else with this 25 dollars for 16 hours.
I can't even set it on fire -- they took my cigarette lighter!
Suddenly, 25 dollars for a Big Mac might be a good deal.
On the other hand, if you're visiting an underdeveloped country, and 25 dollars buys you a gourmet meal, it's exorbitant for a Big Mac.
Why were you all sure that the answer to the question was no, before I'd even told you anything about the context?
Because most of you compared the price of this Big Mac to the price you're used to paying. Rather than asking, "What else can I do with my money," comparing this investment to other possible investments, you compared to the past.
And this is a systematic error people make.
What you knew is, you paid three dollars in the past; 25 is outrageous.
This is an error, and I can prove it to you by showing the kinds of irrationalities to which it leads.
For example, this is, of course, one of the most delicious tricks in marketing, is to say something used to be higher, and suddenly it seems like a very good deal.
When people are asked about these two different jobs: a job where you make 60K, then 50K, then 40K, a job where you're getting a salary cut each year, and one in which you're getting a salary increase, people like the second job better than the first, despite the fact they're all told they make much less money. Why?
Because they had the sense that declining wages are worse than rising wages, even when the total amount of wages is higher in the declining period. Here's another nice example.
Here's a $2,000 Hawaiian vacation package; it's now on sale for 1,600.
Assuming you wanted to go to Hawaii, would you buy this package?
Most people say they would. Here's a slightly different story: $2,000 Hawaiian vacation package is now on sale for 700 dollars, so you decide to mull it over for a week.
By the time you get to the ticket agency, the best fares are gone -- the package now costs 1,500. Would you buy it? Most people say, no.
Why? Because it used to cost 700, and there's no way I'm paying 1,500 for something that was 700 last week.
This tendency to compare to the past is causing people to pass up the better deal. In other words, a good deal that used to be a great deal is not nearly as good as an awful deal that was once a horrible deal.
Here's another example of how comparing to the past can befuddle our decisions.
Imagine that you're going to the theater.
You're on your way to the theater.
In your wallet you have a ticket, for which you paid 20 dollars.
You also have a 20-dollar bill.
When you arrive at the theater, you discover that somewhere along the way you've lost the ticket.
Would you spend your remaining money on replacing it?
Most people answer, no.
Now, let's just change one thing in this scenario.
You're on your way to the theater, and in your wallet you have two 20-dollar bills.
When you arrive you discover you've lost one of them.
Would you spend your remaining 20 dollars on a ticket?
Well, of course, I went to the theater to see the play.
What does the loss of 20 dollars along the way have to do?
Now, just in case you're not getting it, here's a schematic of what happened, OK?
(Laughter) Along the way, you lost something.
In both cases, it was a piece of paper.
In one case, it had a U.S. president on it; in the other case it didn't.
What the hell difference should it make?
The difference is that when you lost the ticket you say to yourself, I'm not paying twice for the same thing.
You compare the cost of the play now -- 40 dollars -- to the cost that it used to have -- 20 dollars -- and you say it's a bad deal.
Comparing with the past causes many of the problems that behavioral economists and psychologists identify in people's attempts to assign value.
But even when we compare with the possible, instead of the past, we still make certain kinds of mistakes.
And I'm going to show you one or two of them.
One of the things we know about comparison: that when we compare one thing to the other, it changes its value.
So in 1992, this fellow, George Bush, for those of us who were kind of on the liberal side of the political spectrum, didn't seem like such a great guy.
Suddenly, we're almost longing for him to return.
(Laughter) The comparison changes how we evaluate him.
Now, retailers knew this long before anybody else did, of course, and they use this wisdom to help you -- spare you the undue burden of money.
And so a retailer, if you were to go into a wine shop and you had to buy a bottle of wine, and you see them here for eight, 27 and 33 dollars, what would you do?
Most people don't want the most expensive, they don't want the least expensive.
So, they will opt for the item in the middle.
If you're a smart retailer, then, you will put a very expensive item that nobody will ever buy on the shelf, because suddenly the $33 wine doesn't look as expensive in comparison.
So I'm telling you something you already knew: namely, that comparison changes the value of things.
Here's why that's a problem: the problem is that when you get that $33 bottle of wine home, it won't matter what it used to be sitting on the shelf next to.
The comparisons we make when we are appraising value, where we're trying to estimate how much we'll like things, are not the same comparisons we'll be making when we consume them.
This problem of shifting comparisons can bedevil our attempts to make rational decisions.
Let me just give you an example.
I have to show you something from my own lab, so let me sneak this in.
These are subjects coming to an experiment to be asked the simplest of all questions: How much will you enjoy eating potato chips one minute from now?
They're sitting in a room with potato chips in front of them.
For some of the subjects, sitting in the far corner of a room is a box of Godiva chocolates, and for others is a can of Spam.
In fact, these items that are sitting in the room change how much the subjects think they're going to enjoy the potato chips.
Namely, those who are looking at Spam think potato chips are going to be quite tasty; those who are looking at Godiva chocolate think they won't be nearly so tasty.
Of course, what happens when they eat the potato chips?
Well, look, you didn't need a psychologist to tell you that when you have a mouthful of greasy, salty, crispy, delicious snacks, what's sitting in the corner of the room makes not a damn bit of difference to your gustatory experience.
Nonetheless, their predictions are perverted by a comparison that then does not carry through and change their experience.
You've all experienced this yourself, even if you've never come into our lab to eat potato chips. So here's a question: You want to buy a car stereo.
The dealer near your house sells this particular stereo for 200 dollars, but if you drive across town, you can get it for 100 bucks.
So would you drive to get 50 percent off, saving 100 dollars?
Most people say they would.
They can't imagine buying it for twice the price when, with one trip across town, they can get it for half off.
Now, let's imagine instead you wanted to buy a car that had a stereo, and the dealer near your house had it for 31,000.
But if you drove across town, you could get it for 30,900.
Would you drive to get it? At this point, 0.003 savings -- the 100 dollars.
Most people say, no, I'm going to schlep across town to save 100 bucks on the purchase of a car?
This kind of thinking drives economists crazy, and it should.
Because this 100 dollars that you save -- hello! -- doesn't know where it came from.
It doesn't know what you saved it on.
When you go to buy groceries with it, it doesn't go, I'm the money saved on the car stereo, or, I'm the dumb money saved on the car. It's money.
And if a drive across town is worth 100 bucks, it's worth 100 bucks no matter what you're saving it on. People don't think that way.
That's why they don't know whether their mutual fund manager is taking 0.1 percent or 0.15 percent of their investment, but they clip coupons to save one dollar off of toothpaste.
Now, you can see, this is the problem of shifting comparisons, because what you're doing is, you're comparing the 100 bucks to the purchase that you're making, but when you go to spend that money you won't be making that comparison.
You've all had this experience.
If you're an American, for example, you've probably traveled in France.
And at some point you may have met a couple from your own hometown, and you thought, "Oh, my God, these people are so warm. They're so nice to me.
I mean, compared to all these people who hate me when I try to speak their language and hate me more when I don't, these people are just wonderful." And so you tour France with them, and then you get home and you invite them over for dinner, and what do you find?
Compared to your regular friends, they are boring and dull, right? Because in this new context, the comparison is very, very different. In fact, you find yourself disliking them enough almost to qualify for French citizenship.
Now, you have exactly the same problem when you shop for a stereo.
You go to the stereo store, you see two sets of speakers -- these big, boxy, monoliths, and these little, sleek speakers, and you play them, and you go, you know, I do hear a difference: the big ones sound a little better.
And so you buy them, and you bring them home, and you entirely violate the décor of your house.
And the problem, of course, is that this comparison you made in the store is a comparison you'll never make again.
What are the odds that years later you'll turn on the stereo and go, "Sounds so much better than those little ones," which you can't even remember hearing.
The problem of shifting comparisons is even more difficult when these choices are arrayed over time.
People have a lot of trouble making decisions about things that will happen at different points in time.
And what psychologists and behavioral economists have discovered is that by and large people use two simple rules.
So let me give you one very easy problem, a second very easy problem and then a third, hard, problem.
Here's the first easy problem: You can have 60 dollars now or 50 dollars now. Which would you prefer?
This is what we call a one-item IQ test, OK?
All of us, I hope, prefer more money, and the reason is, we believe more is better than less.
Here's the second problem: You can have 60 dollars today or 60 dollars in a month. Which would you prefer?
Again, an easy decision, because we all know that now is better than later.
What's hard in our decision-making is when these two rules conflict.
For example, when you're offered 50 dollars now or 60 dollars in a month.
This typifies a lot of situations in life in which you will gain by waiting, but you have to be patient.
What do we know? What do people do in these kinds of situations?
Well, by and large people are enormously impatient.
That is, they require interest rates in the hundred or thousands of percents in order to delay gratification and wait until next month for the extra 10 dollars.
Maybe that isn't so remarkable, but what is remarkable is how easy it is to make this impatience go away by simply changing when the delivery of these monetary units will happen.
Imagine that you can have 50 dollars in a year -- that's 12 months -- or 60 dollars in 13 months.
What do we find now?
People are gladly willing to wait: as long as they're waiting 12, they might as well wait 13.
What makes this dynamic inconsistency happen?
Comparison. Troubling comparison. Let me show you.
This is just a graph showing the results that I just suggested you would show if I gave you time to respond, which is, people find that the subjective value of 50 is higher than the subjective value of 60 when they'll be delivered in now or one month, respectively -- a 30-day delay -- but they show the reverse pattern when you push the entire decision off into the future a year.
Now, why in the world do you get this pattern of results?
These guys can tell us.
What you see here are two lads, one of them larger than the other: the fireman and the fiddler.
They are going to recede towards the vanishing point in the horizon, and I want you to notice two things.
At no point will the fireman look taller than the fiddler. No point.
However, the difference between them seems to be getting smaller.
First it's an inch in your view, then it's a quarter-inch, then a half-inch, and then finally they go off the edge of the earth.
Here are the results of what I just showed you.
This is the subjective height -- the height you saw of these guys at various points.
And I want you to see that two things are true.
One, the farther away they are, the smaller they look; and two, the fireman is always bigger than the fiddler.
But watch what happens when we make some of them disappear. Right.
At a very close distance, the fiddler looks taller than the fireman, but at a far distance their normal, their true, relations are preserved.
As Plato said, what space is to size, time is to value.
These are the results of the hard problem I gave you: 60 now or 50 in a month?
And these are subjective values, and what you can see is, our two rules are preserved.
People always think more is better than less: 60 is always better than 50, and they always think now is better than later: the bars on this side are higher than the bars on this side.
Watch what happens when we drop some out.
Suddenly we have the dynamic inconsistency that puzzled us.
We have the tendency for people to go for 50 dollars now over waiting a month, but not if that decision is far in the future.
Notice something interesting that this implies -- namely, that when people get to the future, they will change their minds.
That is, as that month 12 approaches, you will say, what was I thinking, waiting an extra month for 60 dollars?
I'll take the 50 dollars now.
Well, the question with which I'd like to end is this: If we're so damn stupid, how did we get to the moon?
Because I could go on for about two hours with evidence of people's inability to estimate odds and inability to estimate value.
The answer to this question, I think, is an answer you've already heard in some of the talks, and I dare say you will hear again: namely, that our brains were evolved for a very different world than the one in which we are living.
They were evolved for a world in which people lived in very small groups, rarely met anybody who was terribly different from themselves, had rather short lives in which there were few choices and the highest priority was to eat and mate today.
Bernoulli's gift, Bernoulli's little formula, allows us, it tells us how we should think in a world for which nature never designed us.
That explains why we are so bad at using it, but it also explains why it is so terribly important that we become good, fast.
We are the only species on this planet that has ever held its own fate in its hands.
We have no significant predators, we're the masters of our physical environment; the things that normally cause species to become extinct are no longer any threat to us.
The only thing -- the only thing -- that can destroy us and doom us are our own decisions.
If we're not here in 10,000 years, it's going to be because we could not take advantage of the gift given to us by a young Dutch fellow in 1738, because we underestimated the odds of our future pains and overestimated the value of our present pleasures.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: That was remarkable.
We have time for some questions for Dan Gilbert. One and two.
Bill Lyell: Would you say that this mechanism is in part how terrorism actually works to frighten us, and is there some way that we could counteract that?
Dan Gilbert: I actually was consulting recently with the Department of Homeland Security, which generally believes that American security dollars should go to making borders safer.
I tried to point out to them that terrorism was a name based on people's psychological reaction to a set of events, and that if they were concerned about terrorism they might ask what causes terror and how can we stop people from being terrified, rather than -- not rather than, but in addition to stopping the atrocities that we're all concerned about.
Surely the kinds of play that at least American media give to -- and forgive me, but in raw numbers these are very tiny accidents.
We already know, for example, in the United States, more people have died as a result of not taking airplanes -- because they were scared -- and driving on highways, than were killed in 9/11. OK?
If I told you that there was a plague that was going to kill 15,000 Americans next year, you might be alarmed if you didn't find out it was the flu.
These are small-scale accidents, and we should be wondering whether they should get the kind of play, the kind of coverage, that they do.
Surely that causes people to overestimate the likelihood that they'll be hurt in these various ways, and gives power to the very people who want to frighten us.
CA: Dan, I'd like to hear more on this. So, you're saying that our response to terror is, I mean, it's a form of mental bug?
Talk more about it.
DG: It's out-sized. I mean, look.
If Australia disappears tomorrow, terror is probably the right response.
That's an awful large lot of very nice people. On the other hand, when a bus blows up and 30 people are killed, more people than that were killed by not using their seatbelts in the same country.
Is terror the right response?
CA: What causes the bug? Is it the drama of the event -- that it's so spectacular?
Is it the fact that it's an intentional attack by, quote, outsiders?
What is it?
DG: Yes. It's a number of things, and you hit on several of them.
First, it's a human agent trying to kill us -- it's not a tree falling on us by accident.
Second, these are enemies who may want to strike and hurt us again.
People are being killed for no reason instead of good reason -- as if there's good reason, but sometimes people think there are.
So there are a number of things that together make this seem like a fantastic event, but let's not play down the fact that newspapers sell when people see something in it they want to read. So there's a large role here played by the media, who want these things to be as spectacular as they possibly can.
CA: I mean, what would it take to persuade our culture to downplay it?
DG: Well, go to Israel. You know, go to Israel. And a mall blows up, and then everybody's unhappy about it, and an hour-and-a-half later -- at least when I was there, and I was 150 feet from the mall when it blew up -- I went back to my hotel and the wedding that was planned was still going on.
And as the Israeli mother said, she said, "We never let them win by stopping weddings."
I mean, this is a society that has learned -- and there are others too -- that has learned to live with a certain amount of terrorism and not be quite as upset by it, shall I say, as those of us who have not had many terror attacks.
CA: But is there a rational fear that actually, the reason we're frightened about this is because we think that the Big One is to come?
DG: Yes, of course. So, if we knew that this was the worst attack there would ever be, there might be more and more buses of 30 people -- we would probably not be nearly so frightened.
I don't want to say -- please, I'm going to get quoted somewhere as saying, "Terrorism is fine and we shouldn't be so distressed."
That's not my point at all.
What I'm saying is that, surely, rationally, our distress about things that happen, about threats, should be roughly proportional to the size of those threats and threats to come.
I think in the case of terrorism, it isn't.
And many of the things we've heard about from our speakers today -- how many people do you know got up and said, Poverty! I can't believe what poverty is doing to us.
People get up in the morning; they don't care about poverty.
It's not making headlines, it's not making news, it's not flashy.
There are no guns going off.
I mean, if you had to solve one of these problems, Chris, which would you solve? Terrorism or poverty?
(Laughter) (Applause) That's a tough one.
CA: There's no question.
Poverty, by an order of magnitude, a huge order of magnitude, unless someone can show that there's, you know, terrorists with a nuke are really likely to come.
The latest I've read, seen, thought is that it's incredibly hard for them to do that.
If that turns out to be wrong, we all look silly, but with poverty it's a bit -- DG: Even if that were true, still more people die from poverty.
CA: We've evolved to get all excited about these dramatic attacks. Is that because in the past, in the ancient past, we just didn't understand things like disease and systems that cause poverty and so forth, and so it made no sense for us as a species to put any energy into worrying about those things?
People died; so be it.
But if you got attacked, that was something you could do something about.
And so we evolved these responses.
Is that what happened?
DG: Well, you know, the people who are most skeptical about leaping to evolutionary explanations for everything are the evolutionary psychologists themselves.
My guess is that there's nothing quite that specific in our evolutionary past. But rather, if you're looking for an evolutionary explanation, you might say that most organisms are neo-phobic -- that is, they're a little scared of stuff that's new and different.
And there's a good reason to be, because old stuff didn't eat you. Right?
Any animal you see that you've seen before is less likely to be a predator than one that you've never seen before.
So, you know, when a school bus is blown up and we've never seen this before, our general tendency is to orient towards that which is new and novel is activated.
I don't think it's quite as specific a mechanism as the one you alluded to, but maybe a more fundamental one underlying it.
Jay Walker: You know, economists love to talk about the stupidity of people who buy lottery tickets. But I suspect you're making the exact same error you're accusing those people of, which is the error of value.
I know, because I've interviewed about 1,000 lottery buyers over the years.
It turns out that the value of buying a lottery ticket is not winning.
That's what you think it is. All right?
The average lottery buyer buys about 150 tickets a year, so the buyer knows full well that he or she is going to lose, and yet she buys 150 tickets a year. Why is that?
It's not because she is stupid or he is stupid.
It's because the anticipation of possibly winning releases serotonin in the brain, and actually provides a good feeling until the drawing indicates you've lost.
Or, to put it another way, for the dollar investment, you can have a much better feeling than flushing the money down the toilet, which you cannot have a good feeling from.
Now, economists tend to -- (Applause) -- economists tend to view the world through their own lenses, which is: this is just a bunch of stupid people.
And as a result, many people look at economists as stupid people.
And so fundamentally, the reason we got to the moon is, we didn't listen to the economists. Thank you very much.
(Applause) DG: Well, no, it's a great point. It remains to be seen whether the joy of anticipation is exactly equaled by the amount of disappointment after the lottery. Because remember, people who didn't buy tickets don't feel awful the next day either, even though they don't feel great during the drawing.
I would disagree that people know they're not going to win.
I think they think it's unlikely, but it could happen, which is why they prefer that to the flushing.
But certainly I see your point: that there can be some utility to buying a lottery ticket other than winning.
Now, I think there's many good reasons not to listen to economists.
That isn't one of them, for me, but there's many others.
CA: Last question.
Aubrey de Grey: My name's Aubrey de Grey, from Cambridge.
I work on the thing that kills more people than anything else kills -- I work on aging -- and I'm interested in doing something about it, as we'll all hear tomorrow.
I very much resonate with what you're saying, because it seems to me that the problem with getting people interested in doing anything about aging is that by the time aging is about to kill you it looks like cancer or heart disease or whatever. Do you have any advice?
(Laughter) DG: For you or for them?
AdG: In persuading them.
DG: Ah, for you in persuading them.
Well, it's notoriously difficult to get people to be farsighted.
But one thing that psychologists have tried that seems to work is to get people to imagine the future more vividly.
One of the problems with making decisions about the far future and the near future is that we imagine the near future much more vividly than the far future.
To the extent that you can equalize the amount of detail that people put into the mental representations of near and far future, people begin to make decisions about the two in the same way.
So, would you like to have an extra 100,000 dollars when you're 65 is a question that's very different than, imagine who you'll be when you're 65: will you be living, what will you look like, how much hair will you have, who will you be living with.
Once we have all the details of that imaginary scenario, suddenly we feel like it might be important to save so that that guy has a little retirement money.
But these are tricks around the margins.
I think in general you're battling a very fundamental human tendency, which is to say, "I'm here today, and so now is more important than later."
CA: Dan, thank you. Members of the audience, that was a fantastic session. Thank you.
(Applause)
In the German town of Nördlingen in 1593, an innkeeper named Maria Höll found herself accused of witchcraft.
She was arrested for questioning, and denied the charges.
She continued to insist she wasn’t a witch through 62 rounds of torture before her accusers finally released her.
Rebekka Lemp, accused a few years earlier in the same town, faced a worse fate.
She wrote to her husband from jail worrying that she would confess under torture, even though she was innocent.
After giving a false confession, she was burned at the stake in front of her family.
Höll and Lemp were both victims of the witch hunts that occurred in Europe and the American colonies from the late 15th century until the early 18th century.
These witch hunts were not a unified initiative by a single authority, but rather a phenomenon that occurred sporadically and followed a similar pattern each time.
The term “witch” has taken on many meanings, but in these hunts, a witch was someone who allegedly gained magical powers by obeying Satan rather than God.
This definition of witchcraft spread through churches in Western Europe starting at the end of the 15th century.
It really gained traction after the pope gave a friar and professor of theology named Heinrich Kraemer permission to conduct inquisitions in search of witches in 1485.
His first, in the town of Innsbruck, didn’t gain much traction with the local authorities, who disapproved of his harsh questioning of respectable citizens and shut down his trials.
Undeterred, he wrote a book called the "Malleus Maleficarum," or "Hammer of Witches."
The text argued for the existence of witches and suggested ruthless tactics for hunting and prosecuting them.
He singled out women as easier targets for the devil’s influence, though men could also be witches.
Kraemer’s book spurred others to write their own books and give sermons on the dangers of witchcraft.
According to these texts, witches practiced rituals including kissing the Devil’s anus and poisoning or bewitching targets the devil singled out for harm.
Though there was no evidence to support any of these claims, belief in witches became widespread.
A witch hunt often began with a misfortune: a failed harvest, a sick cow, or a stillborn child.
Community members blamed witchcraft, and accused each other of being witches.
Many of the accused were people on the fringes of society: the elderly, the poor, or social outcasts, but any member of the community could be targeted, even occasionally children.
While religious authorities encouraged witch hunts, local secular governments usually carried out the detainment and punishment of accused witches.
Those suspected of witchcraft were questioned and often tortured— and under torture, thousands of innocent people confessed to witchcraft and implicated others in turn.
Because these witch hunts occurred sporadically over centuries and continents the specifics varied considerably.
Punishments for convicted witches ranged from small fines to burning at the stake.
The hunt in which Höll and Lemp were accused dragged on for nine years, while others lasted just months.
They could have anywhere from a few to a few hundred victims.
The motivations of the witch hunters probably varied as well, but it seems likely that many weren’t consciously looking for scapegoats— instead, they sincerely believed in witchcraft, and thought they were doing good by rooting it out in their communities.
Institutions of power enabled real harm to be done on the basis of these beliefs.
But there were dissenters all along– jurists, scholars, and physicians countered books like Kraemer’s "Hammer of Witches" with texts objecting to the cruelty of the hunts, the use of forced confessions, and the lack of evidence of witchcraft.
From the late 17th through the mid-18th century, their arguments gained force with the rise of stronger central governments and legal norms like due process.
Witch hunting slowly declined until it disappeared altogether.
Both the onset and demise of these atrocities came gradually, out of seemingly ordinary circumstances.
The potential for similar situations, in which authorities use their powers to mobilize society against a false threat, still exists today— but so does the capacity of reasoned dissent to combat those false beliefs.
Insulin pumps improve the lives of many of the 415 million people with diabetes around the world by monitoring blood sugar, delivering insulin, and preventing the need for constant finger-pricking and blood testing.
These small machines include a pump and a needle, which can sense glucose levels, feed back to the pump, and then calculate how much insulin to deliver through the needle.
But they have a catch: they’re temporary.
Within a few days, glucose sensors have to be moved and replaced.
And it’s not just glucose monitors and insulin pumps that have this problem, but all bodily implants, at different time scales.
Plastic prosthetic knees have to be replaced after about 20 years.
Other implants, such as those used for cosmetic reasons, can meet the same fate in about 10.
That isn’t just a nuisance: it can be expensive and risky.
This inconvenience happens because of our bodies’ immune systems.
Honed by several hundred million years of evolution, these defensive fronts have become exceptionally good at identifying foreign objects.
Our immune systems boast an impressive arsenal of tools to tackle, intercept, and destroy anything they believe shouldn’t be there.
But the consequence of this constant surveillance is that our bodies treat helpful implants, like insulin pumps, with the same suspicion as they would a harmful virus or bacteria.
As soon as the insulin pump has been implanted in the skin, its presence triggers what’s known as a “foreign body response.” This starts with free-floating proteins that stick themselves to the surface of the implant.
Those proteins include antibodies, which attempt to neutralize the new object and send out a signal that calls other immune cells to the site to strengthen the attack.
Early-responding inflammatory cells, like neutrophils and macrophages, respond to the emergency call.
Neutrophils release little granules filled with enzymes that try to break down the surface of the insulin pump’s needle.
Macrophages secrete enzymes too, together with nitric oxide radicals, which create a chemical reaction that degrades the object over time.
If the macrophages are unable to dispatch the foreign body rapidly, they fuse together, forming a mass of cells called a “giant cell.” At the same time, cells called fibroblasts travel to the site and begin to deposit layers of dense connective tissue.
Those enclose the needle that the pump uses to deliver insulin and test for glucose levels.
Over time this scaffolding builds up, forming a scar around the implant.
The scar functions as an almost impenetrable wall that might start to block vital interactions between the body and the implant.
For example, scarring around pacemakers can interrupt the electrical transmission that’s crucial for their functioning.
Synthetic knee joints may give off particles as they’re worn down, causing immune cells to inflame around these fragments.
Tragically, the immune system’s attack can even be life-threatening.
However, researchers are finding ways to trick the immune system into accepting the new devices we introduce into our bodily tissues.
We’ve discovered that coating implants with certain chemicals and drugs can dampen the immune response.
Those basically make the implants invisible to the immune system.
We’re also making more implants out of natural materials and in forms that directly mimic tissues, so that the body launches a weaker attack than it would if it came across a completely artificial implant.
Some medical treatments involve implants designed to regenerate lost or damaged tissues.
In those cases, we can design the implants to contain ingredients that will release specific signals, and carefully tailor our bodies’ immune reactions.
In the future, this way of working alongside the immune system could help us develop completely artificial organs, totally integrative prostheses, and self-healing wound therapies.
These treatments might one day revolutionize medicine– and transform, forever, the bodies we live in.
The career that I started early on in my life was looking for exotic life forms in exotic places, and at that time I was working in the Antarctic and the Arctic, and high deserts and low deserts.
Until about a dozen years ago, when I was really captured by caves, and I really re-focused most of my research in that direction.
So I have a really cool day job-- I get to do some really amazing stuff.
I work in some of the most extreme cave environments on the planet.
Many of them are trying to kill us from the minute we go into them, but nevertheless, they're absolutely gripping, and contain unbelievable biological wonders that are very, very different from those that we have on the planet.
Apart from the intrinsic value of the biology and mineralogy and geo-microbiology that we do there, we're also using these as templates for figuring out how to go look for life on other planets.
Particularly Mars, but also Europa, the small, icy moon around Jupiter.
And perhaps, someday, far beyond our solar system itself.
I'm very passionately interested in the human future, on the Moon and Mars particularly, and elsewhere in the solar system.
I think it's time that we transitioned to a solar system-going civilization and species.
And, as an outgrowth of all of this then, I wonder about whether we can, and whether we even should, think about transporting Earth-type life to other planets.
Notably Mars, as a first example.
Something I never talk about in scientific meetings is how I actually got to this state and why I do the work that I do.
Why don't I have a normal job, a sensible job?
And then of course, I blame the Soviet Union.
Because in the mid-1950s, when I was a tiny child, they had the audacity to launch a very primitive little satellite called Sputnik, which sent the Western world into a hysterical tailspin.
And a tremendous amount of money went into the funding of science and mathematics skills for kids.
And I'm a product of that generation, like so many other of my peers.
It really caught hold of us, and caught fire, and it would be lovely if we could reproduce that again now.
Of course, refusing to grow up -- -- even though I impersonate a grown-up in daily life, but I do a fairly good job of that -- but really retaining that childlike quality of not caring what other people think about what you're interested in, is really critical.
The next element is the fact that I have applied a value judgment and my value judgment is that the presence of life is better than no life.
And so, life is more valuable than no life.
And so I think that that holds together a great deal of the work that people in this audience approach.
I'm very interested in Mars, of course, and that was a product of my being a young undergraduate when the Viking Landers landed on Mars.
And that took what had been a tiny little astronomical object in the sky, that you would see as a dot, and turned it completely into a landscape, as that very first primitive picture came rastering across the screen.
And when it became a landscape, it also became a destination, and altered, really, the course of my life.
In my graduate years I worked with my colleague and mentor and friend, Steve Schneider, at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, working on global change issues.
We've written a number of things on the role of Gaia hypothesis -- whether or not you could consider Earth as a single entity in any meaningful scientific sense, and then, as an outgrowth of that, I worked on the environmental consequences of nuclear war.
So, wonderful things and grim things.
But what it taught me was to look at Earth as a planet with external eyes, not just as our home.
And that is a wonderful stepping away in perspective, to try to then think about the way our planet behaves, as a planet, and with the life that's on it.
And all of this seems to me to be a salient point in history.
We're getting ready to begin to go through the process of leaving our planet of origin and out into the wider solar system and beyond.
So, back to Mars.
How hard is it going to be to find life on Mars?
Well, sometimes it's really very hard for us to find each other, even on this planet.
So, finding life on another planet is a non-trivial occupation and we spend a lot of time trying to think about that.
Whether or not you think it's likely to be successful sort of depends on what you think about the chances of life in the universe.
I think, myself, that life is a natural outgrowth of the increasing complexification of matter over time.
So, you start with the Big Bang and you get hydrogen, and then you get helium, and then you get more complicated stuff, and you get planets forming -- and life is a common, planetary-based phenomenon, in my view.
Certainly, in the last 15 years, we've seen increasing numbers of planets outside of our solar system being confirmed, and just last month, a couple of weeks ago, a planet in the size-class of Earth has actually been found.
And so this is very exciting news.
So, my first bold prediction is that, is that in the universe, life is going to be everywhere.
It's going to be everywhere we look -- where there are planetary systems that can possibly support it.
And those planetary systems are going to be very common.
So, what about life on Mars?
Well, if somebody had asked me about a dozen years ago what I thought the chances of life on Mars would be, I would've probably said, a couple of percent.
And even that was considered outrageous at the time.
I was once sneeringly introduced by a former NASA official, as the only person on the planet who still thought there was life on Mars.
Of course, that official is now dead, and I'm not, so there's a certain amount of glory in outliving your adversaries.
But things have changed greatly over the last dozen years.
And the reason that they have changed is because we now have new information.
The amazing Pathfinder mission that went in '97, and the MER Rover missions that are on Mars as we speak now and the European Space Agency's Mars Express, has taught us a number of amazing things.
There is sub-surface ice on that planet.
And so where there is water, there is a very high chance of our kind of life.
There's clearly sedimentary rocks all over the place – one of the landers is sitting in the middle of an ancient seabed, and there are these amazing structures called blueberries, which are these little, rocky concretions that we are busy making biologically in my lab right now.
So, with all of these things put together, I think that the chances of life are much greater than I would've ever thought.
I think that the chance of life having arisen on Mars, sometime in its past, is maybe one in four to maybe even half and half.
So this is a very bold statement.
I think it's there, and I think we need to go look for it, and I think it's underground.
So the game's afoot, and this is the game that we play in astro-biology.
How do you try to get a handle on extraterrestrial life?
How do you plan to look for it?
How do you know it when you find it?
Because if it's big and obvious, we would've already found it -- it would've already bitten us on the foot, and it hasn't.
So, we know that it's probably quite cryptic.
Very critically, how do we protect it, if we find it, and not contaminate it?
And also, even perhaps more critically, because this is the only home planet we have, how do we protect us from it, while we study it?
So why might it be hard to find?
Well, it's probably microscopic, and it's never easy to study microscopic things, although the amazing tools that we now have to do that allow us to study things in much greater depth, at much smaller scales than ever before.
But it's probably hiding, because if you are out sequestering resources from your environment, that makes you yummy, and other things might want to eat you, or consume you.
And so, there's a game of predator-prey that's going to be, essentially, universal, really, in any kind of biological system.
It also may be very, very different in its fundamental properties – its chemistry, or its size.
We say small, but what does that mean?
Is it virus-sized? Is it smaller than that?
Is it bigger than the biggest bacterium? We don't know.
And speed of activity, which is something that we face in our work with sub-surface organisms, because they grow very, very slowly.
If I were to take a swab off your teeth and plate it on a Petri plate, within about four or five hours, I would have to see growth.
But the organisms that we work with, from the sub-surface of Earth, very often it's months -- and in many cases, years -- before we see any growth whatsoever.
So they are, intrinsically, a slower life-form.
But the real issue is that we are guided by our limited experience, and until we can think out of the box of our cranium and what we know, then we can't recognize what to look for, or how to plan for it.
So, perspective is everything and, because of the history that I've just briefly talked to you about, I have learned to think about Earth as an extraterrestrial planet.
And this has been invaluable in our approach to try to study these things.
This is my favorite game on airplanes: where you're in an airplane and you look out the window, you see the horizon.
I always turn my head on the side, and that simple change makes me go from seeing this planet as home, to seeing it as a planet.
It's a very simple trick, and I never fail to do it when I'm sitting in a window seat.
Well, this is what we apply to our work.
This shows one of the most extreme caves that we work in.
This is Cueva de Villa Luz in Tabasco, in Mexico, and this cave is saturated with sulfuric acid.
There is tremendous amounts of hydrogen sulfide coming into this cave from volcanic sources and from the breakdown of evaporite -- minerals below the carbonates in which this cave is formed -- and it is a completely hostile environment for us.
We have to go in with protective suits and breathing gear, and 30 parts per million of H2S will kill you.
This is regularly several hundred parts per million.
So, it's a very hazardous environment, with CO as well, and many other gases.
These extreme physical and chemical parameters make the biology that grows in these places very special.
Because contrary to what you might think, this is not devoid of life.
This is one of the richest caves that we have found on the planet, anywhere.
It's bursting with life.
The extremes on Earth are interesting in their own right, but one of the reasons that we're interested in them is because they represent, really, the average conditions that we may expect on other planets.
So, this is part of the ability that we have, to try to stretch our imagination, in terms of what we may find in the future.
There's so much life in this cave, and I can't even begin to scratch the surface of it with you.
But one of the most famous objects out of this are what we call Snottites, for obvious reasons.
This stuff looks like what comes out of your two-year-old's nose when he has a cold.
And this is produced by bacteria who are actually making more sulfuric acid, and living at pHs right around zero.
And so, this stuff is like battery acid.
And yet, everything in this cave has adapted to it.
In fact, there's so much energy available for biology in this cave, that there's actually a huge number of cavefish.
And the local Zoque Indians harvest this twice a year, as part of their Easter week celebration and Holy Week celebration.
This is very unusual for caves.
In some of the other amazing caves that we work in -- this is in Lechuguilla cave in New Mexico near Carlsbad, and this is one of the most famous caves in the world.
It's 115 miles of mapped passage, it's pristine, it has no natural opening and it's a gigantic biological, geo-microbiological laboratory.
In this cave, great areas are covered by this reddish material that you see here, and also these enormous crystals of selenite that you can see dangling down.
This stuff is produced biologically.
This is the breakdown product of the bedrock, that organisms are busy munching their way through.
They take iron and manganese minerals within the bedrock and they oxidize them.
And every time they do that, they get a tiny little packet of energy.
And that tiny little packet of energy is what they use, then, to run their life processes.
Interestingly enough, they also do this with uranium and chromium, and various other toxic metals.
And so, the obvious avenue for bio-remediation comes from organisms like this.
These organisms we now bring into the lab, and you can see some of them growing on Petri plates, and get them to reproduce the precise biominerals that we find on the walls of these caves.
So, these are signals that they leave in the rock record.
Well, even in basalt surfaces in lava-tube caves, which are a by-product of volcanic activity, we find these walls totally covered, in many cases, by these beautiful, glistening silver walls, or shiny pink or shiny red or shiny gold.
And these are mineral deposits that are also made by bacteria.
And you can see in these central images here, scanning electron micrographs of some of these guys -- these are gardens of these bacteria.
One of the interesting things about these particular guys is that they're in the actinomycete and streptomycete groups of the bacteria, which is where we get most of our antibiotics.
The sub-surface of Earth contains a vast biodiversity.
And these organisms, because they're very separate from the surface, make a vast array of novel compounds.
And so, the potential for exploiting this for pharmaceutical and industrial chemical uses is completely untapped, but probably exceeds most of the rest of the biodiversity of the planet.
So, lava-tube caves-- I've just told you about organisms that live here on this planet.
We know that on Mars and the Moon there are tons of these structures.
We can see them.
On the left you can see a lava tube forming at a recent eruption -- Mount Etna in Sicily -- and this is the way these tubes form.
And when they hollow out, then they become habitats for organisms.
These are all over the planet Mars, and we're busy cataloguing them now.
And so, there's very interesting cave real estate on Mars, at least of that type.
In order to access these sub-surface environments that we're interested in, we're very interested in developing the tools to do this.
You know, it's not easy to get into these caves.
It requires crawling, climbing, rope-work, technical rope-work and many other complex human motions in order to access these.
We face the problem of, how can we do this robotically?
Why would we want to do it robotically?
Well, we're going to be sending robotic missions to Mars long in advance of human missions.
And then, secondly, getting back to that earlier point that I made about the preciousness of any life that we may find on Mars, we don't want to contaminate it.
And one of the best ways to study something without contaminating it is to have an intermediary.
And in this case, we're imagining intermediary robotic devices that can actually do some of that front-end work for us, to protect any potential life that we find.
I'm not going to go through all of these projects now, but we're involved in about half-a-dozen robotic development projects, in collaboration with a number of different groups.
I want to talk specifically about the array that you see on the top.
These are hopping microbot swarms.
I'm working on this with the Field and Space Robotics Laboratory and my friend Steve Dubowsky at MIT, and we have come up with the idea of having little, jumping bean-like robots that are propelled by artificial muscle, which is one of the Dubowsky Lab's specialties -- are the EPAMs, or artificial muscles.
And these allow them to hop.
They behave with a swarm behavior, where they relate to each other, modeled after insect swarm behavior, and they could be made very numerous.
And so, one can send a thousand of them, as you can see in this upper left-hand picture, a thousand of them could fit into the payload bay that was used for one of the current MER Rovers.
And these little guys -- you could lose many of them.
If you send a thousand of them, you could probably get rid of 90 percent of them and still have a mission.
And so, that allows you the flexibility to go into very challenging terrain and actually make your way where you want to go.
Now, to wrap this up, I want to talk for two seconds about caves and the human expansion beyond Earth as a natural outgrowth of the work that we do in caves.
It occurred to us a number of years ago that caves have many properties that people have used and other organisms have used as habitat in the past.
And perhaps it's time we started to explore those, in the context of future Mars and the Moon exploration.
So, we have just finished a NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts Phase II study, looking at the irreducible set of technologies that you would need in order to actually allow people to inhabit lava tubes on the Moon or Mars.
It turns out to be a fairly simple and small list, and we have gone in the relatively primitive technology direction.
So, we're talking about things like inflatable liners that can conform to the complex topological shape on the inside of a cave, foamed-in-place airlocks to deal with this complex topology, various ways of getting breathing gases made from the intrinsic materials of these bodies.
And the future is there for us to use these lava-tube caves on Mars.
And right now we're in caves, and we're doing science and recreation, but I think in the future we'll be using them for habitat and science on these other bodies.
Now, my view of what the current status of potential life on Mars is that it's probably been on the planet, maybe one in two chances.
The question as to whether there is life on Mars that is related to life on Earth has now been very muddied, because we now know, from Mars meteorites that have made it to Earth, that there's material that can be exchanged between those two planets.
One of the burning questions, of course, is if we go there and find life in the sub-surface, as I fully expect that we will, is that a second genesis of life?
Did life start here and was it transported there?
Did it start there and get transported here?
This will be a fascinating puzzle as we go into the next half-century, and where I expect that we will have more and more Mars missions to answer these questions.
Thank you.
I was trying to think, how is sync connected to happiness, and it occurred to me that for some reason we take pleasure in synchronizing.
We like to dance together, we like singing together.
And so, if you'll put up with this, I would like to enlist your help with a first experiment today. The experiment is -- and I notice, by the way, that when you applauded, that you did it in a typical North American way, that is, you were raucous and incoherent.
You were not organized. It didn't even occur to you to clap in unison.
Do you think you could do it? I would like to see if this audience would -- no, you haven't practiced, as far as I know -- can you get it together to clap in sync?
(Clapping) Whoa! Now, that's what we call emergent behavior.
(Laughter) So I didn't expect that, but -- I mean, I expected you could synchronize.
It didn't occur to me you'd increase your frequency.
It's interesting.
(Laughter) So what do we make of that? First of all, we know that you're all brilliant.
This is a room full of intelligent people, highly sensitive.
Some trained musicians out there.
Is that what enabled you to synchronize?
So to put the question a little more seriously, let's ask ourselves what are the minimum requirements for what you just did, for spontaneous synchronization.
Do you need, for instance, to be as smart as you are?
Do you even need a brain at all just to synchronize?
Do you need to be alive? I mean, that's a spooky thought, right?
Inanimate objects that might spontaneously synchronize themselves.
It's real. In fact, I'll try to explain today that sync is maybe one of, if not one of the most, perhaps the most pervasive drive in all of nature.
It extends from the subatomic scale to the farthest reaches of the cosmos.
It's a deep tendency toward order in nature that opposes what we've all been taught about entropy.
I mean, I'm not saying the law of entropy is wrong -- it's not.
But there is a countervailing force in the universe -- the tendency towards spontaneous order. And so that's our theme.
Now, to get into that, let me begin with what might have occurred to you immediately when you hear that we're talking about synchrony in nature, which is the glorious example of birds that flock together, or fish swimming in organized schools.
So these are not particularly intelligent creatures, and yet, as we'll see, they exhibit beautiful ballets.
This is from a BBC show called "Predators," and what we're looking at here are examples of synchrony that have to do with defense.
When you're small and vulnerable, like these starlings, or like the fish, it helps to swarm to avoid predators, to confuse predators.
Let me be quiet for a second because this is so gorgeous.
For a long time, biologists were puzzled by this behavior, wondering how it could be possible.
We're so used to choreography giving rise to synchrony.
These creatures are not choreographed.
They're choreographing themselves.
I'll show you a computer model made by Iain Couzin, a researcher at Oxford, that shows how swarms work.
There are just three simple rules.
First, all the individuals are only aware of their nearest neighbors.
Second, all the individuals have a tendency to line up.
And third, they're all attracted to each other, but they try to keep a small distance apart.
And when you build those three rules in, automatically you start to see swarms that look very much like fish schools or bird flocks.
Now, fish like to stay close together, about a body length apart.
Birds try to stay about three or four body lengths apart.
But except for that difference, the rules are the same for both.
Now, all this changes when a predator enters the scene.
There's a fourth rule: when a predator's coming, get out of the way.
Here on the model you see the predator attacking.
The prey move out in random directions, and then the rule of attraction brings them back together again, so there's this constant splitting and reforming.
And you see that in nature.
Keep in mind that, although it looks as if each individual is acting to cooperate, what's really going on is a kind of selfish Darwinian behavior.
Each is scattering away at random to try to save its scales or feathers.
That is, out of the desire to save itself, each creature is following these rules, and that leads to something that's safe for all of them.
Even though it looks like they're thinking as a group, they're not.
You might wonder what exactly is the advantage to being in a swarm, so you can think of several.
As I say, if you're in a swarm, your odds of being the unlucky one are reduced as compared to a small group.
There are many eyes to spot danger.
And you'll see in the example with the starlings, with the birds, when this peregrine hawk is about to attack them, that actually waves of panic can propagate, sending messages over great distances.
You'll see -- let's see, it's coming up possibly at the very end -- maybe not.
Information can be sent over half a kilometer away in a very short time through this mechanism.
Yes, it's happening here.
See if you can see those waves propagating through the swarm.
It's beautiful. The birds are, we sort of understand, we think, from that computer model, what's going on.
As I say, it's just those three simple rules, plus the one about watch out for predators.
There doesn't seem to be anything mystical about this.
We don't, however, really understand at a mathematical level.
I'm a mathematician. We would like to be able to understand better.
I mean, I showed you a computer model, but a computer is not understanding.
A computer is, in a way, just another experiment.
We would really like to have a deeper insight into how this works and to understand, you know, exactly where this organization comes from.
How do the rules give rise to the patterns?
There is one case that we have begun to understand better, and it's the case of fireflies.
If you see fireflies in North America, like so many North American sorts of things, they tend to be independent operators. They ignore each other.
They each do their own thing, flashing on and off, paying no attention to their neighbors.
But in Southeast Asia -- places like Thailand or Malaysia or Borneo -- there's a beautiful cooperative behavior that occurs among male fireflies.
You can see it every night along the river banks.
The trees, mangrove trees, are filled with fireflies communicating with light.
Specifically, it's male fireflies who are all flashing in perfect time together, in perfect synchrony, to reinforce a message to the females.
And the message, as you can imagine, is "Come hither. Mate with me."
(Music) In a second I'm going to show you a slow motion of a single firefly so that you can get a sense. This is a single frame.
Then on, and then off -- a 30th of a second, there.
And then watch this whole river bank, and watch how precise the synchrony is.
On, more on and then off.
The combined light from these beetles -- these are actually tiny beetles -- is so bright that fishermen out at sea can use them as navigating beacons to find their way back to their home rivers. It's stunning.
For a long time it was not believed when the first Western travelers, like Sir Francis Drake, went to Thailand and came back with tales of this unbelievable spectacle.
No one believed them.
We don't see anything like this in Europe or in the West.
And for a long time, even after it was documented, it was thought to be some kind of optical illusion.
Scientific papers were published saying it was twitching eyelids that explained it, or, you know, a human being's tendency to see patterns where there are none.
But I hope you've convinced yourself now, with this nighttime video, that they really were very well synchronized.
Okay, well, the issue then is, do we need to be alive to see this kind of spontaneous order, and I've already hinted that the answer is no.
Well, you don't have to be a whole creature.
You can even be just a single cell.
Like, take, for instance, your pacemaker cells in your heart right now.
They're keeping you alive.
Every beat of your heart depends on this crucial region, the sinoatrial node, which has about 10,000 independent cells that would each beep, have an electrical rhythm -- a voltage up and down -- to send a signal to the ventricles to pump.
Now, your pacemaker is not a single cell.
It's this democracy of 10,000 cells that all have to fire in unison for the pacemaker to work correctly.
I don't want to give you the idea that synchrony is always a good idea.
If you have epilepsy, there is an instance of billions of brain cells, or at least millions, discharging in pathological concert.
So this tendency towards order is not always a good thing.
You don't have to be alive. You don't have to be even a single cell.
If you look, for instance, at how lasers work, that would be a case of atomic synchrony.
In a laser, what makes laser light so different from the light above my head here is that this light is incoherent -- many different colors and different frequencies, sort of like the way you clapped initially -- but if you were a laser, it would be rhythmic applause.
It would be all atoms pulsating in unison, emitting light of one color, one frequency.
Now comes the very risky part of my talk, which is to demonstrate that inanimate things can synchronize.
Hold your breath for me.
What I have here are two empty water bottles.
This is not Keith Barry doing a magic trick.
This is a klutz just playing with some water bottles.
I have some metronomes here.
Can you hear that?
All right, so, I've got a metronome, and it's the world's smallest metronome, the -- well, I shouldn't advertise.
Anyway, so this is the world's smallest metronome.
I've set it on the fastest setting, and I'm going to now take another one set to the same setting.
We can try this first. If I just put them on the table together, there's no reason for them to synchronize, and they probably won't.
Maybe you'd better listen to them. I'll stand here.
What I'm hoping is that they might just drift apart because their frequencies aren't perfectly the same.
Right? They did.
They were in sync for a while, but then they drifted apart.
And the reason is that they're not able to communicate.
How can metronomes communicate?
Well, they can communicate through mechanical forces.
So I'm going to give them a chance to do that.
I'm going to put them on a movable platform, which is the "Guide to Graduate Study at Cornell." Okay? So here it is.
Let's see if we can get this to work.
My wife pointed out to me that it will work better if I put both on at the same time because otherwise the whole thing will tip over.
All right. So there we go. Let's see. OK, I'm not trying to cheat -- let me start them out of sync. No, hard to even do that.
(Applause) All right. So before any one goes out of sync, I'll just put those right there.
(Laughter) Now, that might seem a bit whimsical, but this pervasiveness of this tendency towards spontaneous order sometimes has unexpected consequences.
And a clear case of that, was something that happened in London in the year 2000.
The Millennium Bridge was supposed to be the pride of London -- a beautiful new footbridge erected across the Thames, first river crossing in over 100 years in London.
There was a big competition for the design of this bridge, and the winning proposal was submitted by an unusual team -- in the TED spirit, actually -- of an architect -- perhaps the greatest architect in the United Kingdom, Lord Norman Foster -- working with an artist, a sculptor, Sir Anthony Caro, and an engineering firm, Ove Arup.
And together they submitted a design based on Lord Foster's vision, which was -- he remembered as a kid reading Flash Gordon comic books, and he said that when Flash Gordon would come to an abyss, he would shoot what today would be a kind of a light saber.
He would shoot his light saber across the abyss, making a blade of light, and then scamper across on this blade of light.
He said, "That's the vision I want to give to London.
I want a blade of light across the Thames."
So they built the blade of light, and it's a very thin ribbon of steel, the world's -- probably the flattest and thinnest suspension bridge there is, with cables that are out on the side.
You're used to suspension bridges with big droopy cables on the top.
These cables were on the side of the bridge, like if you took a rubber band and stretched it taut across the Thames -- that's what's holding up this bridge.
Now, everyone was very excited to try it out.
On opening day, thousands of Londoners came out, and something happened.
And within two days the bridge was closed to the public.
So I want to first show you some interviews with people who were on the bridge on opening day, who will describe what happened.
Man: It really started moving sideways and slightly up and down, rather like being on the boat.
Woman: Yeah, it felt unstable, and it was very windy, and I remember it had lots of flags up and down the sides, so you could definitely -- there was something going on sideways, it felt, maybe.
Interviewer: Not up and down? Boy: No.
Interviewer: And not forwards and backwards? Boy: No.
Interviewer: Just sideways. About how much was it moving, do you think?
Boy: It was about -- Interviewer: I mean, that much, or this much?
Boy: About the second one.
Interviewer: This much? Boy: Yeah.
Interviewer: Right, so, at least this much? Man: Oh, yes.
Woman: I remember wanting to get off.
Interviewer: Oh, did you? Woman: Yeah. It felt odd.
Interviewer: So it was enough to be scary? Woman: Yeah, but I thought that was just me.
Interviewer: Ah! Now, tell me why you had to do this?
Boy: We had to do this because, to keep in balance because if you didn't keep your balance, then you would just fall over about, like, to the left or right, about 45 degrees.
Interviewer: So just show me how you walk normally. Right.
And then show me what it was like when the bridge started to go. Right.
So you had to deliberately push your feet out sideways and -- oh, and short steps?
Man: That's right. And it seemed obvious to me that it was probably the number of people on it.
Interviewer: Were they deliberately walking in step, or anything like that?
Man: No, they just had to conform to the movement of the bridge.
Steven Strogatz: All right, so that already gives you a hint of what happened.
Think of the bridge as being like this platform.
Think of the people as being like metronomes.
Now, you might not be used to thinking of yourself as a metronome, but after all, we do walk like -- I mean, we oscillate back and forth as we walk.
And especially if we start to walk like those people did, right?
They all showed this strange sort of skating gait that they adopted once the bridge started to move.
And so let me show you now the footage of the bridge.
But also, after you see the bridge on opening day, you'll see an interesting clip of work done by a bridge engineer at Cambridge named Allan McRobie, who figured out what happened on the bridge, and who built a bridge simulator to explain exactly what the problem was.
It was a kind of unintended positive feedback loop between the way the people walked and the way the bridge began to move, that engineers knew nothing about.
Actually, I think the first person you'll see is the young engineer who was put in charge of this project. Okay.
(Video) Interviewer: Did anyone get hurt? Engineer: No.
Interviewer: Right. So it was quite small -- Engineer: Yes. Interviewer: -- but real?
Engineer: Absolutely. Interviewer: You thought, "Oh, bother."
Engineer: I felt I was disappointed about it.
We'd spent a lot of time designing this bridge, and we'd analyzed it, we'd checked it to codes -- to heavier loads than the codes -- and here it was doing something that we didn't know about.
Interviewer: You didn't expect. Engineer: Exactly.
Narrator: The most dramatic and shocking footage shows whole sections of the crowd -- hundreds of people -- apparently rocking from side to side in unison, not only with each other, but with the bridge.
This synchronized movement seemed to be driving the bridge.
But how could the crowd become synchronized?
Was there something special about the Millennium Bridge that caused this effect?
This was to be the focus of the investigation.
Interviewer: Well, at last the simulated bridge is finished, and I can make it wobble.
Now, Allan, this is all your fault, isn't it? Allan McRobie: Yes.
Interviewer: You designed this, yes, this simulated bridge, and this, you reckon, mimics the action of the real bridge?
AM: It captures a lot of the physics, yes.
Interviewer: Right. So if we get on it, we should be able to wobble it, yes?
Allan McRobie is a bridge engineer from Cambridge who wrote to me, suggesting that a bridge simulator ought to wobble in the same way as the real bridge -- provided we hung it on pendulums of exactly the right length.
AM: This one's only a couple of tons, so it's fairly easy to get going.
Just by walking. Interviewer: Well, it's certainly going now.
AM: It doesn't have to be a real dangle. Just walk. It starts to go.
Interviewer: It's actually quite difficult to walk.
You have to be careful where you put your feet down, don't you, because if you get it wrong, it just throws you off your feet.
AM: It certainly affects the way you walk, yes. You can't walk normally on it.
Interviewer: No. If you try and put one foot in front of another, it's moving your feet away from under you. AM: Yes.
Interviewer: So you've got to put your feet out sideways.
So already, the simulator is making me walk in exactly the same way as our witnesses walked on the real bridge.
AM: ... ice-skating gait. There isn't all this sort of snake way of walking.
Interviewer: For a more convincing experiment, I wanted my own opening-day crowd, the sound check team.
Their instructions: just walk normally.
It's really intriguing because none of these people is trying to drive it.
They're all having some difficulty walking.
And the only way you can walk comfortably is by getting in step.
But then, of course, everyone is driving the bridge.
You can't help it. You're actually forced by the movement of the bridge to get into step, and therefore to drive it to move further.
SS: All right, well, with that from the Ministry of Silly Walks, maybe I'd better end. I see I've gone over.
But I hope that you'll go outside and see the world in a new way, to see all the amazing synchrony around us. Thank you.
(Applause)
Deep in our solar system, a new era of space exploration is unfolding.
Beneath the thick ice of Europa, in the vapor plumes on Enceladus, and within the methane lakes of Titan, astrobiologists are on the hunt for extraterrestrial life.
We’ve honed in on these three moons because each is an ‘ocean world,’ an environment that contains a liquid ocean– and liquid can support the formation of life.
Living organisms have to be able to grow, reproduce, and feed themselves, among other things.
All of those functions require the formation of complex molecules from more basic components.
Liquids such as water allow chemical compounds to remain in suspension instead of sinking under the force of gravity.
This enables them to interact frequently in a 3-dimensional space and, in the right conditions, go through chemical reactions that lead to the formation of living matter.
That alone isn’t enough; the small but complex biomolecules that we’re familiar with are sensitive to temperature— too hot or cold, and they won’t mix.
Liquid water has an additional advantage in that it’s relatively temperature-stable, meaning it can insulate molecules against large shifts in heat.
On Earth, these and other conditions in aquatic environments may have supported the emergence of life billions of years ago.
Tantalizingly, the same could be true in other parts of our solar system, like these three icy moons.
Europa, which is a moon of Jupiter, is probably the most intriguing ocean world.
Beneath a surface layer of ice thicker than Mount Everest, there exists a liquid ocean as much as 100 kilometers deep.
Astrobiologists think this hidden ocean could harbor life.
Thanks to the Galileo probe, we can deduce that its potential salt content is similar to that of some lakes on Earth.
But most of its characteristics will be a mystery until we can explore it further.
Like Jupiter, Saturn also has moons that might have the right conditions for life.
For instance– Enceladus is a tiny ball of ice that’s small enough to nestle within the surface area of the Gulf of Mexico.
Similarly to Europa, it likely contains an ocean deep under the ice.
But Enceladus also has geysers that frequently vent water vapor and tiny ice grains into space.
Astrobiologists are curious about whether these geysers are connected to the ocean below.
They hope to send a probe to test whether the geysers’ plumes of vapor contain life-enabling material from that hidden sea.
Although it’s the best known substance for nurturing life, water isn’t necessarily the only medium that can support living things.
Take Titan, Saturn’s largest moon, which has a thick nitrogen atmosphere containing methane and many other organic molecules.
Its clouds condense and rain onto Titan’s surface, sustaining lakes and seas full of liquid methane.
This compound’s particular chemistry means it’s not as supportive a medium as water.
But, paired with the high quantities of organic material that also rain down from the sky, these bodies of liquid methane could possibly support unfamiliar life forms.
So what might indicate that life exists on these or other worlds?
If it is out there, astrobiologists speculate that it would be microscopic, comparable to the bacteria we have on earth.
This would make it difficult to directly observe from a great distance, so astrobiologists seek clues called biosignatures.
Those may be cells, fossils, or mineral traces left behind by living things.
And finding any biosignatures will be challenging for many reasons.
One of the biggest concerns is to make sure we sterilize our probes extremely thoroughly.
Otherwise we could accidentally contaminate ocean worlds with Earth’s own bacteria, which could destroy alien life.
Titan, Enceladus, and Europa are just three of possibly many ocean worlds that we could explore.
We already know of several other candidates in our solar system, including Jupiter’s moons Callisto and Ganymede, Neptune’s Triton, and even Pluto.
If there’s this much potential for life to exist in our own tiny solar system, what unimagined secrets might the rest of the universe contain?
Hi I'm Andrea Gibson and this is my poem "The Nutritionist."
The nutritionist said I should eat root vegetables Said if I could get down 13 turnips a day I would be grounded, rooted.
Said my head would not keep flying away to where the darkness lives.
The psychic told me my heart carries too much weight Said for 20 dollars she’d tell me what to do I handed her the twenty, she said “stop worrying darling, you will find a good man soon.” The first psychotherapist said I should spend 3 hours a day sitting in a dark closet with my eyes closed and my ears plugged.
I tried it once but couldn’t stop thinking about how gay it was to be sitting in the closet.
The yogi told me to stretch everything but truth, said focus on the outbreaths, said everyone finds happiness if they can care more about what they can give than what they get.
The pharmacist said klonopin, lamictil, lithium, Xanax.
The doctor said an antipsychotic might help me forget what the trauma said The trauma said don’t write this poem.
Nobody wants to hear you cry about the grief inside your bones But my bones said “Tyler Clementi dove into the Hudson River convinced he was entirely alone.” My bones said “write the poem.” To the lamplight.
To the chandelier of your fate hanging by a thread.
To everyday you could not get out of bed.
To the bulls eye of your wrist To anyone who has ever wanted to die.
I have been told, sometimes, the most healing thing we can do- Is remind ourselves over and over and over Other people feel this too The tomorrow that has come and gone And it has not gotten better When you are half finished writing that letter to your mother that says “I swear to God I tried” But when I thought I hit bottom, it started hitting back There is no bruise like the bruise loneliness kicks into your spine So let me tell you I know there are days it looks like the whole world is dancing in the streets when you break down like the doors of their looted buildings You are not alone and wondering who will be convicted of the crime of insisting you keep loading your grief into the chamber of your shame You are not weak just because your heart feels so heavy I have never met a heavy heart that wasn’t a phone booth with a red cape inside Some people will never understand the kind of superpower it takes for some people to just walk outside Some days I know my smile looks like the gutter of a falling house But my hands are always holding tight to the ripchord of believing A life can be rich like the soil Make food of decay Turn wound into highway Pick me up in a truck with that bumper sticker that says “it is no measure of good health to be well adjusted to a sick society” I have never trusted anyone with the pulled back bow of my spine the way I trust the ones who come undone at the throat Screaming for their pulse to find the fight to pound Four nights before Tyler Clementi jumped from the George Washington bridge I was sitting in a hotel room in my own town Calculating exactly what I had to swallow to keep a bottle of sleeping pills down What I know about living is the pain is never just ours Every time I hurt I know the wound is an echo So I keep a listening for the moment when the grief becomes a window When I can see what I couldn’t see before, through the glass of my most battered dream, I watched a dandelion lose its mind in the wind and when it did, it scattered a thousand seeds.
So the next time I tell you how easily I come out of my skin, don’t try to put me back in just say here we are together at the window aching for it to all get better but knowing there is a chance our hearts may have only just skinned their knees knowing there is a chance the worst day might still be coming let me say right now for the record, I’m still gonna be here asking this world to dance, even if it keeps stepping on my holy feet you- you stay here with me, okay?
You stay here with me.
Raising your bite against the bitter dark Your bright longing Your brilliant fists of loss Friend if the only thing we have to gain in staying is each other, my god that’s plenty my god that’s enough my god that is so so much for the light to give each of us at each other’s backs whispering over and over and over “Live” “Live” “Live”
It's amazing, when you meet a head of state and you say, "What is your most precious natural resource?" -- they will not say children at first.
And then when you say children, they will pretty quickly agree with you.
(Video): We're traveling today with the Minister of Defense of Colombia, head of the army and the head of the police, and we're dropping off 650 laptops today to children who have no television, no telephone and have been in a community cut off from the rest of the world for the past 40 years.
The importance of delivering laptops to this region is connecting kids who have otherwise been unconnected because of the FARC, the guerrillas that started off 40 years ago as a political movement and then became a drug movement.
There are one billion children in the world, and 50 percent of them don't have electricity at home or at school.
And in some countries -- let me pick Afghanistan -- 75 percent of the little girls don't go to school.
And I don't mean that they drop out of school in the third or fourth grade -- they don't go.
So in the three years since I talked at TED and showed a prototype, it's gone from an idea to a real laptop.
We have half a million laptops today in the hands of children.
We have about a quarter of a million in transit to those and other children, and then there are another quarter of a million more that are being ordered at this moment.
So, in rough numbers, there are a million laptops.
That's smaller than I predicted -- I predicted three to 10 million -- but is still a very large number.
In Colombia, we have about 3,000 laptops.
It's the Minister of Defense with whom we're working, not the Minister of Education, because it is seen as a strategic defense issue in the sense of liberating these zones that had been completely closed off, in which the people who had been causing, if you will, 40 years' worth of bombings and kidnappings and assassinations lived.
And suddenly, the kids have connected laptops.
They've leapfrogged.
The change is absolutely monumental, because it's not just opening it up, but it's opening it up to the rest of the world.
So yes, they're building roads, yes, they're putting in telephone, yes, there will be television.
But the kids six to 12 years old are surfing the Internet in Spanish and in local languages, so the children grow up with access to information, with a window into the rest of the world.
Before, they were closed off.
Interestingly enough, in other countries, it will be the Minister of Finance who sees it as an engine of economic growth.
And that engine is going to see the results in 20 years.
It's not going to happen, you know, in one year, but it's an important, deeply economic and cultural change that happens through children.
Thirty-one countries in total are involved, and in the case of Uruguay, half the children already have them, and by the middle of 2009, every single child in Uruguay will have a laptop -- a little green laptop.
Now what are some of the results?
Some of the results that go across every single country include teachers saying they have never loved teaching so much, and reading comprehension measured by third parties -- not by us -- skyrockets.
Probably the most important thing we see is children teaching parents.
They own the laptops. They take them home.
And so when I met with three children from the schools, who had traveled all day to come to Bogota, one of the three children brought her mother.
And the reason she brought her mother is that this six-year-old child had been teaching her mother how to read and write.
Her mother had not gone to primary school.
And this is such an inversion, and such a wonderful example of children being the agents of change.
So now, in closing, people say, now why laptops?
Laptops are a luxury; it's like giving them iPods. No.
The reason you want laptops is that the word is education, not laptop.
This is an education project, not a laptop project.
They need to learn learning. And then, just think -- they can have, let's say, 100 books.
In a village, you have 100 laptops, each with a different set of 100 books, and so that village suddenly has 10,000 books.
You and I didn't have 10,000 books when we went to primary school.
Sometimes school is under a tree, or in many cases, the teacher has only a fifth-grade education, so you need a collaborative model of learning, not just building more schools and training more teachers, which you have to do anyway.
So we're once again doing "Give One, Get One."
Last year, we ran a "Give One, Get One" program, and it generated over 100,000 laptops that we were then able to give free.
And by being a zero-dollar laptop, we can go to countries that can't afford it at all.
And that's what we did. We went to Haiti, we went to Rwanda, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Mongolia.
Places that are not markets, seeding it with the principles of saturation, connectivity, low ages, etc.
And then we can actually roll out large numbers.
So think of it this way: think of it as inoculating children against ignorance.
And think of the laptop as a vaccine.
You don't vaccinate a few children.
You vaccinate all the children in an area.
There are more Chinese restaurants in this country than McDonald's, Burger King, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Wendy's, combined -- 40,000, actually.
Chinese restaurants have played an important role in American history, as a matter of fact.
The Cuban missile crisis was resolved in a Chinese restaurant called Yenching Palace in Washington, DC, which unfortunately is closed now, and about to be turned into Walgreen's.
And the house where John Wilkes Booth planned the assassination of Abraham Lincoln is also now a Chinese restaurant called Wok and Roll, on H Street in Washington.
(Laughter) And it's not completely gratuitous, because "wok" and "roll" -- Chinese food and Japanese foods, so it kind of works out.
And Americans love their Chinese food so much, they've actually brought it into space.
NASA, for example, serves thermostabilized sweet-and-sour pork on its shuttle menu for its astronauts.
So, let me present the question to you: If our benchmark for Americanness is apple pie, you should ask yourself: how often do you eat apple pie, versus how often do you eat Chinese food?
(Laughter) And if you think about it, a lot of the foods that we or Americans think of as Chinese food are barely recognizable to Chinese.
For example: beef with broccoli, egg rolls, General Tso's Chicken, fortune cookies, chop suey, the take-out boxes.
For example, I took a whole bunch of fortune cookies back to China, gave them to Chinese to see how they would react.
[What is this?] [Should I try it?] [Try it!] [What is this called?] [Fortune cookie.] (Laughter) [There's a piece of paper inside!] (Laughter) [What is this?] [You've won a prize!] [What is this?] [It's a fortune!] [Tasty!] So where are they from?
The short answer is, actually, they're from Japan.
And in Kyoto, outside, there are still small family-run bakeries that make fortune cookies, as they did over 100 years ago, 30 years before fortune cookies were introduced in the United States.
If you see them side by side, there's yellow and brown.
Theirs are actually flavored with miso and sesame paste, so they're not as sweet as our version.
So how did they get to the US?
Well, the short answer is, the Japanese immigrants came over, and a bunch of the bakers introduced them -- including at least one in Los Angeles, and one here in San Francisco, called Benkyodo, which is on the corner of Sutter and Buchanan.
Back then, they made fortune cookies using very much the similar kind of irons that we saw back in Kyoto.
The interesting question is: How do you go from fortune cookies being something that is Japanese to being something that is Chinese?
Well, we locked up all the Japanese during World War II, including those that made fortune cookies.
So that's when the Chinese moved in, saw a market opportunity and took over.
(Laughter) So, fortune cookies: invented by the Japanese, popularized by the Chinese, but ultimately consumed by Americans.
They're more American than anything else.
Another of my favorite dishes: General Tso's Chicken -- which, by the way, in the US Naval Academy is called Admiral Tso's Chicken.
(Laughter) I love this dish.
The original name of my book was "The Long March of General Tso."
And he has marched very far indeed, because he is sweet, he is fried, and he is chicken -- all things that Americans love.
(Laughter) He has marched so far, actually, that the chef who originally invented the dish doesn't recognize it; he's kind of horrified.
Video: (In Chinese) Audience: (Laughter) He's in Taiwan right now.
He's retired, deaf and plays a lot of mah–jongg.
After I showed him this, he got up, and says, "mòmíngqímiào," which means, "This is all nonsense," and goes back to play his mah-jongg game during the afternoon.
Another dish, one of my favorites: beef with broccoli.
Broccoli is not a Chinese vegetable; in fact, it is originally an Italian vegetable.
It was introduced into the United States in the 1800s, but became popularized in the 1920s and the 1930s.
The Chinese have their own version of broccoli, called Chinese broccoli, but they've now discovered American broccoli, and are importing it as a sort of exotic delicacy.
I guarantee you, General Tso never saw a stalk of broccoli in his life.
That was a picture of General Tso.
I went to his home town.
This is a billboard that says: "Welcome to the birthplace of General Tso."
And I went looking for chicken.
Finally found a cow -- and did find chicken.
Believe it or not, these guys were actually crossing the road.
(Laughter) And I found a whole bunch of General Tso's relatives who are still in the town.
This guy is now five generations removed from the General; this guy is about seven.
I showed them the pictures of General Tso Chicken, and they were like, "We don't know this dish. Is this Chinese food?"
Because it doesn't look like Chinese food to them.
But they weren't surprised I traveled around the world to visit them, because in their eyes he is, after all, a famous Qing dynasty military hero.
He played an important role in the Taiping Rebellion, a war started by a guy who thought he was the son of God and baby brother of Jesus Christ.
He caused a war that killed 20 million people -- still the deadliest civil war in the world to this day.
So, you know, I realized when I was there, General Tso is kind of a lot like Colonel Sanders in America, in that he's known for chicken and not war.
But in China, this guy's actually known for war and not chicken.
But the granddaddy of all the Chinese American dishes we probably ought to talk about is chop suey, which was introduced around the turn of the 20th century.
According to the New York Times in 1904, there was an outbreak of Chinese restaurants all over town, and "... the city has gone 'chop suey' mad."
So it took about 30 years before the Americans realized that chop suey is actually not known in China, and as this article points out, "The average native of any city in China knows nothing of chop suey."
Back then it was a way to show you were sophisticated and cosmopolitan; a guy who wanted to impress a girl could take her on a chop suey date.
I like to say chop suey is the biggest culinary joke one culture ever played on another, because "chop suey," translated into Chinese, means "jaahp-seui," which, translated back, means "odds and ends."
So, these people are going around China asking for chop suey, which is sort of like a Japanese guy coming here and saying, "I understand you have a very popular dish in your country called 'leftovers.'" (Laughter) Right?
(Laughter) And not only that: "This dish is particularly popular after that holiday you call 'Thanksgiving.'" (Laughter) So, why and where did chop suey come from?
Let's go back to the mid-1800s, when the Chinese first came to America.
Back then, Americans were not clamoring to eat Chinese food.
In fact, they saw these people who landed at their shores as alien.
These people weren't eating dogs, they were eating cats.
If they weren't eating cats, they were eating rats.
In fact, The New York Times, my esteemed employer, in 1883 ran an article that asked, "Do Chinese eat rats?"
Not the most PC question to be asked today, but if you look at the popular imagery of the time, not so outlandish.
This is actually a real advertisement for rat poison from the late 1800s.
And if you see under the word "Clears" -- very small -- it says, "They must go," which refers not only to the rats, but to the Chinese in their midst, because the way that the food was perceived was that these people who ate foods different from us must be different from us.
Another way that you saw this antipathy towards the Chinese is through documents like this.
This is in the Library of Congress.
It's a pamphlet published by Samuel Gompers, hero of our American labor movement.
It's called, "Some Reason for Chinese Exclusion: Meat versus Rice: American Manhood against Asiatic Coolieism: Which shall survive?"
And it basically made the argument that Chinese men who ate rice would necessarily bring down the standard of living for American men who ate meat.
And as a matter of fact, then, this is one of the reasons we must exclude them from this country.
So, with sentiments like these, the Chinese Exclusion Act was passed between 1882 and 1902, the only time in American history when a group was specifically excluded for its national origin or ethnicity.
So in a way, because the Chinese were attacked, chop suey was created as a defense mechanism.
Who came up with the idea of chop suey?
There's a lot of different mysteries and legends, but of the ones I've found, the most interesting is this article from 1904.
A Chinese guy named Lem Sen shows up in Chinatown, New York City, and says, "I want you all to stop making chop suey, because I am the original creator and sole proprietor of chop suey.
And the way he tells it, there was a famous Chinese diplomat that showed up, and he was told to make a dish that looked very popular and could, quote, "pass" as Chinese.
And as he said -- we would never print this today -- but basically, the American man has become very rich.
Lem Sen: "I would've made this money, too, but I spent all this time looking for the American man who stole my recipe.
Now I've found him and I want my recipe back, and I want everyone to stop making chop suey, or pay me for the right to do the same.
So it was an early exercise of intellectual property rights.
The thing is, this idea of Chinese-American food doesn't exist only in America.
In fact, Chinese food is the most pervasive food on the planet, served on all seven continents, even Antarctica, because Monday night is Chinese food night at McMurdo Station, which is the main scientific station in Antarctica.
You see different varieties of Chinese food.
For example, there is French Chinese food, where they serve salt and pepper frog legs.
There is Italian Chinese food, where they don't have fortune cookies, so they serve fried gelato.
My neighbor, Alessandra, was shocked when I told her, "Dude, fried gelato is not Chinese."
She's like, "It's not? But they serve it in all the Chinese restaurants in Italy."
(Laughter) Even the Brits have their own version.
This is a dish called "crispy shredded beef," which has a lot of crisp, a lot of shred, and not a lot of beef.
There is West Indian Chinese food, there's Jamaican Chinese food, Middle Eastern Chinese food, Mauritian Chinese food.
This is a dish called "Magic Bowl," that I discovered.
There's Indian Chinese food, Korean Chinese food, Japanese Chinese food, where they take the bao, the little buns, and make them into pizza versions.
(Laughter) And they totally randomly take Chinese noodle dishes, and just ramenize them.
This is something that, in the Chinese version, has no soup.
So, there's Peruvian Chinese food, which should not be mixed with Mexican Chinese food, where they basically take things and make it look like fajitas.
(Laughter) And they have things like risotto chop suey.
My personal favorite of all the restaurants I've encountered around the world was this one in Brazil, called "Kung Food."
(Laughter) So, let's take a step back and understand what is to be appreciated in America.
McDonald's has garnered a lot of attention, a lot of respect, for basically standardizing the menu, decor and dining experience in post-World War II America.
But you know what?
They did so through a centralized headquarters out of Illinois.
Chinese restaurants have done largely the same thing, I would argue, with the menu and the decor, even the restaurant name, but without a centralized headquarters.
So, this actually became very clear to me with the March 30, 2005 Powerball drawing, where they expected, based on the number of ticket sales they had, to have three or four second-place winners, people who match five or six Powerball numbers.
Instead, they had 110, and they were completely shocked.
They looked all across the country and discovered it couldn't be fraud, since it happened in different states, across different computer systems.
Whatever it was, it caused people to behave in a mass-synchronized way.
So, OK, maybe it had to do with the patterns on the pieces of paper, like it was a diamond, or diagonal.
It wasn't that, so they're like, OK, let's look at television.
So they looked at an episode of "Lost."
Now, I don't have a TV, which makes me a freak, but very productive -- (Laughter) And there's an episode of "Lost" where one guy has a lucky number, but it's not a lucky number, it's why he's on the island, but they looked and the numbers did not match.
They looked at "The Young and The Restless." It wasn't that, either.
It wasn't until the first guy shows up the next day and they ask him, "Where did you get your number?"
He said, "I got it from a fortune cookie."
This is a slip one of the winners had, because the Tennessee lottery security officials were like, "Oh, no, this can't be true."
Basically, of those 110 people, 104 of them or so had gotten their number from a fortune cookie.
(Laughter) Yeah. So I went and started looking.
I went across the country, looking for these restaurants where these people had gotten their fortune cookies from.
There are a bunch of them, including Lee's China in Omaha -- which is actually run by Koreans, but that's another point, and a bunch of them named "China Buffet."
What's interesting is that their stories were similar, but different.
It was lunch, it was take-out, it was sit-down, it was buffet, it was three weeks ago, it was three months ago.
But at some point, all these people had a very similar experience that converged at a fortune cookie and a Chinese restaurant.
And all these restaurants were serving fortune cookies, which, of course, aren't even Chinese to begin with.
It's part of the phenomenon I called "spontaneous self-organization," where, like in ant colonies, little decisions made on the micro level actually have a big impact on the macro level.
A good contrast is Chicken McNuggets.
McDonald's actually spent 10 years coming out with a chicken-like product.
They did chicken pot pie, fried chicken, and finally introduced Chicken McNuggets.
And the great innovation of Chicken McNuggets was not nuggifying them, that's kind of an easy concept.
The trick was, they were able to remove the chicken from the bone in a cost-efficient manner, which is why it took so long for people to copy them -- 10 years, then within a couple months, it was such a hit, they introduced it across the entire McDonald's system in the country.
In contrast is General Tso's Chicken, which actually started in New York City in the early 1970s, as I was also started in this universe in New York City in the early 1970s.
(Laughter) And this logo!
So me, General Tso's Chicken and this logo are all karmicly related.
But that dish also took about 10 years to spread across America from a restaurant in New York City.
Someone's like, "It's sweet, it's fried, it's chicken -- Americans will love this."
So what I like to say, this being Bay Area, Silicon Valley, is that we think of McDonald's as sort of the Microsoft of dining experiences.
We can think of Chinese restaurants perhaps as Linux, sort of an open-source thing, right?
(Laughter) Where ideas from one person can be copied and propagated across the entire system, that there can be specialized versions of Chinese food, depending on the region.
For example, in New Orleans we have Cajun Chinese food, where they serve Sichuan alligator and sweet and sour crawfish.
And in Philadelphia, you have Philadelphia cheesesteak roll, which is like an egg roll on the outside and cheesesteak on the inside.
I was surprised to discover that not only in Philadelphia, but also in Atlanta.
What had happened was, a Chinese family had moved from Philadelphia to Atlanta, and brought that with them.
So the thing is, our historical lore, because of the way we like narratives, is full of vast characters, such as Howard Schultz of Starbucks and Ray Kroc with McDonald's and Asa Candler with Coca-Cola.
But, you know, it's very easy to overlook the smaller characters.
For example, Lem Sen, who introduced chop suey, Chef Peng, who introduced General Tso's Chicken, and all the Japanese bakers who introduced fortune cookies.
So, the point of my presentation is to make you think twice; that those whose names are forgotten in history can often have had as much, if not more, impact on what we eat today.
Thank you very much.
When I was a child, every other Friday, I would leave my mother and stepfather's home -- an Indian and British, atheist, Buddhist, agnostic, vegetarian, new age-y sometimes, Democratic household.
And I would go 1.4 miles to my father and stepmother's home and enter a white, Evangelical Christian, conservative, Republican, twice-a-week-churchgoing, meat-eating family.
It doesn't take a shrink to explain how I ended up in the field of conflict resolution.
(Laughter) Whether I was facilitating dialogues in Charlottesville or Istanbul or Ahmedabad, the challenge was always the same: despite all odds, and with integrity, how do you get people to connect meaningfully, to take risks, to be changed by their experience?
And I would witness extraordinarily beautiful electricity in those rooms.
And then I would leave those rooms and attend my everyday gatherings like all of you -- a wedding or a conference or a back-to-school picnic -- and many would fall flat.
There was a meaning gap between these high-intensity conflict groups and my everyday gatherings.
Now, you could say, sure, somebody's birthday party isn't going to live up to a race dialogue, but that's not what I was responding to.
As a facilitator, you're taught to strip everything away and focus on the interaction between people, whereas everyday hosts focus on getting the things right -- the food, the flowers, the fish knives -- and leave the interaction between people largely to chance.
So I began to wonder how we might change our everyday gatherings to focus on making meaning by human connection, not obsessing with the canapés.
And I set out and interviewed dozens of brave and unusual hosts -- an Olympic hockey coach, a Cirque du Soleil choreographer, a rabbi, a camp counselor-- to better understand what creates meaningful and even transformative gatherings.
And I want to share with you some of what I learned today about the new rules of gathering.
So when most people plan a gathering, they start with an off-the-rack format.
Birthday party? Cake and candles.
Board meeting?
One brown table, 12 white men.
(Laughter) Assuming the purpose is obvious, we skip too quickly to form.
This not only leads to dull and repetitive gatherings, it misses a deeper opportunity to actually address our needs.
The first step of creating more meaningful everyday gatherings is to embrace a specific disputable purpose.
An expectant mother I know was dreading her baby shower.
The idea of "pin the diaper on the baby" games and opening gifts felt odd and irrelevant.
So she paused to ask: What is the purpose of a baby shower?
What is my need at this moment?
And she realized it was to address her fears of her and her husband's -- remember that guy? -- transition to parenthood.
And so she asked two friends to invent a gathering based on that.
And so on a sunny afternoon, six women gathered.
And first, to address her fear of labor -- she was terrified -- they told her stories from her life to remind her of the characteristics she already carries -- bravery, wonder, faith, surrender -- that they believed would carry her and help her in labor as well.
And as they spoke, they tied a bead for each quality into a necklace that she could wear around her neck in the delivery room.
Next, her husband came in, and they wrote new vows, family vows, and spoke them aloud, first committing to keep their marriage central as they transitioned to parenthood, but also future vows to their future son of what they wanted to carry with them from each of their family lines and what would stop with this generation.
Then more friends came along, including men, for a dinner party.
And in lieu of gifts, they each brought a favorite memory from their childhood to share with the table.
Now, you might be thinking this is a lot for a baby shower, or it's a little weird or it's a little intimate.
Good.
It's specific.
It's disputable.
It's specific to them, just as your gathering should be specific to you.
The next step of creating more meaningful everyday gatherings is to cause good controversy.
You may have learned, as I did, never to talk about sex, politics or religion at the dinner table.
It's a good rule in that it preserves harmony, or that's its intention.
But it strips away a core ingredient of meaning, which is heat, burning relevance.
The best gatherings learn to cultivate good controversy by creating the conditions for it, because human connection is as threatened by unhealthy peace as by unhealthy conflict.
I was once working with an architecture firm, and they were at a crossroads.
They had to figure out whether they wanted to continue to be an architecture firm and focus on the construction of buildings or pivot and become the hot new thing, a design firm, focusing on beyond the construction of spaces.
And there was real disagreement in the room, but you wouldn't know, because no one was actually speaking up publicly.
And so we hosted good controversy.
After a lunch break, all the architects came back, and we hosted a cage match.
They walked in, we took one architect, put him in one corner to represent architecture, the other one to represent design.
We threw white towels around their necks, stolen from the bathroom -- sorry -- played Rocky music on an iPad, got each a Don King-like manager to rev them up and prepare them with counterarguments, and then basically made them each argue the best possible argument of each future vision.
The norm of politeness was blocking their progress.
And we then had everybody else physically choose a side in front of their colleagues.
And because they were able to actually show where they stood, they broke an impasse.
Architecture won.
So that's work.
What about a hypothetical tense Thanksgiving dinner?
Anyone?
(Laughter) So first, ask the purpose.
What does this family need this year?
If cultivating good heat is part of it, then try for a night banning opinions and asking for stories instead.
Choose a theme related to the underlying conflict.
But instead of opinions, ask everybody to share a story from their life and experience that nobody around the table has ever heard, to difference or to belonging or to a time I changed my mind, giving people a way in to each other without burning the house down.
And finally, to create more meaningful everyday gatherings, create a temporary alternative world through the use of pop-up rules.
A few years ago, I started noticing invitations coming with a set of rules.
Kind of boring or controlling, right?
Wrong.
In this multicultural, intersectional society, where more of us are gathered and raised by people and with etiquette unlike our own, where we don't share the etiquette, unspoken norms are trouble, whereas pop-up rules allow us to connect meaningfully.
They're one-time-only constitutions for a specific purpose.
So a team dinner, where different generations are gathering and don't share the same assumptions of phone etiquette: whoever looks at their phone first foots the bill.
(Laughter) Try it.
(Applause) For an entrepreneurial advice circle of just strangers, where the hosts don't want everybody to just listen to the one venture capitalist in the room -- (Laughter) knowing laugh -- (Laughter) you can't reveal what you do for a living.
For a mom's dinner, where you want to upend the norms of what women who also happen to be mothers talk about when they gather, if you talk about your kids, you have to take a shot.
(Laughter) That's a real dinner.
Rules are powerful, because they allow us to temporarily change and harmonize our behavior.
And in diverse societies, pop-up rules carry special force.
They allow us to gather across difference, to connect, to make meaning together without having to be the same.
When I was a child, I navigated my two worlds by becoming a chameleon.
If somebody sneezed in my mother's home, I would say, "Bless you," in my father's, "God bless you."
To protect myself, I hid, as so many of us do.
And it wasn't until I grew up and through conflict work that I began to stop hiding.
And I realized that gatherings for me, at their best, allow us to be among others, to be seen for who we are, and to see.
The way we gather matters because how we gather is how we live.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"The New Colossus" by Emma Lazarus Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame, With conquering limbs astride from land to land; Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name Mother of Exiles. From her beacon-hand Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame.
“Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!” cries she With silent lips. “Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”
My name is Safia Elhillo, and this poem is called "to make use of water."
dilute i forget the arabic word for economy i forget the english word for عسل forget the arabic word for incense &amp; english word for مسكين arabic word for sandwich english for صيدلية &amp; مطعم &amp; وله ‎ /stupid girl, atlantic got your tongue/ blur back home we are plagued by a politeness so dense even the doctors cannot call things what they are my grandfather’s left eye swirled thick with smoke what my new mouth can call glaucoma while the arabic still translates to the white water swim i want to go home dissolve i want to go home drown half don’t even make it out or across you get to be ungrateful you get to be homesick from safe inside your blue american passport do you even understand what was lost to bring you here
My mom has always reminded me that I have the same proportions as a LEGO man.
(Laughter) And she does actually have a point.
LEGO is a company that has succeeded in making everybody believe that LEGO is from their home country.
But it's not, it's from my home country.
So you can imagine my excitement when the LEGO family called me and asked us to work with them to design the Home of the Brick.
This is the architectural model -- we built it out of LEGO, obviously.
This is the final result.
And what we tried to do was to design a building that would be as interactive and as engaging and as playful as LEGO is itself, with these kind of interconnected playgrounds on the roofscape.
You can enter a square on the ground where the citizens of Billund can roam around freely without a ticket.
And it's probably one of the only museums in the world where you're allowed to touch all the artifacts.
But the Danish word for design is "formgivning," which literally means to give form to that which has not yet been given form.
In other words, to give form to the future.
And what I love about LEGO is that LEGO is not a toy.
It's a tool that empowers the child to build his or her own world, and then to inhabit that world through play and to invite her friends to join her in cohabiting and cocreating that world.
And that is exactly what formgivning is.
As human beings, we have the power to give form to our future.
Inspired by LEGO, we've built a social housing project in Copenhagen, where we stacked blocks of wood next to each other.
Between them, they leave spaces with extra ceiling heights and balconies.
And by gently wiggling the blocks, we can actually create curves or any organic form, adapting to any urban context.
Because adaptability is probably one of the strongest drivers of architecture.
Another example is here in Vancouver.
We were asked to look at the site where Granville bridge triforks as it touches downtown.
And we started, like, mapping the different constraints.
There's like a 100-foot setback from the bridge because the city want to make sure that no one looks into the traffic on the bridge.
There's a park where we can't cast any shadows.
So finally, we're left with a tiny triangular footprint, almost too small to build.
But then we thought, like, what if the 100-foot minimum distance is really about minimum distance -- once we get 100 feet up in the air, we can grow the building back out.
And so we did.
When you drive over the bridge, it's as if someone is pulling a curtain aback, welcoming you to Vancouver.
Or a like a weed growing through the cracks in the pavement and blossoming as it gets light and air.
Underneath the bridge, we've worked with Rodney Graham and a handful of Vancouver artists, to create what we called the Sistine Chapel of street art, an art gallery turned upside down, that tries to turn the negative impact of the bridge into a positive.
So even if it looks like this kind of surreal architecture, it's highly adapted to its surroundings.
So if a bridge can become a museum, a museum can also serve as a bridge.
In Norway, we are building a museum that spans across a river and allows people to sort of journey through the exhibitions as they cross from one side of a sculpture park to the other.
An architecture sort of adapted to its landscape.
In China, we built a headquarters for an energy company and we designed the facade like an Issey Miyake fabric.
It's rippled, so that facing the predominant direction of the sun, it's all opaque; facing away from the sun, it's all glass.
On average, it sort of transitions from solid to clear.
And this very simple idea without any moving parts or any sort of technology, purely because of the geometry of the facade, reduces the energy consumption on cooling by 30 percent.
So you can say what makes the building look elegant is also what makes it perform elegantly.
It's an architecture that is adapted to its climate.
You can also adapt one culture to another, like in Manhattan, we took the Copenhagen courtyard building with a social space where people can hang out in this kind of oasis in the middle of a city, and we combined it with the density and the verticality of an American skyscraper, creating what we've called a "courtscraper."
From New York to Copenhagen.
On the waterfront of Copenhagen, we are right now finishing this waste-to-energy power plant.
It's going to be the cleanest waste-to-energy power plant in the world, there are no toxins coming out of the chimney.
An amazing marvel of engineering that is completely invisible.
So we thought, how can we express this?
And in Copenhagen we have snow, as you can see, but we have absolutely no mountains.
We have to go six hours by bus to get to Sweden, to get alpine skiing.
So we thought, let's put an alpine ski slope on the roof of the power plant.
So this is the first test run we did a few months ago.
And what I like about this is that it also show you the sort of world-changing power of formgivning.
I have a five-month-old son, and he's going to grow up in a world not knowing that there was ever a time when you couldn't ski on the roof of the power plant.
(Laughter) (Applause) So imagine for him and his generation, that's their baseline.
Imagine how far they can leap, what kind of wild ideas they can put forward for their future.
So right in front of it, we're building our smallest project.
It's basically nine containers that we have stacked in a shipyard in Poland, then we've schlepped it across the Baltic sea and docked it in the port of Copenhagen, where it is now the home of 12 students.
Each student has a view to the water, they can jump out the window into the clean port of Copenhagen, and they can get back in.
All of the heat comes from the thermal mass of the sea, all the power comes from the sun.
This is the first 12 units in Copenhagen, another 60 on their way, another 200 are going to Gothenburg, and we're speaking with the Paris Olympics to put a small floating village on the Seine.
So very much this kind of, almost like nomadic, impermanent architecture.
And the waterfronts of our cities are experiencing a lot of change.
Economic change, industrial change and climate change.
This is Manhattan before Hurricane Sandy, and this is Manhattan after Sandy.
We got invited by the city of New York to look if we could make the necessary flood protection for Manhattan without building a seawall that would segregate the life of the city from the water around it.
And we got inspired by the High Line.
You probably know the High Line -- it's this amazing new park in New York.
It's basically decommissioned train tracks that now have become one of the most popular promenades in the city.
So we thought, could we design the necessary flood protection for Manhattan so we don't have to wait until we shut it down before it gets nice?
So we sat down with the citizens living along the waterfront of New York, and we worked with them to try to design the necessary flood protection in such a way that it only makes their waterfront more accessible and more enjoyable.
Underneath the FDR, we are putting, like, pavilions with pocket walls that can slide out and protect from the water.
We are creating little stepped terraces that are going to make the underside more enjoyable, but also protect from flooding.
Further north in the East River Park, we are creating rolling hills that protect the park from the noise of the highway, but in turn also become the necessary flood protection that can stop the waves during an incoming storm surge.
So in a way, this project that we have called the Dryline, it's essentially the High Line -- (Laughter) The High Line that's going to keep Manhattan dry.
(Applause) It's scheduled to break ground on the first East River portion at the end of this year.
But it has essentially been codesigned with the citizens of Lower Manhattan to take all of the necessary infrastructure for resilience and give it positive social and environmental side effects.
So, New York is not alone in facing this situation.
In fact, by 2050, 90 percent of the major cities in the world are going to be dealing with rising seas.
In Hamburg, they've created a whole neighborhood where the bottom floors are designed to withstand the inevitable flood.
In Sweden, they've designed a city where all of the parks are wet gardens, designed to deal with storm water and waste water.
So we thought, could we perhaps -- Actually, today, three million people are already permanently living on the sea.
So we thought, could we actually imagine a floating city designed to incorporate all of the Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations into a whole new human-made ecosystem.
And of course, we have to design it so it can produce its own power, harvesting the thermal mass of the oceans, the force of the tides, of the currents, of the waves, the power of the wind, the heat and the energy of the sun.
Also, we are going to collect all of the rain water that drops on this man-made archipelago and deal with it organically and mechanically and store it and clean it.
We have to grow all of our food locally, it has to be fish- and plant-based, because you won't have the space or the resources for a dairy diet.
And finally, we are going to deal with all the waste locally, with compost, recycling, and turning the waste into energy.
So imagine where a traditional urban master plan, you typically draw the street grid where the cars can drive and the building plots where you can put some buildings.
This master plan, we sat down with a handful of scientists and basically started with all of the renewable, available natural resources, and then we started channeling the flow of resources through this kind of human-made ecosystem or this kind of urban metabolism.
So it's going to be modular, it's going to be buoyant, it's going to be designed to resist a tropical storm.
You can prefabricate it at scale, and tow it to dock with others, to form a small community.
We're designing these kind of coastal additions, so that even if it's modular and rational, each island can be unique with its own coastal landscape.
The architecture has to remain relatively low to keep the center of gravity buoyant.
We're going to take all of the agriculture and use it to also create social space so you can actually enjoy the permaculture gardens.
We're designing it for the tropics, so all of the roofs are maximized to harvest solar power and to shade from the sun.
All the materials are going to be light and renewable, like bamboo and wood, which is also going to create this charming, warm environment.
And any architecture is supposed to be able to fit on this platform.
Underneath we have all the storage inside the pontoon, almost like a mega version of the student housings that we've already worked with.
We have all the storage for the energy that's produced, all of the water storage and remediation.
We are sort of dealing with all of the waste and the composting.
And we also have some backup farming with aeroponics and hydroponics.
So imagine almost like a vertical section through this landscape that goes from the air above, where we have vertical farms; below, we have the aeroponics and the aquaponics.
Even further below, we have the ocean farms and where we tie the island to the ground, we're using biorock to create new reefs to regenerate habitat.
So think of this small island for 300 people.
It can then group together to form a cluster or a neighborhood that then can sort of group together to form an entire city for 10,000 people.
And you can imagine if this floating city flourishes, it can sort of grow like a culture in a petri dish.
So one of the first places we are looking at placing this, or anchoring this floating city, is in the Pearl River delta.
So imagine this kind of canopy of photovoltaics on this archipelago floating in the sea.
As you sail towards the island, you will see the maritime residents moving around on alternative forms of aquatic transportation.
You come into this kind of community port.
You can roam around in the permaculture gardens that are productive landscapes, but also social landscapes.
The greenhouses also become orangeries for the cultural life of the city, and below, under the sea, it's teeming with life of farming and science and social spaces.
So in a way, you can imagine this community port is where people gather, both by day and by night.
And even if the first one is designed for the tropics, we also imagine that the architecture can adapt to any culture, so imagine, like, a Middle Eastern floating city or Southeast Asian floating city or maybe a Scandinavian floating city one day.
So maybe just to conclude.
The human body is 70 percent water.
And the surface of our planet is 70 percent water.
And it's rising.
And even if the whole world woke up tomorrow and became carbon-neutral over night, there are still island nations that are destined to sink in the seas, unless we also develop alternate forms of floating human habitats.
And the only constant in the universe is change.
Our world is always changing, and right now, our climate is changing.
No matter how critical the crisis is, and it is, this is also our collective human superpower.
That we have the power to adapt to change and we have the power to give form to our future.
(Applause)
"The Second Coming" by William Butler Yeats Turning and turning in the widening gyre The falcon cannot hear the falconer; Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world, The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere The ceremony of innocence is drowned; The best lack all conviction, while the worst Are full of passionate intensity.
Surely some revelation is at hand; Surely the Second Coming is at hand.
The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert A shape with lion body and the head of a man, A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun, Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.
The darkness drops again; but now I know That twenty centuries of stony sleep Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle, And what rough beast, its hour come round at last, Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?
“All the World’s a Stage” from "As You Like It" by William Shakespeare All the world’s a stage, And all the men and women merely players; They have their exits and their entrances; And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages.
At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms; And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school.
And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress’ eyebrow.
Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon’s mouth.
And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lin’d, With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances; And so he plays his part.
The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slipper’d pantaloon, With spectacles on nose and pouch on side; His youthful hose, well sav’d, a world too wide For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice, Turning again toward childish treble, pipes And whistles in his sound.
Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere oblivion; Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
I'll just start talking about the 17th century.
I hope nobody finds that offensive.
I -- you know, when I -- after I had invented PCR, I kind of needed a change.
And I moved down to La Jolla and learned how to surf.
And I started living down there on the beach for a long time.
And when surfers are out waiting for waves, you probably wonder, if you've never been out there, what are they doing?
You know, sometimes there's a 10-, 15-minute break out there when you're waiting for a wave to come in.
They usually talk about the 17th century.
You know, they get a real bad rap in the world.
People think they're sort of lowbrows.
One day, somebody suggested I read this book.
It was called -- it was called "The Air Pump," or something like "The Leviathan and The Air Pump."
It was a real weird book about the 17th century.
And I realized, the roots of the way I sort of thought was just the only natural way to think about things.
That -- you know, I was born thinking about things that way, and I had always been like a little scientist guy.
And when I went to find out something, I used scientific methods. I wasn't real surprised, you know, when they first told me how -- how you were supposed to do science, because I'd already been doing it for fun and whatever.
But it didn't -- it never occurred to me that it had to be invented and that it had been invented only 350 years ago.
You know, it was -- like it happened in England, and Germany, and Italy sort of all at the same time.
And the story of that, I thought, was really fascinating.
So I'm going to talk a little bit about that, and what exactly is it that scientists are supposed to do.
And it's, it's a kind of -- You know, Charles I got beheaded somewhere early in the 17th century.
And the English set up Cromwell and a whole bunch of Republicans or whatever, and not the kind of Republicans we had.
They changed the government, and it didn't work.
And Charles II, the son, was finally put back on the throne of England.
He was really nervous, because his dad had been, you know, beheaded for being the King of England And he was nervous about the fact that conversations that got going in, like, bars and stuff would turn to -- this is kind of -- it's hard to believe, but people in the 17th century in England were starting to talk about, you know, philosophy and stuff in bars.
They didn't have TV screens, and they didn't have any football games to watch.
And they would get really pissy, and all of a sudden people would spill out into the street and fight about issues like whether or not it was okay if Robert Boyle made a device called the vacuum pump.
Now, Boyle was a friend of Charles II.
He was a Christian guy during the weekends, but during the week he was a scientist.
(Laughter) Which was -- back then it was sort of, you know, well, you know -- if you made this thing -- he made this little device, like kind of like a bicycle pump in reverse that could suck all the air out of -- you know what a bell jar is? One of these things, you pick it up, put it down, and it's got a seal, and you can see inside of it, so you can see what's going on inside this thing.
But what he was trying to do was to pump all the air out of there, and see what would happen inside there.
I mean, the first -- I think one of the first experiments he did was he put a bird in there.
And people in the 17th century, they didn't really understand the same way we do about you know, this stuff is a bunch of different kinds of molecules, and we breathe it in for a purpose and all that.
I mean, fish don't know much about water, and people didn't know much about air.
But both started exploring it.
One thing, he put a bird in there, and he pumped all the air out, and the bird died. So he said, hmm...
He said -- he called what he'd done as making -- they didn't call it a vacuum pump at the time.
Now you call it a vacuum pump; he called it a vacuum.
Right? And immediately, he got into trouble with the local clergy who said, you can't make a vacuum.
Ah, uh -- (Laughter) Aristotle said that nature abhors one.
I think it was a poor translation, probably, but people relied on authorities like that.
And you know, Boyle says, well, shit.
I make them all the time.
I mean, whatever that is that kills the bird -- and I'm calling it a vacuum.
And the religious people said that if God wanted you to make -- I mean, God is everywhere, that was one of their rules, is God is everywhere.
And a vacuum -- there's nothing in a vacuum, so you've -- God couldn't be in there.
So therefore the church said that you can't make a vacuum, you know.
And Boyle said, bullshit.
I mean, you want to call it Godless, you know, you call it Godless.
But that's not my job. I'm not into that.
I do that on the weekend. And like -- what I'm trying to do is figure out what happens when you suck everything out of a compartment.
And he did all these cute little experiments.
Like he did one with -- he had a little wheel, like a fan, that was sort of loosely attached, so it could spin by itself.
He had another fan opposed to it that he had like a -- I mean, the way I would have done this would be, like, a rubber band, and, you know, around a tinker toy kind of fan.
I know exactly how he did it; I've seen the drawings.
It's two fans, one which he could turn from outside after he got the vacuum established, and he discovered that if he pulled all the air out of it, the one fan would no longer turn the other one, right?
Something was missing, you know. I mean, these are -- it's kind of weird to think that someone had to do an experiment to show that, but that was what was going on at the time.
And like, there was big arguments about it in the -- you know, the gin houses and in the coffee shops and stuff.
And Charles started not liking that.
Charles II was kind of saying, you know, you should keep that -- let's make a place where you can do this stuff where people don't get so -- you know, we don't want the -- we don't want to get the people mad at me again. And so -- because when they started talking about religion and science and stuff like that, that's when it had sort of gotten his father in trouble.
And so, Charles said, I'm going to put up the money give you guys a building, come here and you can meet in the building, but just don't talk about religion in there.
And that was fine with Boyle.
He said, OK, we're going to start having these meetings.
And anybody who wants to do science is -- this is about the time that Isaac Newton was starting to whip out a lot of really interesting things.
And there was all kind of people that would come to the Royal Society, they called it. You had to be dressed up pretty well.
It wasn't like a TED conference.
That was the only criteria, was that you be -- you looked like a gentleman, and they'd let anybody could come.
You didn't have to be a member then.
And so, they would come in and you would do -- Anybody that was going to show an experiment, which was kind of a new word at the time, demonstrate some principle, they had to do it on stage, where everybody could see it.
So they were -- the really important part of this was, you were not supposed to talk about final causes, for instance.
And God was out of the picture.
The actual nature of reality was not at issue.
You're not supposed to talk about the absolute nature of anything.
You were not supposed to talk about anything that you couldn't demonstrate.
So if somebody could see it, you could say, here's how the machine works, here's what we do, and then here's what happens.
And seeing what happens, it was OK to generalize, and say, I'm sure that this will happen anytime we make one of these things.
And so you can start making up some rules.
You say, anytime you have a vacuum state, you will discover that one wheel will not turn another one, if the only connection between them is whatever was there before the vacuum. That kind of thing.
Candles can't burn in a vacuum, therefore, probably sparklers wouldn't either.
It's not clear; actually sparklers will, but they didn't know that.
They didn't have sparklers. But, they -- (Laughter) -- you can make up rules, but they have to relate only to the things that you've been able to demonstrate.
And most the demonstrations had to do with visuals.
Like if you do an experiment on stage, and nobody can see it, they can just hear it, they would probably think you were freaky.
I mean, reality is what you can see.
That wasn't an explicit rule in the meeting, but I'm sure that was part of it, you know. If people hear voices, and they can't see and associate it with somebody, that person's probably not there.
But the general idea that you could only -- you could only really talk about things in that place that had some kind of experimental basis.
It didn't matter what Thomas Hobbes, who was a local philosopher, said about it, you know, because you weren't going to be talking final causes.
What's happening here, in the middle of the 17th century, was that what became my field -- science, experimental science -- was pulling itself away, and it was in a physical way, because we're going to do it in this room over here, but it was also what -- it was an amazing thing that happened.
Science had been all interlocked with theology, and philosophy, and -- and -- and mathematics, which is really not science.
But experimental science had been tied up with all those things.
And the mathematics part and the experimental science part was pulling away from philosophy.
And -- things -- we never looked back.
It's been so cool since then.
I mean, it just -- it just -- untangled a thing that was really impeding technology from being developed.
And, I mean, everybody in this room -- now, this is 350 short years ago.
Remember, that's a short time.
It was 300,000, probably, years ago that most of us, the ancestors of most of us in this room came up out of Africa and turned to the left.
You know, the ones that turned to the right, there are some of those in the Japanese translation.
But that happened very -- a long time ago compared to 350 short years ago.
But in that 350 years, the place has just undergone a lot of changes.
In fact, everybody in this room probably, especially if you picked up your bag -- some of you, I know, didn't pick up your bags -- but if you picked up your bag, everybody in this room has got in their pocket, or back in their room, something that 350 years ago, kings would have gone to war to have.
I mean, if you can think how important -- If you have a GPS system and there are no satellites, it's not going to be much use. But, like -- but, you know, if somebody had a GPS system in the 17th century some king would have gotten together an army and gone to get it, you know. If that person -- Audience: For the teddy bear? The teddy bear?
Kary Mullis: They might have done it for the teddy bear, yeah.
But -- all of us own stuff.
I mean, individuals own things that kings would have definitely gone to war to get.
And this is just 350 years.
Not a whole lot of people doing this stuff.
You know, the important people -- you can almost read about their lives, about all the really important people that made advances, you know.
And, I mean -- this kind of stuff, you know, all this stuff came from that separation of this little sort of thing that we do -- now I, when I was a boy was born sort of with this idea that if you want to know something -- you know, maybe it's because my old man was gone a lot, and my mother didn't really know much science, but I thought if you want to know something about stuff, you do it -- you make an experiment, you know.
You get -- you get, like -- I just had a natural feeling for science and setting up experiments. I thought that was the way everybody had always thought.
I thought that anybody with any brains will do it that way.
It isn't true. I mean, there's a lot of people -- You know, I was one of those scientists that was -- got into trouble the other night at dinner because of the post-modernism thing.
And I didn't mean, you know -- where is that lady?
Audience: Here.
(Laughter) KM: I mean, I didn't really think of that as an argument so much as just a lively discussion.
I didn't take it personally, but -- I just -- I had -- I naively had thought, until this surfing experience started me into the 17th century, I'd thought that's just the way people thought, and everybody did, and they recognized reality by what they could see or touch or feel or hear.
At any rate, when I was a boy, I, like, for instance, I had this -- I got this little book from Fort Sill, Oklahoma -- This is about the time that George Dyson's dad was starting to blow nuclear -- thinking about blowing up nuclear rockets and stuff.
I was thinking about making my own little rockets.
And I knew that frogs -- little frogs -- had aspirations of space travel, just like people. And I -- (Laughter) I was looking for a -- a propulsion system that would like, make a rocket, like, maybe about four feet high go up a couple of miles.
And, I mean, that was my sort of goal.
I wanted it to go out of sight and then I wanted this little parachute to come back with the frog in it.
And -- I -- I -- I got this book from Fort Sill, Oklahoma, where there's a missile base.
They send it out for amateur rocketeers, and it said in there do not ever heat a mixture of potassium perchlorate and sugar.
(Laughter) You know, that's what you call a lead.
(Laughter) You sort of -- now you say, well, let's see if I can get hold of some potassium chlorate and sugar, perchlorate and sugar, and heat it; it would be interesting to see what it is they don't want me to do, and what it is going to -- and how is it going to work.
And we didn't have -- like, my mother presided over the back yard from an upstairs window, where she would be ironing or something like that.
And she was usually just sort of keeping an eye on, and if there was any puffs of smoke out there, she'd lean out and admonish us all not to blow our eyes out. That was her -- You know, that was kind of the worst thing that could happen to us.
That's why I thought, as long as I don't blow my eyes out...
I may not care about the fact that it's prohibited from heating this solution.
I'm going to do it carefully, but I'll do it.
It's like anything else that's prohibited: you do it behind the garage.
(Laughter) So, I went to the drug store and I tried to buy some potassium perchlorate and it wasn't unreasonable then for a kid to walk into a drug store and buy chemicals.
Nowadays, it's no ma'am, check your shoes. And like -- (Laughter) But then it wasn't -- they didn't have any, but the guy had -- I said, what kind of salts of potassium do you have? You know.
And he had potassium nitrate.
And I said, that might do the same thing, whatever it is.
I'm sure it's got to do with rockets or it wouldn't be in that manual.
And so I -- I did some experiments.
You know, I started off with little tiny amounts of potassium nitrate and sugar, which was readily available, and I mixed it in different proportions, and I tried to light it on fire.
Just to see what would happen, if you mixed it together.
And it -- they burned.
It burned kind of slow, but it made a nice smell, compared to other rocket fuels I had tried, that all had sulfur in them.
And, it smelt like burnt candy.
And then I tried the melting business, and I melted it.
And then it melted into a little sort of syrupy liquid, brown.
And then it cooled down to a brick-hard substance, that when you lit that, it went off like a bat.
I mean, the little bowl of that stuff that had cooled down -- you'd light it, and it would just start dancing around the yard.
And I said, there is a way to get a frog up to where he wants to go.
(Laughter) So I started developing -- you know, George's dad had a lot of help. I just had my brother.
But I -- it took me about -- it took me about, I'd say, six months to finally figure out all the little things.
There's a lot of little things involved in making a rocket that it will actually work, even after you have the fuel.
But you do it, by -- what I just-- you know, you do experiments, and you write down things sometimes, you make observations, you know.
And then you slowly build up a theory of how this stuff works.
And it was -- I was following all the rules.
I didn't know what the rules were, I'm a natural born scientist, I guess, or some kind of a throwback to the 17th century, whatever.
But at any rate, we finally did have a device that would reproduceably put a frog out of sight and get him back alive.
And we had not -- I mean, we weren't frightened by it.
We should have been, because it made a lot of smoke and it made a lot of noise, and it was powerful, you know.
And once in a while, they would blow up.
But I wasn't worried, by the way, about, you know, the explosion causing the destruction of the planet.
I hadn't heard about the 10 ways that we should be afraid of the -- By the way, I could have thought, I'd better not do this because they say not to, you know.
And I'd better get permission from the government.
If I'd have waited around for that, I would have never -- the frog would have died, you know.
At any rate, I bring it up because it's a good story, and he said, tell personal things, you know, and that's a personal -- I was going to tell you about the first night that I met my wife, but that would be too personal, wouldn't it.
So, so I've got something else that's not personal.
But that... process is what I think of as science, see, where you start with some idea, and then instead of, like, looking up, every authority that you've ever heard of I -- sometimes you do that, if you're going to write a paper later, you want to figure out who else has worked on it.
But in the actual process, you get an idea -- like, when I got the idea one night that I could amplify DNA with two oligonucleotides, and I could make lots of copies of some little piece of DNA, you know, the thinking for that was about 20 minutes while I was driving my car, and then instead of going -- I went back and I did talk to people about it, but if I'd listened to what I heard from all my friends who were molecular biologists -- I would have abandoned it.
You know, if I had gone back looking for an authority figure who could tell me if it would work or not, he would have said, no, it probably won't.
Because the results of it were so spectacular that if it worked it was going to change everybody's goddamn way of doing molecular biology.
Nobody wants a chemist to come in and poke around in their stuff like that and change things.
But if you go to authority, and you always don't -- you don't always get the right answer, see.
But I knew, you'd go into the lab and you'd try to make it work yourself. And then you're the authority, and you can say, I know it works, because right there in that tube is where it happened, and here, on this gel, there's a little band there that I know that's DNA, and that's the DNA I wanted to amplify, so there! So it does work.
You know, that's how you do science.
And then you say, well, what can make it work better?
And then you figure out better and better ways to do it.
But you always work from, from like, facts that you have made available to you by doing experiments: things that you could do on a stage.
And no tricky shit behind the thing. I mean, it's all -- you've got to be very honest with what you're doing if it really is going to work.
I mean, you can't make up results, and then do another experiment based on that one.
So you have to be honest.
And I'm basically honest.
I have a fairly bad memory, and dishonesty would always get me in trouble, if I, like -- so I've just sort of been naturally honest and naturally inquisitive, and that sort of leads to that kind of science.
Now, let's see...
I've got another five minutes, right?
OK. All scientists aren't like that.
You know -- and there is a lot -- (Laughter) There is a lot -- a lot has been going on since Isaac Newton and all that stuff happened.
One of the things that happened right around World War II in that same time period before, and as sure as hell afterwards, government got -- realized that scientists aren't strange dudes that, you know, hide in ivory towers and do ridiculous things with test tube.
Scientists, you know, made World War II as we know it quite possible.
They made faster things.
They made bigger guns to shoot them down with.
You know, they made drugs to give the pilots if they were broken up in the process.
They made all kinds of -- and then finally one giant bomb to end the whole thing, right?
And everybody stepped back a little and said, you know, we ought to invest in this shit, because whoever has got the most of these people working in the places is going to have a dominant position, at least in the military, and probably in all kind of economic ways.
And they got involved in it, and the scientific and industrial establishment was born, and out of that came a lot of scientists who were in there for the money, you know, because it was suddenly available.
And they weren't the curious little boys that liked to put frogs up in the air.
They were the same people that later went in to medical school, you know, because there was money in it, you know. I mean, later, then they all got into business -- I mean, there are waves of -- going into your high school, person saying, you want to be rich, you know, be a scientist. You know, not anymore.
You want to be rich, you be a businessman.
But a lot of people got in it for the money and the power and the travel.
That's back when travel was easy.
And those people don't think -- they don't -- they don't always tell you the truth, you know.
There is nothing in their contract, in fact, that makes it to their advantage always, to tell you the truth.
And the people I'm talking about are people that like -- they say that they're a member of the committee called, say, the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change.
And they -- and they have these big meetings where they try to figure out how we're going to -- how we're going to continually prove that the planet is getting warmer, when that's actually contrary to most people's sensations.
I mean, if you actually measure the temperature over a period -- I mean, the temperature has been measured now pretty carefully for about 50, 60 years -- longer than that it's been measured, but in really nice, precise ways, and records have been kept for 50 or 60 years, and in fact, the temperature hadn't really gone up.
It's like, the average temperature has gone up a tiny little bit, because the nighttime temperatures at the weather stations have come up just a little bit.
But there's a good explanation for that.
And it's that the weather stations are all built outside of town, where the airport was, and now the town's moved out there, there's concrete all around and they call it the skyline effect.
And most responsible people that measure temperatures realize you have to shield your measuring device from that.
And even then, you know, because the buildings get warm in the daytime, and they keep it a little warmer at night.
So the temperature has been, sort of, inching up.
It should have been. But not a lot. Not like, you know -- the first guy -- the first guy that got the idea that we're going to fry ourselves here, actually, he didn't think of it that way.
His name was Sven Arrhenius. He was Swedish, and he said, if you double the CO2 level in the atmosphere, which he thought might -- this is in 1900 -- the temperature ought to go up about 5.5 degrees, he calculated.
He was thinking of the earth as, kind of like, you know, like a completely insulated thing with no stuff in it, really, just energy coming down, energy leaving.
And so he came up with this theory, and he said, this will be cool, because it'll be a longer growing season in Sweden, you know, and the surfers liked it, the surfers thought, that's a cool idea, because it's pretty cold in the ocean sometimes, and -- but a lot of other people later on started thinking it would be bad, you know.
But nobody actually demonstrated it, right?
I mean, the temperature as measured -- and you can find this on our wonderful Internet, you just go and look for all NASAs records, and all the Weather Bureau's records, and you'll look at it yourself, and you'll see, the temperature has just -- the nighttime temperature measured on the surface of the planet has gone up a tiny little bit.
So if you just average that and the daytime temperature, it looks like it went up about .7 degrees in this century.
But in fact, it was just coming up -- it was the nighttime; the daytime temperatures didn't go up.
So -- and Arrhenius' theory -- and all the global warmers think -- they would say, yeah, it should go up in the daytime, too, if it's the greenhouse effect.
Now, people like things that have, like, names like that, that they can envision it, right? I mean -- but people don't like things like this, so -- most -- I mean, you don't get all excited about things like the actual evidence, you know, which would be evidence for strengthening of the tropical circulation in the 1990s.
It's a paper that came out in February, and most of you probably hadn't heard about it.
"Evidence for Large Decadal Variability in the Tropical Mean Radiative Energy Budget."
Excuse me. Those papers were published by NASA, and some scientists at Columbia, and Viliki and a whole bunch of people, Princeton.
And those two papers came out in Science Magazine, February the first, and these -- the conclusion in both of these papers, and in also the Science editor's, like, descriptions of these papers, for, you know, for the quickie, is that our theories about global warming are completely wrong. I mean, what these guys were doing, and this is what -- the NASA people have been saying this for a long time.
They say, if you measure the temperature of the atmosphere, it isn't going up -- it's not going up at all. We've doing it very carefully now for 20 years, from satellites, and it isn't going up.
And in this paper, they show something much more striking, and that was that they did what they call a radiation -- and I'm not going to go into the details of it, actually it's quite complicated, but it isn't as complicated as they might make you think it is by the words they use in those papers. If you really get down to it, they say, the sun puts out a certain amount of energy -- we know how much that is -- it falls on the earth, the earth gives back a certain amount.
When it gets warm it generates -- it makes redder energy -- I mean, like infra-red, like something that's warm gives off infra-red.
The whole business of the global warming -- trash, really, is that -- if the -- if there's too much CO2 in the atmosphere, the heat that's trying to escape won't be able to get out. But the heat coming from the sun, which is mostly down in the -- it's like 350 nanometers, which is where it's centered -- that goes right through CO2.
So you still get heated, but you don't dissipate any.
Well, these guys measured all of those things.
I mean, you can talk about that stuff, and you can write these large reports, and you can get government money to do it, but these -- they actually measured it, and it turns out that in the last 10 years -- that's why they say "decadal" there -- that the energy -- that the level of what they call "imbalance" has been way the hell over what was expected.
Like, the amount of imbalance -- meaning, heat's coming in and it's not going out that you would get from having double the CO2, which we're not anywhere near that, by the way.
But if we did, in 2025 or something, have double the CO2 as we had in 1900, they say it would be increase the energy budget by about -- in other words, one watt per square centimeter more would be coming in than going out.
So the planet should get warmer.
Well, they found out in this study -- these two studies by two different teams -- that five and a half watts per square meter had been coming in from 1998, 1999, and the place didn't get warmer.
So the theory's kaput -- it's nothing.
These papers should have been called, "The End to the Global Warming Fiasco," you know.
They're concerned, and you can tell they have very guarded conclusions in these papers, because they're talking about big laboratories that are funded by lots of money and by scared people.
You know, if they said, you know what?
There isn't a problem with global warming any longer, so we can -- you know, they're funding.
And if you start a grant request with something like that, and say, global warming obviously hadn't happened...
if they -- if they -- if they actually -- if they actually said that, I'm getting out.
(Laughter) I'll stand up too, and -- (Laughter) (Applause) They have to say that.
They had to be very cautious.
But what I'm saying is, you can be delighted, because the editor of Science, who is no dummy, and both of these fairly professional -- really professional teams, have really come to the same conclusion and in the bottom lines in their papers they have to say, what this means is, that what we've been thinking, was the global circulation model that we predict that the earth is going to get overheated that it's all wrong. It's wrong by a large factor.
It's not by a small one. They just -- they just misinterpreted the fact that the earth -- there's obviously some mechanisms going on that nobody knew about, because the heat's coming in and it isn't getting warmer.
So the planet is a pretty amazing thing, you know, it's big and horrible -- and big and wonderful, and it does all kinds of things we don't know anything about.
So I mean, the reason I put those things all together, OK, here's the way you're supposed to do science -- some science is done for other reasons, and just curiosity.
And there's a lot of things like global warming, and ozone hole and you know, a whole bunch of scientific public issues, that if you're interested in them, then you have to get down the details, and read the papers called, "Large Decadal Variability in the..."
You have to figure out what all those words mean.
And if you just listen to the guys who are hyping those issues, and making a lot of money out of it, you'll be misinformed, and you'll be worrying about the wrong things.
Remember the 10 things that are going to get you. The -- one of them -- (Laughter) And the asteroids is the one I really agree with there.
I mean, you've got to watch out for asteroids. OK, thank you for having me here.
(Applause)
It may seem like we're all standing on solid earth right now, but we're not.
The rocks and the dirt underneath us are crisscrossed by tiny little fractures and empty spaces.
And these empty spaces are filled with astronomical quantities of microbes, such as these ones.
The deepest that we found microbes so far into the earth is five kilometers down.
So like, if you pointed yourself at the ground and took off running into the ground, you could run an entire 5K race and microbes would line your whole path.
So you may not have ever thought about these microbes that are deep inside earth's crust, but you probably thought about the microbes living in our guts.
If you add up the gut microbiomes of all the people and all the animals on the planet, collectively, this weighs about 100,000 tons.
This is a huge biome that we carry in our bellies every single day.
We should all be proud.
(Laughter) But it pales in comparison to the number of microbes that are covering the entire surface of the earth, like in our soils, our rivers and our oceans.
Collectively, these weigh about two billion tons.
But it turns out that the majority of microbes on earth aren't even in oceans or our guts or sewage treatment plants.
Most of them are actually inside the earth's crust.
So collectively, these weigh 40 billion tons.
This is one of the biggest biomes on the planet, and we didn't even know it existed until a few decades ago.
So the possibilities for what life is like down there, or what it might do for humans, are limitless.
This is a map showing a red dot for every place where we've gotten pretty good deep subsurface samples with modern microbiological methods, and you may be impressed that we're getting a pretty good global coverage, but actually, if you remember that these are the only places that we have samples from, it looks a little worse.
If we were all in an alien spaceship, trying to reconstruct a map of the globe from only these samples, we'd never be able to do it.
So people sometimes say to me, "Yeah, there's a lot of microbes in the subsurface, but ...
aren't they just kind of dormant?"
This is a good point.
Relative to a ficus plant or the measles or my kid's guinea pigs, these microbes probably aren't doing much of anything at all.
We know that they have to be slow, because there's so many of them.
If they all started dividing at the rate of E. coli, then they would double the entire weight of the earth, rocks included, over a single night.
In fact, many of them probably haven't even undergone a single cell division since the time of ancient Egypt.
Which is just crazy.
Like, how do you wrap your head around things that are so long-lived?
But I thought of an analogy that I really love, but it's weird and it's complicated.
So I hope that you can all go there with me.
Alright, let's try it.
It's like trying to figure out the life cycle of a tree ...
if you only lived for a day.
So like if human life span was only a day, and we lived in winter, then you would go your entire life without ever seeing a tree with a leaf on it.
And there would be so many human generations that would pass by within a single winter that you may not even have access to a history book that says anything other than the fact that trees are always lifeless sticks that don't do anything.
Of course, this is ridiculous.
We know that trees are just waiting for summer so they can reactivate.
But if the human life span were significantly shorter than that of trees, we might be completely oblivious to this totally mundane fact.
So when we say that these deep subsurface microbes are just dormant, are we like people who die after a day, trying to figure out how trees work?
What if these deep subsurface organisms are just waiting for their version of summer, but our lives are too short for us to see it?
If you take E. coli and seal it up in a test tube, with no food or nutrients, and leave it there for months to years, most of the cells die off, of course, because they're starving.
But a few of the cells survive.
If you take these old surviving cells and compete them, also under starvation conditions, against a new, fast-growing culture of E. coli, the grizzled old tough guys beat out the squeaky clean upstarts every single time.
So this is evidence there's actually an evolutionary payoff to being extraordinarily slow.
So it's possible that maybe we should not equate being slow with being unimportant.
Maybe these out-of-sight, out-of-mind microbes could actually be helpful to humanity.
OK, so as far as we know, there are two ways to do subsurface living.
The first is to wait for food to trickle down from the surface world, like trying to eat the leftovers of a picnic that happened 1,000 years ago.
Which is a crazy way to live, but shockingly seems to work out for a lot of microbes in earth.
The other possibility is for a microbe to just say, "Nah, I don't need the surface world.
For microbes that go this route, they have to get everything that they need in order to survive from inside the earth.
Some things are actually easier for them to get.
They're more abundant inside the earth, like water or nutrients, like nitrogen and iron and phosphorus, or places to live.
These are things that we literally kill each other to get ahold of up at the surface world.
But in the subsurface, the problem is finding enough energy.
Up at the surface, plants can chemically knit together carbon dioxide molecules into yummy sugars as fast as the sun's photons hit their leaves.
But in the subsurface, of course, there's no sunlight, so this ecosystem has to solve the problem of who is going to make the food for everybody else.
The subsurface needs something that's like a plant but it breathes rocks.
Luckily, such a thing exists, and it's called a chemolithoautotroph.
(Laughter) Which is a microbe that uses chemicals -- "chemo," from rocks -- "litho," to make food -- "autotroph."
And they can do this with a ton of different elements.
They can do this with sulphur, iron, manganese, nitrogen, carbon, some of them can use pure electrons, straight up.
Like, if you cut the end off of an electrical cord, they could breathe it like a snorkel.
(Laughter) These chemolithoautotrophs take the energy that they get from these processes and use it to make food, like plants do.
But we know that plants do more than just make food.
They also make a waste product, oxygen, which we are 100 percent dependent upon.
But the waste product that these chemolithoautotrophs make is often in the form of minerals, like rust or pyrite, like fool's gold, or carminites, like limestone.
So what we have are microbes that are really, really slow, like rocks, that get their energy from rocks, that make as their waste product other rocks.
So am I talking about biology, or am I talking about geology?
This stuff really blurs the lines.
(Laughter) So if I'm going to do this thing, and I'm going to be a biologist who studies microbes that kind of act like rocks, then I should probably start studying geology.
And what's the coolest part of geology?
Volcanoes.
(Laughter) This is looking inside the crater of Poás Volcano in Costa Rica.
Many volcanoes on earth arise because an oceanic tectonic plate crashes into a continental plate.
As this oceanic plate subducts or gets moved underneath this continental plate, things like water and carbon dioxide and other materials get squeezed out of it, like ringing a wet washcloth.
So in this way, subduction zones are like portals into the deep earth, where materials are exchanged between the surface and the subsurface world.
So I was recently invited by some of my colleagues in Costa Rica to come and work with them on some of the volcanoes.
And of course I said yes, because, I mean, Costa Rica is beautiful, but also because it sits on top of one of these subduction zones.
We wanted to ask the very specific question: Why is it that the carbon dioxide that comes out of this deeply buried oceanic tectonic plate is only coming out of the volcanoes?
Why don't we see it distributed throughout the entire subduction zone?
Do the microbes have something to do with that?
So this is a picture of me inside Poás Volcano, along with my colleague Donato Giovannelli.
That lake that we're standing next to is made of pure battery acid.
I know this because we were measuring the pH when this picture was taken.
And at some point while we were working inside the crater, I turned to my Costa Rican colleague Carlos Ramírez and I said, "Alright, if this thing starts erupting right now, what's our exit strategy?"
And he said, "Oh, yeah, great question, it's totally easy.
Just turn around and enjoy the view."
(Laughter) "Because it will be your last."
(Laughter) And it may sound like he was being overly dramatic, but 54 days after I was standing next to that lake, this happened.
Audience: Oh!
Freaking terrifying, right?
(Laughs) This was the biggest eruption this volcano had had in 60-some-odd years, and not long after this video ends, the camera that was taking the video is obliterated and the entire lake that we had been sampling vaporizes completely.
But I also want to be clear that we were pretty sure this was not going to happen on the day that we were actually in the volcano, because Costa Rica monitors its volcanoes very carefully through the OVSICORI Institute, and we had scientists from that institute with us on that day.
But the fact that it erupted illustrates perfectly that if you want to look for where carbon dioxide gas is coming out of this oceanic plate, then you should look no further than the volcanoes themselves.
But if you go to Costa Rica, you may notice that in addition to these volcanoes there are tons of cozy little hot springs all over the place.
Some of the water in these hot springs is actually bubbling up from this deeply buried oceanic plate.
And our hypothesis was that there should be carbon dioxide bubbling up with it, but something deep underground was filtering it out.
So we spent two weeks driving all around Costa Rica, sampling every hot spring we could find -- it was awful, let me tell you.
And then we spent the next two years measuring and analyzing data.
And if you're not a scientist, I'll just let you know that the big discoveries don't really happen when you're at a beautiful hot spring or on a public stage; they happen when you're hunched over a messy computer or you're troubleshooting a difficult instrument, or you're Skyping your colleagues because you are completely confused about your data.
Scientific discoveries, kind of like deep subsurface microbes, can be very, very slow.
But in our case, this really paid off this one time.
We discovered that literally tons of carbon dioxide were coming out of this deeply buried oceanic plate.
And the thing that was keeping them underground and keeping it from being released out into the atmosphere was that deep underground, underneath all the adorable sloths and toucans of Costa Rica, were chemolithoautotrophs.
These microbes and the chemical processes that were happening around them were converting this carbon dioxide into carbonate mineral and locking it up underground.
Which makes you wonder: If these subsurface processes are so good at sucking up all the carbon dioxide coming from below them, could they also help us with a little carbon problem we've got going on up at the surface?
Humans are releasing enough carbon dioxide into our atmosphere that we are decreasing the ability of our planet to support life as we know it.
And scientists and engineers and entrepreneurs are working on methods to pull carbon dioxide out of these point sources, so that they're not released into the atmosphere.
And they need to put it somewhere.
So for this reason, we need to keep studying places where this carbon might be stored, possibly in the subsurface, to know what's going to happen to it when it goes there.
Will these deep subsurface microbes be a problem because they're too slow to actually keep anything down there?
Or will they be helpful because they'll help convert this stuff to solid carbonate minerals?
If we can make such a big breakthrough just from one study that we did in Costa Rica, then imagine what else is waiting to be discovered down there.
This new field of geo-bio-chemistry, or deep subsurface biology, or whatever you want to call it, is going to have huge implications, not just for mitigating climate change, but possibly for understanding how life and earth have coevolved, or finding new products that are useful for industrial or medical applications.
Maybe even predicting earthquakes or finding life outside our planet.
It could even help us understand the origin of life itself.
Fortunately, I don't have to do this by myself.
I have amazing colleagues all over the world who are cracking into the mysteries of this deep subsurface world.
And it may seem like life buried deep within the earth's crust is so far away from our daily experiences that it's kind of irrelevant.
But the truth is that this weird, slow life may actually have the answers to some of the greatest mysteries of life on earth.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Ah, earth's oceans.
They are beautiful, inspiring, life-sustaining.
They are also, as you're probably quite aware, more or less screwed.
In the Seychelles, for example, human activities and climate change have left corals bleached.
Overfishing has caused fish stocks to plummet.
Biodiversity is in peril.
So what can we do?
Well, some form of protection, obviously.
Nature is very resilient.
When marine areas are strategically protected, entire ecosystems can bounce back.
However, creating marine protected areas isn't easy.
First, you have the issue of figuring out where to protect.
This coral reef overlaps with that international fishing route, intersects with this fish hatchery.
Everything is interconnected.
And marine protection plans must take into account how one area affects another.
Then, there's the issue of getting everyone on board.
Coastal economies often rely on fishing and tourism.
If people think they can't do their work, there's no chance of getting the local buy-in you need for the area to be successful.
Marine protected areas must also be enforced.
That means the government itself must be deeply invested in the plan.
Token support will not cut it.
And finally, conservation requires money.
Governments in island and coastal nations may want to protect their waters, but often these nations have very high debt and can't afford to prioritize conservation.
If we rely on philanthropic dollars alone to fund marine protection, we might get a small marine-protected area here, another little one there.
But we need more marine protected areas faster, to have lasting impact.
So what exactly does smart ocean conservation look like?
How do we get the money, government support and careful planning that takes into account both local economies and complex ecosystems?
We want to share with you an audacious idea from The Nature Conservancy.
It seeks to address all of these things in one fell swoop.
They've realized that debt held by island and coastal nations is the very thing that will enable them to achieve their conservation goals.
TNC's idea is to restructure this debt, to generate the funds and political will to protect reefs, mangroves and fisheries.
For example, if you refinance your house to take advantage of a better interest rate, maybe you use the savings to insulate your attic.
That's what Blue Bonds for Conservation do for entire coastal countries.
Refinance the debt, then use the savings to create marine protected areas.
Of course, sovereign debt restructuring is more complicated than that, but you get the basic idea.
If investors put in 40 million dollars now, it can unlock as much as 1.6 billion for ocean conservation.
And this is how the work gets done.
Step one: negotiate the deal.
A coastal nation commits to protect at least 30 percent of its ocean areas.
In exchange, The Nature Conservancy bring investors, public funders and international development organizations to the table to restructure a portion of the nation's debt, leading to lower interest rates and longer repayment periods.
Step two: create a marine plan.
Simultaneously, The Nature Conservancy works with marine scientists, government leaders and local stakeholders to create a detailed conservation plan that integrates the needs of the ocean with the needs of the people.
Step three: activate for longevity.
TNC establishes an independently run conservation trust fund.
The savings from the debt restructure goes into it to support new marine protected areas.
The trust then holds the government accountable for its commitments, ensuring that the Blue Bonds finance real protection efforts.
Could this plan work?
It already has.
In 2016, TNC helped create a national conservation plan in the Seychelles.
TNC restructured 22 million dollars of the government's debt.
And in exchange, the government agreed to protect 30 percent of its marine areas.
Today, the Seychelles is on track to protect 400,000 square kilometers of ocean.
That's an area roughly the size of Germany.
The Seychelles is protecting its coral reefs, it's replenishing its fisheries, it's improving its resilience to climate change.
At the same time, it's strengthening its economy.
This success is making other governments take note.
Many want to be part of this.
There's an opportunity to scale this up, dramatically.
TNC has identified 20 more nations where such a plan should be possible.
But to execute, they need seed capital.
And to put in place local teams who can develop conservation plans, work with all the stakeholders and structure the deals.
If they get the support they need over the next five years, they could protect four million square kilometers of ocean.
That's 10 Germanies.
This would increase the amount of protected areas in all of the world's oceans by an incredible 15 percent.
It would allow vast tracks of the world's coral reefs to replenish and give safe harbor to countless species.
This would be truly incredible.
And it's really just the beginning.
Because there aren't 20 countries in the world where this kind of debt conversion would work.
There are almost 100.
With this approach, everyone wins.
Governments, local citizens, funders, and most importantly, our oceans.
So in fact, we all win.
Ah, earth's oceans.
[The Audacious Project]
I'm kind of tired of talking about simplicity, actually, so I thought I'd make my life more complex, as a serious play.
So, I'm going to, like, go through some slides from way back when, and walk through them to give you a sense of how I end up here.
So, basically it all began with this whole idea of a computer.
Who has a computer? Yeah.
O.K., so, everyone has a computer.
Even a mobile phone, it's a computer.
And -- anyone remember this workbook, "Instant Activities for Your Apple" -- free poster in each book?
This was how computing began.
Don't forget: a computer came out; it had no software.
You'd buy that thing, you'd bring it home, you'd plug it in, and it would do absolutely nothing at all.
So, you had to program it, and there were great programming, like, tutorials, like this.
I mean, this was great.
It's, like, you know, Herbie the Apple II.
It's such a great way to -- I mean, they should make Java books like this, and we've have no problem learning a program.
But this was a great, grand time of the computer, when it was just a raw, raw, what is it? kind of an era.
And, you see, this era coincided with my own childhood.
I grew up in a tofu factory in Seattle.
Who of you grew up in a family business, suffered the torture? Yes, yes.
The torture was good. Wasn't it good torture?
It was just life-changing, you know. And so, in my life, you know, I was in the tofu; it was a family business.
And my mother was a kind of a designer, also.
She'd make this kind of, like, wall of tofu cooking, and it would confuse the customers, because they all thought it was a restaurant.
A bad sort of branding thing, or whatever.
But, anyway, that's where I grew up, in this little tofu factory in Seattle, and it was kind of like this: a small room where I kind of grew up. I'm big there in that picture.
That's my dad. My dad was kind of like MacGyver, really: he would invent, like, ways to make things heavy.
Like back here, there's like, concrete block technology here, and he would need the concrete blocks to press the tofu, because tofu is actually kind of a liquidy type of thing, and so you have to have heavy stuff to push out the liquid and make it hard.
Tofu comes out in these big batches, and my father would sort of cut them by hand.
I can't tell you -- family business story: you'd understand this -- my father was the most sincere man possible.
He walked into a Safeway once on a rainy day, slipped, broke his arm, rushed out: he didn't want to inconvenience Safeway.
So, instead, you know, my father's, like, arm's broken for two weeks in the store, and that week -- now, those two weeks were when my older brother and I had to do everything.
And that was torture, real torture.
Because, you see, we'd seen my father taking the big block of tofu and cutting it, like, knife in, zap, zap, zap. We thought, wow.
So, the first time I did that, I went, like, whoa! Like this.
Bad blocks. But anyways, the tofu to me was kind of my origin, basically.
And because working in a store was so hard, I liked going to school; it was like heaven.
And I was really good at school.
So, when I got to MIT, you know, as most of you who are creatives, your parents all told you not to be creative, right?
So, same way, you know, I was good at art and good at math, and my father says, he's -- John's good at math.
I went to MIT, did my math, but I had this wonderful opportunity, because computers had just become visual.
The Apple -- Macintosh just came out; I had a Mac in hand when I went to MIT.
And it was a time when a guy who, kind of, could cross the two sides -- it was a good time.
And so, I remember that my first major piece of software was on a direct copy of then-Aldus PageMaker.
I made a desktop publishing system way back when, and that was, kind of, my first step into figuring out how to -- oh, these two sides are kind of fun to mix.
And the problem when you're younger -- for all you students out there -- is, your head gets kind of big really easy.
And when I was making icons, I was, like, the icon master, and I was, like, yeah, I'm really good at this, you know.
And then luckily, you know, I had the fortune of going to something called a library, and in the library I came upon this very book.
I found this book. It's called, "Thoughts on Design," by a man named Paul Rand.
It's a little slim volume; I'm not sure if you've seen this.
It's a very nice little book. It's about this guy, Paul Rand, who was one of the greatest graphic designers, and also a great writer as well.
And when I saw this man's work, I realized how bad I was at design, or whatever I called it back then, and I suddenly had a kind of career goal, kind of in hot pursuit.
So I kind of switched. I went to MIT, finished.
I got my masters, and then went to art school after that.
And just began to design stuff, like chopstick wrappers, napkins, menus -- whatever I could get a handle on: sort of wheel-and-deal, move up in the design world, whatever.
And isn't it that strange moment when you publish your design?
Remember that moment -- publishing your designs?
Remember that moment? It felt so good, didn't it?
So, I was published, you know, so, wow, my design's in a book, you know?
After that, things kind of got strange, and I got thinking about the computer, because the computer to me always, kind of, bothered me.
I didn't quite get it. And Paul Rand was a kind of crusty designer, you know, a crusty designer, like a good -- kind of like a good French bread?
You know, he wrote in one of his books: "A Yale student once said, 'I came here to learn how to design, not how to use a computer.' Design schools take heed."
This is in the '80s, in the great clash of computer/non-computer people.
A very difficult time, actually.
And this to me was an important message from Rand.
And so I began to sort of mess with the computer at the time.
This is the first sort of play thing I did, my own serious play.
I built a working version of an Adobe Illustrator-ish thing.
It looks like Illustrator; it can, like, draw.
It was very hard to make this, actually.
It took a month to make this part.
And then I thought, what if I added this feature, where I can say, this point, you can fly like a bird. You're free, kind of thing.
So I could, sort of, change the kind of stability with a little control there on the dial, and I can sort of watch it flip around.
And this is in 1993.
And when my professors saw this, they were very upset at me.
They were saying, Why's it moving?
They were saying, Make it stop now.
Now, I was saying, Well, that's the whole point: it's moving.
And he says, Well, when's it going to stop?
And I said, Never.
And he said, Even worse. Stop it now.
I started studying this whole idea, of like, what is this computer? It's a strange medium.
It's not like print. It's not like video.
It lasts forever. It's a very strange medium.
So, I went off with this, and began to look for things even more.
And so in Japan, I began to experiment with people.
This is actually bad: human experiments.
I would do these things where I'd have students become pens: there's blue pen, red pen, green pen, black pen.
And someone sits down and draws a picture.
They're laughing because he said, draw from the middle-right to the middle, and he kind of messed up.
See, humans don't know how to take orders; the computer's so good at it.
This guy figured out how to get the computer to draw with two pens at once: you know, you, pen, do this, and you, pen, do this.
And so began to have multiple pens on the page -- again, hard to do with our hands.
And then someone discovered this "a-ha moment" where you could use coordinate systems.
We thought, ah, this is when it's going to happen.
In the end, he drew a house. It was the most boring thing.
It became computerish; we began to think computerish -- the X, Y system -- and so that was kind of a revelation.
And after this I wanted to build a computer out of people, called a human-powered computer.
So, this happened in 1993.
Sound down, please.
It's a computer where the people are the parts.
I have behind this wall a disk drive, a CPU, a graphics card, a memory system.
They're picking up a giant floppy disk made of cardboard.
It's put inside the computer.
And that little program's on that cardboard disk.
So, she wears the disk, and reads the data off the sectors of the disk, and the computer starts up; it sort of boots up, really.
And it's a sort of a working computer. And when I built this computer, I had a moment of -- what is it called? -- the epiphany where I realized that the computer's just so fast.
This computer appears to be fast - she's working pretty hard, and people are running around, and we think, wow, this is happening at a fast rate.
And this computer's programmed to do only one thing, which is, if you move your mouse, the mouse changes on the screen.
On the computer, when you move your mouse, that arrow moves around.
On this computer, if you move the mouse, it takes half an hour for the mouse cursor to change.
To give you a sense of the speed, the scale: the computer is just so amazingly fast, O.K.?
And so, after this I began to do experiments for different companies.
This is something I did for Sony in 1996.
It was three Sony "H" devices that responded to sound.
So, if you talk into the mike, you'll hear some music in your headphones; if you talk in the phone, then video would happen.
So, I began to experiment with industry in different ways with this kind of mixture of skills.
I did this ad. I don't believe in this kind of alcohol, but I do drink sometimes.
And Chanel. So, getting to do different projects.
And also, one thing I realized is that I like to make things.
We like to make things. It's fun to make things.
And so I never developed the ability to have a staff.
I have no staff; it's all kind of made by hand -- these sort of broken hands.
And these hands were influenced by this man, Mr. Inami Naomi.
This guy was my kind of like mentor.
He was the first digital media producer in Tokyo.
He's the guy that kind of discovered me, and kind of got me going in digital media.
He was such an inspirational guy.
I remember, like, we'd be in his studio, like, at 2 a.m., and then he'd show up from some client meeting.
He'd come in and say, you know, If I am here, everything is okay.
And you'd feel so much better, you know.
And I'll never forget how, like, but -- I'll never forget how, like, he had a sudden situation with his -- he had an aneurysm.
He went into a coma.
And so, for three years he was out, and he could only blink, and so I realized at this moment, I thought, wow -- how fragile is this thing we're wearing, this body and mind we're wearing, and so I thought, How do you go for it more?
How do you take that time you have left and go after it?
So, Naomi was pivotal in that.
And so, I began to think more carefully about the computer.
This was a moment where I was thinking about, so, you have a computer program, it responds to motion -- X and Y -- and I realized that each computer program has all these images inside the program.
So, if you can see here, you know, that program you're seeing in the corner, if you spread it out, it's all these things all at once.
It's real simultaneity. It's nothing we're used to working with.
We're so used to working in one vector.
This is all at the same time.
The computer lives in so many dimensions.
And also, at the same time I was frustrated, because I would go to all these art and design schools everywhere, and there were these, like, "the computer lab," you know, and this is, like, in the late 1990s, and this is in Basel, a great graphic design school.
And here's this, like, dirty, kind of, shoddy, kind of, dark computer room.
And I began to wonder, Is this the goal?
Is this what we want, you know?
And also, I began to be fascinated by machines -- you know, like copy machines -- and so this is actually in Basel.
I noticed how we spent so much time on making it interactive -- this is, like, a touch screen -- and I noticed how you can only touch five places, and so, "why are we wasting so much interactivity everywhere?"
became a question. And also, the sound: I discovered I can make my ThinkPad pretend it's a telephone.
You get it? No? O.K.
And also, I discovered in Logan airport, this was, like, calling out to me.
Do you hear that? It's like cows. This is at 4 a.m. at Logan.
So, I was wondering, like, what is this thing in front of me, this computer thing?
It didn't make any sense.
So, I began to make things again. This is another series of objects made of old computers from my basement.
I made -- I took my old Macintoshes and made different objects out of them from Tokyo.
I began to be very disinterested in computers themselves, so I began to make paintings out of PalmPilots.
I made this series of works.
They're paintings I made and put a PalmPilot in the middle as a kind of display that's sort of thinking, I'm abstract art. What am I? I'm abstract.
And so it keeps thinking out loud of its own abstraction.
I began to be fascinated by plastic, so I spent four months making eight plastic blocks perfectly optically transparent, as a kind of release of stress.
Because of that, I became interested in blue tape, so in San Francisco, at C.C., I had a whole exhibition on blue tape.
I made a whole installation out of blue tape -- blue painters' tape.
And at this point my wife kind of got worried about me, so I stopped doing blue tape and began to think, Well, what else is there in life?
And so computers, as you know, these big computers, there are now tiny computers.
They're littler computers, so the one-chip computers, I began to program one-chip computers and make objects out of P.C. boards, LEDs.
I began to make LED sculptures that would live inside little boxes out of MDF.
This is a series of light boxes I made for a show in Italy.
Very simple boxes: you just press one button and some LED interaction occurs.
This is a series of lamps I made. This is a Bento box lamp: it's sort of a plastic rice lamp; it's very friendly.
I did a show in London last year made out of iPods -- I used iPods as a material.
So I took 16 iPod Nanos and made a kind of a Nano fish, basically.
Recently, this is for Reebok.
I've done shoes for Reebok as well, as a kind of a hobby for apparel.
So anyways, there are all these things you can do, but the thing I love the most is to experience, taste the world.
The world is just so tasty.
We think we'll go to a museum; that's where all the tastes are.
No, they're all out there.
So, this is, like, in front of the Eiffel Tower, really, actually, around the Louvre area.
This I found, where nature had made a picture for me.
This is a perfect 90-degree angle by nature.
In this strange moment where, like, these things kind of appeared.
We all are creative people.
We have this gene defect in our mind.
We can't help but stop, right? This feeling's a wonderful thing.
It's the forever-always-on museum.
This is from the Cape last year.
I discovered that I had to find the equation of art and design, which we know as circle-triangle-square.
It's everywhere on the beach, I discovered.
I began to collect every instance of circle-triangle-square.
I put these all back, by the way.
And I also discovered how .
some rocks are twins separated at birth.
This is also out there, you know.
I'm, like, how did this happen, kind of thing?
I brought you guys together again.
So, three years ago I discovered, the letters M-I-T occurring in simplicity and complexity.
My alma mater, MIT, and I had this moment -- a kind of M. Night Shayamalan moment -- where I thought, Whoa! I have to do this.
And I went after it with passion.
However, recently this RISD opportunity kind of arose -- going to RISD -- and I couldn't reconcile this real easy, because the letters had told me, MIT forever.
But I discovered in the French word raison d'être.
I was, like, aha, wait a second.
And there RISD appeared.
And so I realized it was O.K. to go.
So, I'm going to RISD, actually.
Who's a RISD alum out there?
RISD alums? Yeah, RISD. There we go, RISD. Woo, RISD.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, Art Center -- Art Center is good, too.
RISD is kind of my new kind of passion, and I'll tell you a little bit about that.
So, RISD is -- I was outside RISD, and some student wrote this on some block, and I thought, Wow, RISD wants to know what itself is.
And I have no idea what RISD should be, actually, or what it wants to be, but one thing I have to tell you is that although I'm a technologist, I don't like technology very much.
It's a, kind of, the qi thing, or whatever.
People say, Are you going to bring RISD into the future?
And I say, well, I'm going to bring the future back to RISD.
There's my perspective. Because in reality, the problem isn't how to make the world more technological.
It's about how to make it more humane again.
And if anything, I think RISD has a strange DNA.
It's a strange exuberance about materials, about the world: a fascination that I think the world needs quite very much right now.
So, thank you everyone.
I'm Clint Smith and this is "Ode to the Only Black Kid in the Class."
You, it seems, are the manifestation of several lifetimes of toil.
Brown v. Board in flesh.
Most days the classroom feels like an antechamber.
You are deemed expert on all things Morrison, King, Malcolm, Rosa.
Hell, weren’t you sitting on that bus, too?
You are every- body’s best friend until you are not.
Hip-hop lyricologist.
Presumed athlete.
Free &amp; Reduced sideshow.
Exception and caricature.
Too black and too white all at once.
If you are successful it is because of affirmative action.
If you fail it is because you were destined to.
You are invisible until they turn on the Friday night lights.
Here you are star before they render you asteroid.
Before they watch you turn to dust.
Sixty-five million years ago, a very important and catastrophic event changed the course of life on land.
And although we know that the land animals I'm going to talk about are just the scum of the Earth on the land -- the little bits of land floating around -- but they are important to us because they're sort of in our scale of experience from millimeters to meters.
And these animals disappeared, and a separate life, mammals, radiated out to take their place. And so, we know this in extraordinary detail. And so this is a core from near Bermuda. We know that the tsunamis, the earthquakes, and the things that we've experienced in the entire record of humankind history can't really quite get around the kind of disaster that this represented for the Earth.
So even before that impact was known, even before scientists in general came to an agreement over the theory of evolution, scientists and natural historians of all kinds of stripes actually had divided Earth's life's history into these two episodes: Mesozoic, the middle life, and the Cenozoic, the recent life.
And as it turns out, it actually corresponds really nicely with geologic history.
So we have a Mesozoic period, an age of fragmentation, and a Cenozoic period, an age of reconnection -- South America to North America, India to Asia.
And so my work, really, is trying to understand the character of that Mesozoic radiation compared to the Cenozoic radiation to see what mysteries we can understand from dinosaurs and from other animals about what life on drifting continents really can tell us about evolution.
The work immediately begs the question, "Why didn't they go into the waters?"
I mean, certainly mammals did. This is one example.
You can go outside -- see many other examples.
Within five, 10 million years of the bolide impact we had a whole variety of animals going into the water. Why didn't they do that?
Why didn't they hang around in trees at good size, and why didn't they burrow?
Why didn't they do all these things, and if they didn't do all these things, what kinds of animals were in those spaces?
And if there were no animals in those spaces, what does that tell us about, you know, how evolution works on land?
Really interesting questions. I think a lot of it has to do with body size.
In fact, I think that most of it has to do with body size -- the size you are when you inherit a vacant ecospace from whatever natural disaster.
Looking at dinosaur evolution and studying it, digging it up for many years, I end up looking at the mammal radiation, and it seems as though everything is quick time, just like technology, advancing by an order of magnitude.
Dinosaur evolution proceeded at a stately pace, an order of magnitude slower on any way you want to measure it.
You want to measure it by diversity?
You want to measure it by the time it took to reach maximum body size?
Yes, they do have larger body size, but many of them are smaller, but we're interested in the time it took them to achieve that.
Fifty million years to achieve this maximum body size.
And that is 10 times longer than it took the mammals to achieve maximum body size and invade all those habitats.
So there's lessons to learn, and there's lessons to learn from the exception, the exception that we know very well today from the discoveries we've made, and many other scholars have made around the world.
This slide was shown before. This is the famous Jurassic bird Archaeopteryx.
We now know this transition is the one time that dinosaurs actually went below that body size -- we're going to see where they began in a minute -- and it is the one time that they rapidly invaded all the habitats I just told you that dinosaurs weren't in.
They became marine. We now know them today from the ice caps.
There's burrowing birds.
They inhabit the trees at all body sizes, and, of course, they inhabit the land.
So we were the first to actually name a bird from the famous series that later exploded onto the pages of Science and Nature.
We called this bird Sinornis. It's a little bit more advanced than Archaeopteryx, and if you go to different layers, you find things that are less advanced than Archaeopteryx, and every grade in between, so that if you find something today, we're usually splitting hairs -- or, more appropriately, feathers -- as to decide whether it's actually a non-avian or an avian.
It is the greatest transition that we have, actually, on land from one habitat to another, bar none, to understand how a bony, fairly heavy, kilogram or a couple-of-kilogram animal could make such a transition.
It is really our greatest -- one of our greatest -- evolutionary sequences.
Now, my work began at the beginning.
I thought if I'm going to understand dinosaur evolution, I'd have to go back to those beds where they had picked up fragments, go back to a time and a place where the earliest dinosaurs existed.
I'd like to call for this little video clip to give you some idea of, sort of, what we face. Normally, we get asked a lot of questions: "Well, how do you find fossils in areas that look like this?"
If we could roll that first video clip.
This is sort of a nice helicopter ride through those early beds, and they're located in Northeastern Argentina.
And we're coming over a cliff, and at the top of that cliff, dinosaurs had basically taken over.
At the bottom of the cliff, we find that they're rare as hens' teeth.
That's where dinosaur origins is to be found: at the bottom of the cliff.
You go into an area like this, you get a geologic map, you get a topographic map, and the best, most-inspired team you can bring to the area.
And the rest is up to you. You've got to find fossils.
You've got to dig a hole that's usually quite a bit bigger than that to get it out; you've got to climb those cliffs and find, really, everything that existed -- not just the dinosaurs, but the entire story. If you're lucky, and you dig a place like that, you actually find the ash bed to dig it, and we did.
228 million years old, we found what really is the most primitive dinosaur: that's the Ur-dinosaur.
A three-and-a-half foot thing, beautiful skull, predator, meat-eater, a two-legged animal.
So, all the other dinosaurs that you know, or your kids know, at least, on four legs.
This is sort of a look at the skull, and it's an absolutely fantastic thing about five or six inches long.
It looks rather bird-like because it is.
It's bird-like and hollow.
A predator. Maybe 25 pounds, or 10 kilograms.
That's where dinosaurs began. That's where the radiation began.
That is 10 times larger than the mammal radiation, which was a four-legged radiation.
We are extremely dinosaur-like, and unusual in our two-legged approach to life.
Now, if you want to understand what happened then when the continents broke apart, and dinosaurs found -- landlubbers, as they are -- found themselves adrift. There's some missing puzzle pieces.
Most of those missing puzzle pieces are southern continents, because it was those continents that are least explored.
If you want to add to this picture and try and sketch it globally, you really have to force yourself to go down to the four corners of the Earth -- Africa, India, Antarctica, Australia -- and start putting together some of these pieces.
I've been to some of those continents, but Africa was, in the words of Steven Pinker, was a blank slate, largely.
But one with an immense chalkboard in the middle, with lots of little areas of dinosaur rock if you could survive an expedition.
There's no roads into the Sahara. It's an enormous place.
To be able to excavate the 80 tons of dinosaurs that we have in the Sahara and take them out, you really have to put together an expedition team that can handle the conditions.
Some of them are political. Many of them are physical.
Some of them -- the most important -- are mental.
And you really have to be able to withstand conditions -- you have to drive into the desert, you will see landscapes in many cases -- you can see from what we've discovered -- that nobody else has ever seen.
And the kinds of teams they bring in?
Well, they're composed of people who understand science as adventure with a purpose.
They're usually students who've never seen a desert.
Some of them are more experienced.
Your job as a leader -- this is definitely a team sport -- your job as a leader is to try to inspire them to do more work than they've ever done in their life under conditions that they can't imagine.
So, 125 degrees is normal.
The ground surface at 150 -- typical.
So, you can't leave your normal metal tools out because you'll get a first-degree burn if you grab them sometimes.
So, you are finding yourself also in an amazing cultural milieu.
You're really rubbing shoulders with the world's last great nomadic people.
These are the Tuareg nomads, and they're living their lives much as they have for centuries.
Your job is to excavate things like this in the foreground, and make them enter the pages of history.
To do that, you've got to actually transport them thousands of miles out of the desert.
We're talking about Ethiopia, but let's talk about Niger -- or Niger, in our English language -- north of Nigeria -- that's where this photograph was taken.
Basically you're talking about a country that, when we started working there, did not have container traffic.
You transported the bones out yourself to the coast of Africa, onto a boat, if you wanted to get them out of the middle of the Sahara.
That's a 2,000 mile journey.
So enormous excavations and a lot of work, and out of essentially a partial herd of dinosaurs that you saw buried there -- 20 tons of material -- we erect Jobaria, a sauropod dinosaur like we haven't seen on some other continents.
It really is a little bit out of place temporally.
It looks nothing like what we would find if we dug in contemporary beds in North America.
Here's the animal that was causing it trouble.
And, you know, on and on -- a whole menagerie. When you pick up something like this -- and some of you have had the chance to touch it -- this is a piece of history. You're touching something that's 110 million years old.
This is a thumb claw. There it was, moments after it was discovered.
It is an incredible view of life, and it really began when we began to understand the depth of time.
It's only been with us for less than a century, and in that time, that fourth dimension, when radioactive dating came about, less than a century ago, and we could actually tell how old some of these things were, is probably the most profound transformation, because it changes the way we look at ourselves and the world dramatically.
When you pick up a piece of history like that, I think it can transform kids that are possibly interested in science.
That's the animal that thumb claw came from: Suchomimus.
Here's some others.
This is something we found in Morocco, an immense animal.
We prototyped by CAT-scanning the brain out of this animal.
It turns out to have a forebrain one-fifteenth the size of a human.
This was the cover of Science, because they thought that humans were more intelligent than these animals, but we can see by some in our administration that despite the enormous advantage in brain volume some of the attitudes remain the same. Anyway, smaller raptors.
All the stuff from Jurassic Park that you know of -- all those small animals -- they all come from northern continents.
This is the first skeleton from a southern continent, and guess what? You start preparing it.
It has no big claw on its hind foot. It doesn't look like a Velociraptor.
It's really a wholly separate radiation.
So what we're trying to piece together here is a story.
It involves flying reptiles like this Pterosaur that we reconstructed from Africa.
Crocodiles, of course, and that's a nasty one we haven't named yet.
And huge things -- I mean, this is a lower jaw just laying there in the desert of this enormous crocodile.
The crocodile is technically called Sarcosuchus.
That's an adult Orinoco crocodile in its jaws.
We had to try and reconstruct this.
We had to actually look at recent crocodiles to understand how crocodiles scale.
Could I have the second little video clip?
Now, this field is just -- and, of course, science in general -- is just -- adventure.
We had to find and measure the largest crocodiles living today.
Narrator: ... as long as their boat.
Man: Look at that set of choppers! Yeah, he's a big one.
Narrator: If they can just land it, this croc will provide useful data, helping Paul in his quest to understand Sarcosuchus.
Man: OK, hand me some more here. Man 2: OK.
Narrator: It falls to Paul to cover its eyes.
Man: Watch out! Watch out! No, no, no, no. You're going to have to get on the back legs.
Man: I got the back legs.
Man 2: You have the back legs? No, you have the front legs, my friend.
I've got it. I've got the back legs.
Somebody get the front legs.
Paul Sereno: Let's get this tape measure on him. Put it right there.
Wow.
Sixty-five. Wow.
That's a big skull.
Narrator: Big, but less than half the size of supercroc's skull.
Man: Enormous. PS: You've got a ... 14-foot croc.
Man: I knew it was big.
PS: Don't get off. You don't get off, but don't worry about me.
Narrator: Paul has his data, so they decide to release the animal back into the river.
PS: Don't get off! Don't get off! Don't get off!
Narrator: Paul has never seen a fossil do that.
PS: Okay, when I say three, we move.
One, two, three!
Whoa!
So -- there were -- (Applause) Well, you know, the -- the fossil record is truly amazing because it really forces you to look at living animals in a new way.
We proved with those measurements that crocodiles scaled isometrically.
It depended on the shape of their skull, though, so we had to actually get those measurements to be sure that we had reconstructed and could prove to the scientific world that supercroc in fact is a 40-foot crocodile, probably a male.
Anyway, you find other things, too.
I'm going to lead an expedition to the Sahara to dig up Africa's largest neolithic site.
We found this last year.
Two hundred skeletons, tools, jewelry.
This is a ceremonial disk.
An amazing record of the colonization of the Sahara 5,000 years ago is been sitting out there waiting for us to go back. So, really exciting.
And then work later is going to take us to Tibet.
Now, we normally think of Tibet as a highland.
It's really an island continent.
It was a precursor to India, a messenger from Gondwana -- a lost paradise of dinosaurs isolated for millions of years.
No one's found them. We know where they are, and we're going to go and get them next year.
They're only between 13 and 14,000 feet, but if you go in the warm part of the year, it's O.K.
Now, I tried to suture together a dinosaur evolutionary history so that we can try to understand some basic patterns of evolution.
I've talked about a few of them. We really need to take that further.
We need to delve into this mass of anatomy that we've been compiling to understand where the changes are occurring and what this means.
We can't predict, necessarily, what will happen in evolution, but we can learn some of the rules of the game, and that's really what we're trying to do.
With regard to the biogeographic question, the Earth is dividing.
These are all landlubbing animals. There's a couple of choices.
You get divided, and a continent's division corresponds to a fork in the evolutionary tree, or you're crafty, and you manage to escape from one to the other and erase that division, or you're living peacefully on each side, and on one side you just go extinct, and you survive on the other side and create a difference.
And the fourth thing is that you actually did one or the other of those three things, but the paleontologist never found you.
And you take those four instances and you realize you have a complex problem.
And so, in addition to digging, I think we have some answers from the dinosaur record. I think these dinosaurs migrated -- we call it dispersal -- around the globe, with the slightest land bridge.
They did it within two or three degrees of the pole, to maintain similarity between continents.
But when they were divided, indeed they were divided, and we do see the continents carving differences among dinosaurs.
But there's one thing that's even more important, and I think that's extinction.
We have downgraded this factor.
It carves up the history of life, and gives us the differences that we see in the dinosaur world towards the end, right before the bolide impact.
The best way to test this is to actually create a model.
So if we move back, this is a two-dimensional typical tree of life.
I want to give you three dimensions.
So you see the tree of life, but now I've added the dimension of area.
So the tree of life is normally divergence over time.
Now we have divergence over time, but we've created the third dimension of area.
This is a computer program which has three knobs.
We can control those things that we're worried about: extinction, sampling, dispersal -- going from one area to another.
And ultimately we can control the branching to mimic what we think the continents were like, and run it a thousand times, so we can estimate the parameters, to answer the question whether we are on the mark or not, at least to know the barriers of the problems. So that's a little bit about the science.
Today I'm going to spend the rest of my few minutes up here talking about the other stuff that I do in Chicago, which is related to the fact that I never -- and actually, in talking to a lot of TEDsters, there's a number of you out there -- I don't know that I'd get an answer honestly, if I asked you to raise your hand, but there are a number of you out there that started your scientific, technical, entertainment career as failures, by society's standards, as failures by schools.
I was one of those. I was failed by my school -- my school failed me.
Who's pointing fingers?
Several teachers nearly killed me.
I found myself in art.
I was a total failure in school, not really headed to graduate high school.
And I went on -- that's my first painting on canvas.
I read a dictionary. I got into college.
I became an artist. O.K., and started drawing.
It became abstract.
I worked up a portfolio, and I was headed to New York.
Sometimes I would see bones when there was a body there.
Something was going on in the background. I headed to New York to a studio.
I took a side trip to the American Museum, and I never recovered.
But really it's the same discipline -- they're kindred disciplines.
I mean, is there anything that is not visualizing what can't be seen, in terms of discovering this dinosaur bone from a small piece of it that's out there, or seeing the distortion that we try to see as evolutionary distortion in one animal to another?
This is a very extraordinarily visual.
I give you a human face because you're experts at that.
It takes us years to understand how to do that with dinosaurs.
They're really kindred disciplines.
But what we're trying to create in Chicago is a way to get, collect together, those students who are least represented in our science and technology spheres.
We all know, and there's been several allusions to it, that we are failing in our ability to produce enough scientists, engineers and technicians.
We've known that for a long time. We've gone through the Sputnik phase, and now, as you see the increase in the pace of what we're doing, it becomes even more prominent. Where are all these people going to come from?
And a more general question for our society is, what's going to happen to all the rest that are left behind?
What about all the kids like me that were in school -- kids like some of you out there -- that were in school and didn't get a chance and will never get a chance to participate in science and technology?
Those are the questions I ask. And we talk about Ethiopia, and it's very important.
Niger is equally important, and I'm trying desperately to do something in Niger.
They have an AIDS problem. I asked -- the U.S. State Department asked the government recently, What do you want to do? And they gave them two problems.
Dinosaurs was one of them.
Give us a museum of dinosaurs, and we will attract tourists, which is our number two industry.
And I hope to God the United States government, me, or TED, or somebody helps us do that, because that would be an incredible thing for their country.
But when we look back at our own country, we're looking back at our cities, the cities where most of you come from -- certainly the city I come from -- there's legions of kids out there like these.
And the question is -- and we started to address this question for centuries -- as to how we get these kids involved in science.
We've started in Chicago an organization -- a non-profit organization -- called Project Exploration.
These are two kids from Project Exploration.
We met them in their early stages in high school. They were -- failing to poor students, and they are now -- one at the University of Chicago, another in Illinois.
We've got students at Harvard. We're six years old.
And we created a track record.
Because when you go out there as a scholar, and you try to find out longitudinal studies, track records like that, there essentially are very few, if none.
So, we've created an incredible track record of 100 percent graduation, 90 percent going to college, many first-generation, 90 percent of those choosing science as a career.
It's an impressive track record, and so we look back and we say, well, we didn't really exactly work this out theoretically from the start, but when we look back, there are theoretical movements in science education.
It's gone through science as an inquiry, which was a big advance, and Dewey back at Chicago -- you learn by doing.
To -- you learn by envisioning yourself as a scientist, and then you learn to envision yourself as a scientist.
The next step is to learn the capability to make yourself a scientist.
You have to have those steps. If you have -- It's easy to get kids interested in science.
It's hard to get them to envision themselves as a scientist, which involves standing up in front of people like we're doing here at this symposium and presenting something as a knowledgeable person, and then seeing yourself in the role as a scientist and giving yourself the tools to pursue that.
And so, that's what we're going to do. We're planning a permanent home in Chicago.
We have lots of ideas, but I guarantee you this one thing -- and I've talked to some people here at TED -- it's not going to look like anything you've seen before.
It's going to be part-school, part-museum hall, part-conservatory, part-zoo, and part of an answer to the problem of how you interest kids in science.
Thank you very much.
I'm Cristin O'Keefe Aptowicz and this is "Three Months After."
To want to disappear is different from wanting to die.
To disappear and to not have to explain to anyone, to talk to anyone.
To move to somewhere where no one knows you, where you don't have to look at a single laughing face.
To elope with this grief who is not your enemy This grief who maybe now is your best friend.
This grief who is your husband, the thing you curl into every night, falling asleep in its arms.
Who wakes up early to make you your cold thankless breakfast.
To go to that place where every surface is a blade.
A sharp thing on which to hang your sorry flesh to feel something, anything, other than this.
I'm Aracelis Girmay, and this is, "For Estefani, Third Grade, Who Made Me a Card."
Elephant on an orange line, underneath a yellow circle, meaning sun.
Six green, vertical lines, with color all from the top, meaning flowers.
The first time I peel back the five squares of Scotch tape, unfold the crooked-crease fold of art class paper.
I am in my living room. It is June.
Inside of the card, there is one long word, and then Estefani’s name: Loisfoeribari Estefani Loisfoeribari?
Loisfoeribari: The scientific, Latinate way of saying hibiscus.
Loisforeribari: A direction, as in: are you going North? South? East? West? Loisfoeribari?
I try, over and over, to read the word out loud.
Loisfoeribari.
LoISFOeribari.
LoiSFOEribari.
LoisFOERibARI.
What is this word? I imagine using it in sentences like, “Man, I have to go back to the house, I forgot my Loisfoeribari.” or “There’s nothing better than rain, hot rain, open windows with music, and a tall glass of Loisfoeribari.” or “How are we getting to Pittsburgh? Should we drive or take the Loisfoeribari?” I have lived four minutes with this word not knowing what it means.
It is the end of the year. I consider writing my student, Estefani, a letter that goes: To The BRILLIANT Estefani!
Hola, querida, I hope that you are well.
I’ve just opened the card that you made me, and it is beautiful.
I really love the way you filled the sky with birds.
I believe that you are chula, chulita, and super fly!
Yes, the card is beautiful.
I only have one question for you.
What does the word ‘Loisfoeribari’ mean?
I try the word again. Loisfoeribari.
Loisfoeribari. Loisfoeribari.
I try the word in Spanish.
Loisfoeribari Lo-ees-fo-eh-dee-bah-dee Lo-ees-fo-eh-dee-bah-dee and then, slowly, Lo is fo e ri bari Lo is fo eribari love is for everybody love is for every every body love love love everybody love everybody love love is love everybody everybody is love love love for love for everybody for love is everybody love is for every love is for every body love love love for body love body body is love love is body every body is love is every love for every love is love for love everybody love love love love for everybody Love is for everybody.
Many of you could ask the question, you know, why is a flying car, or maybe more accurately, a roadable aircraft, possible at this time?
A number of years ago, Mr. Ford predicted that flying cars of some form would be available.
Now, 60 years later, I'm here to tell you why it's possible.
When I was about five years old, not very much -- about a year after Mr. Ford made his predictions, I was living in a rural part of Canada, on the side of a mountain in a very isolated area.
Getting to school, for a kid that was actually pretty short for his age, through the Canadian winter, was not a pleasant experience.
It was a trying and scary thing for a young kid to be going through.
At the end of my first year in school, in the summer of that year, I discovered a couple hummingbirds that were caught in a shed near my home.
They'd worn themselves out, beating themselves against the window, and, well, they were easy to capture.
I took them outside and as I let them go, that split second, even though they were very tired, that second I let them go they hovered for a second, then zipped off into the distance.
I thought, what a great way to get to school.
(Laughter) For a kid at that age, this was like infinite speed, disappearing, and I was very inspired by that.
And so the next -- over the next six decades, believe it or not, I've built a number of aircraft, with the goal of creating something that could do for you, or me, what the hummingbird does, and give you that flexibility.
I've called this vehicle, generically, a volantor, after the Latin word "volant," meaning, to fly in a light, nimble manner.
Volantor-like helicopter, perhaps.
The FAA, the controlling body above all, calls it a "powered lift aircraft."
And they've actually issued a pilot's license -- a powerlift pilot's license -- for this type of aircraft.
It's closer than you think. It's kind of remarkable when you consider that there are no operational powered lift aircraft.
So for once, perhaps, the government is ahead of itself.
The press calls my particular volantor a "Skycar."
This is a little bit earlier version of it, that's why it's given the X designation, but it's a four-passenger aircraft that could take off vertically, like a helicopter -- therefore it doesn't need an airfield.
On the ground, it's powered electrically.
It's actually classified as a motorcycle because of the three wheels, which is a great asset because it allows you, theoretically, to use this on the highways in most states, and actually in all cities.
So that's an asset because if you've got to deal with the crash protection issues of the automobile, forget it -- you're never going to fly it.
(Laughter) One could say that a helicopter does pretty much what the hummingbird does, and gets around in much the same way, and it's true, but a helicopter is a very complex device.
It's expensive -- so expensive that very few people could own or use it.
It's often been described because of its fragile nature and its complexity, as a series of parts -- a large number of parts -- flying in formation.
(Laughter) Another difference, and I have to describe this, because it's very personal, another great difference between the helicopter and the volantor -- in my case the Skycar volantor -- is the experience that I've had in flying both of those.
In a helicopter you feel -- and it's still a remarkable sensation -- you feel like you're being hauled up from above by a vibrating crane.
When you get in the Skycar -- and I can tell you, there's only one other person that's flown it, but he had the same sensation -- you really feel like you're being lifted up by a magic carpet, without any vibration whatsoever. The sensation is unbelievable.
And it's been a great motivator.
I only get to fly this vehicle occasionally, and only when I can persuade my stockholders to let me do so, but it's still one of those wonderful experiences that reward you for all that time.
What we really need is something to replace the automobile for those 50-plus mile trips.
Very few people realize that 50 mile-plus trips make up 85 percent of the miles traveled in America.
If we can get rid of that, then the highways will now be useful to you, as contrasted by what's happening in many parts of the world today.
On this next slide, is an interesting history of what we really have seen in infrastructure, because whether I give you a perfect Skycar, the perfect vehicle for use, it's going to have very little value to you unless you've got a system to use it in.
I'm sure any of you have asked the question, yeah, are there great things up there -- what am I going to do, get up there?
It's bad enough on a highway, what's it going to be like to be in the air?
This world that you're going to be talking about tomorrow is going to be completely integrated. You're not going to be a pilot, you're going to be a passenger.
And it's the infrastructure that really determines whether this process goes forward.
I can tell you, technically we can build Skycars -- my God, we went to the moon!
The technology there was much more difficult than what I'm dealing with here.
But we have to have these priority changes, we have to have infrastructure to go with this.
Historically you see that we got around 200 years ago by canals, and as that system disappeared, were replaced by railroads.
As that disappeared we came in with highways.
But if you look at that top corner -- the highway system -- you see where we are today. Highways are no longer being built, and that's a fact. You won't see any additional highways in the next 10 years.
However, the next 10 years, if like the last 10 years, we're going to see 30 percent more traffic.
And where is that going to lead you to?
So the issue then, I've often asked, is when is it going to happen?
When are we going to be able to have these vehicles?
And of course, if you ask me, I'm going to give you a really optimistic view.
After all, I've been spending 60 years here believing it's going to happen tomorrow.
So, I'm not going to quote myself on this.
I'd prefer to quote someone else, who testified with me before Congress, and in his position as head of NASA put forward this particular vision of the future of this type of aircraft.
Now I would argue, actually, if you look at the fact that on the highways today, you're only averaging about 30 miles per hour -- on average, according to the DOT -- the Skycar travels at over 300 miles an hour, up to 25,000 feet.
And so, in effect, you could see perhaps a tenfold increase in the ability to get around as far as speed is concerned.
Unbeknownst to many of you, the highway in the sky that I'm talking about here has been under construction for 10 years.
It makes use of the GPS -- you're familiar with GPS in your automobile, but you may not be familiar with the fact that there's a GPS U.S., there's a Russian GPS, and there's a new GPS system going to Europe, called Galileo.
With those three systems, you have what is always necessary -- a level of redundancy that says, if one system fails, you'll still have a way to make sure that you're being controlled.
Because if you're in this world, where computers are controlling what you're doing, it's going to be very critical that something can't fail on you.
How would a trip in a Skycar work?
Well, you can't right now take off from your home because it's too noisy.
I mean to be able to take off from your home, you'd have to be extremely quiet.
But it's still fairly quiet.
You'd motor, electrically, to a vertiport, which may be a few blocks, maybe even a few miles away.
This is clearly, as I said earlier, a roadable aircraft, and you're not going to spend that much time on the road.
After all, if you can fly like that, why are you going to drive around on a highway?
Go to a local vertiport, plug in your destination, delivered almost like a passenger.
You can play computer games, you can sleep, you can read on the way.
This is the world -- there won't be you as a pilot. And I know the pilots in the audience aren't going to like that -- and I've had a lot of bad feedback from people who want to be up there, flying around and experiencing that.
And of course, I suppose like recreational parks you can still do that.
But the vehicle itself is going to be a very, very controlled environment.
Or it's going to have no use to you as a person who might use such a system.
We flew the first vehicle for the international press in 1965, when I really got it started.
I was a professor at the U.C. Davis System, and I got a lot of excitement around this, and I was able to fund the initiation of the program back in that time.
And then through the various years we invented various vehicles.
Actually the critical point was in 1989, when we demonstrated the stability of this vehicle -- how completely stable it was in all circumstances, which is of course very critical.
Still not a practical vehicle during all of this, but moving in the right direction, we believe.
Finally, in the early part of -- or actually the middle of 2002, we flew the 400 -- M400, which was the four-passenger vehicle.
In this case here, we're flying it remotely, as we always did at the beginning.
And we had very small power plants in it at this time.
We are now installing larger powerplants, which will make it possible for me to get back on board.
A vertical-takeoff aircraft is not the safest vehicle during the test flight program.
There's an old adage that applied for the years between 1950s and 1970s, when every aeronautical company was working on vertical-takeoff aircraft.
A vertical-takeoff aircraft needs an artificial stabilization system -- that's essential.
At least for the hover, and the low-speed flight.
If that single-stability system, that brain that flies that aircraft, fails, or if the engine fails, that vehicle crashes. There is no option to that.
And the adage that I'm referring to, that applied at that time, was that nothing comes down faster than a VTOL aircraft upside down.
(Laughter) That's a macabre comment because we lost a lot of pilots.
In fact, the aircraft companies gave up on vertical-takeoff aircraft more or less for a number of years.
And there's really only one operational aircraft in the world today that's a vertical-takeoff aircraft -- as distinct from a helicopter -- and that's the Hawker Harrier jump jet.
A vertical-takeoff aircraft, like the hummingbird, has a very high metabolism, which means it requires a lot of energy.
Getting that energy is very, very difficult. It all comes down to that power plant -- how to get a large amount of power in a small package.
Fortunately, Dr. Felix Wankel invented the rotary engine.
A very unique engine -- it's round, it's small, it's vibration-free.
It fits exactly where we need to fit it, right in the center of the hubs of the ducts in the system -- very critical. In fact that engine -- for those who are into the automobile -- know that it recently is applied to the RX8 -- the Mazda.
And that sportscar won Sports Car of the Year.
Wonderful engine.
In that application, it generates one horsepower per pound, which is twice as good as your car engine today, but only half of what we need.
My company has spent 35 years and many millions of dollars taking that rotary engine, which was invented in the late '50s, and getting it to the point that we get over two horsepower per pound, reliably, and critical.
We actually get 175 horsepower into one cubic foot.
We have eight engines in this vehicle.
We have four computers. We have two parachutes.
Redundancy is the critical issue here.
If you want to stay alive you've got to have backups.
And we have actually flown this vehicle and lost an engine, and continued to hover.
The computers back up each other. There's a voting system -- if one computer is not agreeing with the other three, it's kicked out of the system.
And then you have three -- you still have the triple redundancy.
If one of those fails, you still have a second chance.
If you stick around, then good luck.
There won't be a third chance.
The parachutes are there -- hopefully, more for psychological than real reasons, but they will be an ultimate backup if it comes to that.
(Laughter) I'd like to show you an animation in this next one, which is one element of the Skycar's use, but it's one that demonstrates how it could be used.
You could think of it personally in your own terms, of how you might use it.
Video: Skycar dispatched, launch rescue vehicle for San Francisco.
Paul Moller: I believe that personal transportation in something like the Skycar, probably in another volantor form as well, will be a significant part of our lives, as Dr. Goldin says, within the next 10 years.
And it's going to change the demographics in a very significant way.
If you can live 75 miles from San Francisco and get there in 15 minutes, you're going to sell your 700,000-dollar apartment, buy an upscale home on the side of a mountain, buy a Skycar, which I think would be priced at that time perhaps in the area of 100,000 dollars, put money in the bank ...
that's a very significant incentive for getting out of San Francisco.
But you better be the first one out of town as the real estate values go to hell.
(Laughter) Developing the Skycar has been a real challenge.
Obviously I'm dependent on a lot of other people believing in what I'm doing -- both financially and in technical help.
And that has -- you run into situations where you have this great acceptance of what you're doing, and a lot of rejection of the same kind of thing.
I characterized this emerging technology in an aphorism, as it's described, which really talks about what I've experienced, and I'm sure what other people may have experienced in emerging technologies.
There's an interesting poll that came out recently under NAS -- I think it's MSNBC -- in which they asked the question, "Are you in the market for a volantor?"
Twenty-three percent said, "Yes, as soon as possible."
Forty-seven percent -- yes, as soon as they could -- price could come down.
Twenty-three percent said, "As soon as it's proven safe."
Only seven percent said that they wouldn't consider buying a Skycar.
I'm encouraged by that. At least it makes me feel like, to some extent, it is becoming self-evident.
That we need an alternative to the automobile, at least for those 50-mile trips and more, so that the highways become usable in today's world.
Thank you.
So, there's about seven and a half billion of us.
The World Health Organization tells us that 300 million of us are depressed, and about 800,000 people take their lives every year.
A tiny subset of them choose a profoundly nihilistic route, which is they die in the act of killing as many people as possible.
These are some famous recent examples.
And here's a less famous one. It happened about nine weeks ago.
If you don't remember it, it's because there's a lot of this going on.
Wikipedia just last year counted 323 mass shootings in my home country, the United States.
Not all of those shooters were suicidal, not all of them were maximizing their death tolls, but many, many were.
An important question becomes: What limits do these people have?
Take the Vegas shooter.
He slaughtered 58 people.
Did he stop there because he'd had enough?
No, and we know this because he shot and injured another 422 people who he surely would have preferred to kill.
We have no reason to think he would have stopped at 4,200.
In fact, with somebody this nihilistic, he may well have gladly killed us all.
We don't know.
What we do know is this: when suicidal murderers really go all in, technology is the force multiplier.
Here's an example.
Several years back, there was a rash of 10 mass school attacks in China carried out with things like knives and hammers and cleavers, because guns are really hard to get there.
By macabre coincidence, this last attack occurred just hours before the massacre in Newtown, Connecticut.
But that one American attack killed roughly the same number of victims as the 10 Chinese attacks combined.
So we can fairly say, knife: terrible; gun: way worse.
And airplane: massively worse, as pilot Andreas Lubitz showed when he forced 149 people to join him in his suicide, smashing a plane into the French Alps.
And there are other examples of this.
And I'm afraid there are far more deadly weapons in our near future than airplanes, ones not made of metal.
So let's consider the apocalyptic dynamics that will ensue if suicidal mass murder hitches a ride on a rapidly advancing field that for the most part holds boundless promise for society.
Somewhere out there in the world, there's a tiny group of people who would attempt, however ineptly, to kill us all if they could just figure out how.
The Vegas shooter may or may not have been one of them, but with seven and a half billion of us, this is a nonzero population.
There's plenty of suicidal nihilists out there.
We've already seen that.
There's people with severe mood disorders that they can't even control.
There are people who have just suffered deranging traumas, etc. etc.
As for the corollary group, its size was simply zero forever until the Cold War, when suddenly, the leaders of two global alliances attained the ability to blow up the world.
The number of people with actual doomsday buttons has stayed fairly stable since then.
But I'm afraid it's about to grow, and not just to three.
This is going off the charts.
I mean, it's going to look like a tech business plan.
(Laughter) And the reason is, we're in the era of exponential technologies, which routinely take eternal impossibilities and make them the actual superpowers of one or two living geniuses and -- this is the big part -- then diffuse those powers to more or less everybody.
Now, here's a benign example.
If you wanted to play checkers with a computer in 1952, you literally had to be that guy, then commandeer one of the world's 19 copies of that computer, then used your Nobel-adjacent brain to teach it checkers.
That was the bar.
Today, you just need to know someone who knows someone who owns a telephone, because computing is an exponential technology.
So is synthetic biology, which I'll now refer to as "synbio."
And in 2011, a couple of researchers did something every bit as ingenious and unprecedented as the checkers trick with H5N1 flu.
This is a strain that kills up to 60 percent of the people it infects, more than Ebola.
But it is so uncontagious that it's killed fewer than 50 people since 2015.
So these researchers edited H5N1's genome and made it every bit as deadly, but also wildly contagious.
The news arm of one of the world's top two scientific journals said if this thing got out, it would likely cause a pandemic with perhaps millions of deaths.
And Dr. Paul Keim said he could not think of an organism as scary as this, which is the last thing I personally want to hear from the Chairman of the National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity.
And by the way, Dr. Keim also said this -- ["I don't think anthrax is scary at all compared to this."] And he's also one of these.
[Anthrax expert] (Laughter) Now, the good news about the 2011 biohack is that the people who did it didn't mean us any harm.
They're virologists.
They believed they were advancing science.
The bad news is that technology does not freeze in place, and over the next few decades, their feat will become trivially easy.
In fact, it's already way easier, because as we learned yesterday morning, just two years after they did their work, the CRISPR system was harnessed for genome editing.
This was a radical breakthrough that makes gene editing massively easier -- so easy that CRISPR is now taught in high schools.
And this stuff is moving quicker than computing.
That slow, stodgy white line up there?
That's Moore's law.
That shows us how quickly computing is getting cheaper.
That steep, crazy-fun green line, that shows us how quickly genetic sequencing is getting cheaper.
Now, gene editing and synthesis and sequencing, they're different disciplines, but they're tightly related.
And they're all moving in these headlong rates.
And the keys to the kingdom are these tiny, tiny data files.
That is an excerpt of H5N1's genome.
The whole thing can fit on just a few pages.
And yeah, don't worry, you can Google this as soon as you get home.
It's all over the internet, right?
And the part that made it contagious could well fit on a single Post-it note.
And once a genius makes a data file, any idiot can copy it, distribute it worldwide or print it.
And I don't just mean print it on this, but soon enough, on this.
So let's imagine a scenario.
Let's say it's 2026, to pick an arbitrary year, and a brilliant virologist, hoping to advance science and better understand pandemics, designs a new bug.
It's as contagious as chicken pox, it's as deadly as Ebola, and it incubates for months and months before causing an outbreak, so the whole world can be infected before the first sign of trouble.
Then, her university gets hacked.
And of course, this is not science fiction.
In fact, just one recent US indictment documents the hacking of over 300 universities.
So that file with the bug's genome on it spreads to the internet's dark corners.
And once a file is out there, it never comes back -- just ask anybody who runs a movie studio or a music label.
So now maybe in 2026, it would take a true genius like our virologist to make the actual living critter, but 15 years later, it may just take a DNA printer you can find at any high school.
And if not?
Give it a couple of decades.
So, a quick aside: Remember this slide here?
Turn your attention to these two words.
If somebody tries this and is only 0.1 percent effective, eight million people die.
That's 2,500 9/11s.
Civilization would survive, but it would be permanently disfigured.
So this means we need to be concerned about anybody who has the faintest shot on goal, not just geniuses.
So today, there's a tiny handful of geniuses who probably could make a doomsday bug that's .1-percent effective and maybe even a little bit more.
They tend to be stable and successful and so not part of this group.
So I guess I'm sorta kinda barely OK-ish with that.
But what about after technology improves and diffuses and thousands of life science grad students are enabled?
Are every single one of them going to be perfectly stable?
Or how about a few years after that, where every stress-ridden premed is fully enabled?
At some point in that time frame, these circles are going to intersect, because we're now starting to talk about hundreds of thousands of people throughout the world.
And they recently included that guy who dressed up like the Joker and shot 12 people to death at a Batman premiere.
That was a neuroscience PhD student with an NIH grant.
OK, plot twist: I think we can actually survive this one if we start focusing on it now.
And I say this, having spent countless hours interviewing global leaders in synbio and also researching their work for science podcasts I create.
I have come to fear their work, in case I haven't gotten that out there yet -- (Laughter) but more than that, to revere its potential.
This stuff will cure cancer, heal our environment and stop our cruel treatment of other creatures.
So how do we get all this without, you know, annihilating ourselves?
First thing: like it or not, synbio is here, so let's embrace the technology.
If we do a tech ban, that would only hand the wheel to bad actors.
Unlike nuclear programs, biology can be practiced invisibly.
Massive Soviet cheating on bioweapons treaties made that very clear, as does every illegal drug lab in the world.
Secondly, enlist the experts.
Let's sign them up and make more of them.
For every million and one bioengineers we have, at least a million of them are going to be on our side.
I mean, Al Capone would be on our side in this one.
The bar to being a good guy is just so low.
And massive numerical advantages do matter, even when a single bad guy can inflict grievous harm, because among many other things, they allow us to exploit the hell out of this: we have years and hopefully decades to prepare and prevent.
The first person to try something awful -- and there will be somebody -- may not even be born yet.
Next, this needs to be an effort that spans society, and all of you need to be a part of it, because we cannot ask a tiny group of experts to be responsible for both containing and exploiting synthetic biology, because we already tried that with the financial system, and our stewards became massively corrupted as they figured out how they could cut corners, inflict massive, massive risks on the rest of us and privatize the gains, becoming repulsively wealthy while they stuck us with the $22 trillion bill.
And more recently -- (Applause) Are you the ones who have gotten the thank-you letters?
I'm still waiting for mine.
I just figured they were too busy to be grateful.
And much more recently, online privacy started looming as a huge issue, and we basically outsourced it.
And once again: privatized gains, socialized losses.
Is anybody else sick of this pattern?
(Applause) So we need a more inclusive way to safeguard our prosperity, our privacy and soon, our lives.
So how do we do all of this?
Well, when bodies fight pathogens, they use ingenious immune systems, which are very complex and multilayered.
Why don't we build one of these for the whole damn ecosystem?
There's a year of TED Talks that could be given on this first critical layer.
So these are just a couple of many great ideas that are out there.
Some R and D muscle could take the very primitive pathogen sensors that we currently have and put them on a very steep price performance curve that would quickly become ingenious and networked and gradually as widespread as smoke detectors and even smartphones.
On a very related note: vaccines have all kinds of problems when it comes to manufacturing and distribution, and once they're made, they can't adapt to new threats or mutations.
We need an agile biomanufacturing base extending into every single pharmacy and maybe even our homes.
Printer technology for vaccines and medicines is within reach if we prioritize it.
Next, mental health.
Many people who commit suicidal mass murder suffer from crippling, treatment-resistant depression or PTSD.
We need noble researchers like Rick Doblin working on this, but we also need the selfish jerks who are way more numerous to appreciate the fact that acute suffering will soon endanger all of us, not just those afflicted.
Those jerks will then join us and Al Capone in fighting this condition.
Third, each and every one of us can be and should be a white blood cell in this immune system.
Suicidal mass murderers can be despicable, yes, but they're also terribly broken and sad people, and those of us who aren't need to do what we can to make sure nobody goes unloved.
(Applause) Next, we need to make fighting these dangers core to the discipline of synthetic biology.
There are companies out there that at least claim they let their engineers spend 20 percent of their time doing whatever they want.
What if those who hire bioengineers and become them give 20 percent of their time to building defenses for the common good?
Not a bad idea, right?
(Applause) Then, finally: this won't be any fun.
But we need to let our minds go to some very, very dark places, and thank you for letting me take you there this evening.
We survived the Cold War because every one of us understood and respected the danger, in part, because we had spent decades telling ourselves terrifying ghost stories with names like "Dr. Strangelove" and "War Games."
This is no time to remain calm.
This is one of those rare times when it's incredibly productive to freak the hell out -- (Laughter) to come up with some ghost stories and use our fear as fuel to fight this danger.
Because, all these terrible scenarios I've painted -- they are not destiny.
They're optional.
The danger is still kind of distant.
And that means it will only befall us if we allow it to.
Let's not.
Thank you very much for listening.
(Applause)
My day starts just like yours.
(Laughter) When I wake up in the morning, I check my phone, and then I have a cup of coffee.
But then my day truly starts.
It may not be like yours, because I live my life as an artwork.
Picture yourself in a giant jewelry box with all the beautiful things that you have ever seen in your life.
Then imagine that your body is a canvas.
And on that canvas, you have a mission to create a masterpiece using the contents of your giant jewelry box.
Once you've created your masterpiece, you might think, "Wow, I created that.
This is who I am today."
Then you would pick up your house keys, walk out the door into the real world, maybe take public transport to the center of the town ...
Possibly walk along the streets or even go shopping.
That's my life, every day.
When I walk out the door, these artworks are me.
I am art.
I have lived as art my entire adult life.
Living as art is how I became myself.
I was brought up in a small village called Fillongley, in England, and it was last mentioned in the "Domesday Book," so that's the mentality.
(Laughter) I was raised by my grandparents, and they were antiques dealers, so I grew up surrounded by history and beautiful things.
I had the most amazing dress-up box.
So as you can imagine, it started then.
I moved to London when I was 17 to become a model.
And then I went to study photography.
I wasn't really happy with myself at the time, so I was always looking for escapism.
I studied the works of David LaChapelle and Steven Arnold, photographers who both curated and created worlds that were mind-blowing to me.
So I decided one day to cross over from the superficial fashion world to the superficial art world.
(Laughter) I decided to live my life as a work of art.
I spend hours, sometimes months, making things.
My go-to tool is a safety pin, like this -- (Laughter) They're never big enough.
(Laughter) And I use my fabrics time and time again, so I recycle everything that I use.
When I get dressed I'm guided by color, texture and shape.
I rarely have a theme.
I find beautiful objects from all over the world, and I curate them into 3-D tapestries over a base layer that covers my whole body shape ...
because I'm not very happy with my body.
(Laughs) I ask myself, "Should I take something off or should I put something on?
100 pieces, maybe?"
And sometimes, I do that.
I promise you it's not too uncomfortable -- well, just a little -- (Laughter) I might have a safety pin poking at me sometimes when I'm having a conversation with you, so I'll kind of go off -- (Laughter) It usually takes me about 20 minutes to get ready, which nobody ever believes.
It's true -- sometimes.
So, it's my version of a t-shirt and jeans.
(Laughter) When I get dressed, I build like an architect.
I carefully place things till I feel they belong.
Then, I get a lot of my ideas from lucid dreaming.
I actually go to sleep to come up with my ideas, and I've taught myself to wake up to write them down.
I wear things till they fall apart, and then, I give them a new life.
The gold outfit, for example -- it was the outfit that I wore to the Houses of Parliament in London.
It's made of armor, sequins and broken jewelry, and I was the first person to wear armor to Parliament since Oliver Cromwell banned it in the 17th century.
Things don't need to be expensive to be beautiful.
Try making outfits out of bin liners or trash you found out on the streets.
You never know, they might end up on the pages of "Vogue."
There's over 6,000 pieces in my collection, ranging from 2,000-year-old Roman rings to ancient Buddhist artifacts.
I believe in sharing what I do and what I have with others, so I decided to create an art exhibition, which is currently traveling to museums around the world.
It contains an army of me -- life-size sculptures as you can see behind me, they're here -- they are my life, really.
They're kind of like 3-D tapestries of my existence as living as art.
They contain plastic crystals mixed with diamonds, beer cans and royal silks all in one look.
I like the fact that the viewer can never make the assumption about what's real and what's fake.
I find it important to explore and share cultures through my works.
I use clothing as a means to investigate and appreciate people from all over the world.
Sometimes, people think I'm a performer or a drag queen.
I'm not.
Although my life appears to be a performance, it's not.
It's very real.
People respond to me as they would any other type of artwork.
Many people are fascinated and engaged.
Some people walk around me, staring, shy at first.
Then they come up to me and they say they love or absolutely hate what I do.
I sometimes respond, and other times I let the art talk for itself.
The most annoying thing in the world is when people want to touch the artwork.
But I understand.
But like a lot of contemporary art, many people are dismissive.
Some people are critical, others are abusive.
I think it comes from the fear of the different -- the unknown.
There are so many reactions to what I do, and I've just learned not to take them personally.
I've never lived as Daniel Lismore, the person.
I've lived as Daniel Lismore, the artwork.
And I've faced every obstacle as an artwork.
It can be hard ...
especially if your wardrobe takes up a 40-foot container, three storage units and 30 boxes from IKEA -- (Laughter) and sometimes, it can be very difficult, getting into cars, and sometimes -- well, this morning I didn't fit through my bathroom door, so that was a problem.
(Laughter) What does it mean to be yourself?
People say it all the time, but what does it truly mean, and why does it matter?
How does life change when you choose to be unapologetically yourself?
I've had to face struggles and triumphs whilst living my life as art.
I've been put on private jets and flown around the world.
My work's been displayed in prestigious museums, and I've had the opportunity -- that is my grandparents, by the way, they're the people that raised me, and there I am -- (Laughs) (Applause) So I've been put on private jets, flown around the world, and yet, it's not been that easy because at times, I've been homeless, I've been spat at, I've been abused, sometimes daily, bullied my entire life, rejected by countless individuals, and I've been stabbed.
But what hurt the most was being put on the "Worst Dressed" list.
(Laughter) It can be hard, being yourself, but I've found it's the best way.
There's the "Worst Dressed."
(Laughs) As the quote goes, "Everyone else is already taken."
I've come to realize that confidence is a concept you can choose.
I've come to realize that authenticity is necessary, and it's powerful.
I've tried to spend time being like other people.
It didn't work.
It's a lot of hard work, not being yourself.
I have a few questions for you all.
Who are you?
How many versions of you are there?
And I have one final question: Are you using them all to your advantage?
