Without them, we would not manage to produce enough to feed the world's population.
Speaking of humans, there are currently 7 billion of us on Earth.
In less than 40 years, there will be 9 billion of us.
And the question is a simple one: Do we have enough phosphorus to feed our future generations?
So, in order to understand these issues, where do we find our phosphorus?
Let me explain.
But first, let’s just suppose that we are using 100 percent of a given dose of phosphorus.
Only 15 percent of this 100 percent goes to the plant. Eighty-five percent is lost.
It goes into the soil, ending its journey in the lakes, resulting in lakes with extra phosphorus, which leads to the blue algae problem.
So, you’ll see there’s a problem here, something that is illogical.
A hundred percent of the phosphorus is used, but only 15 percent goes to the plant.
You’re going to tell me it’s wasteful.
Yes, it is. What is worse is that it is very expensive.
Nobody wants to throw their money out the window, but unfortunately that's what is happening here.
Eighty percent of each dose of phosphorus is lost.
Modern agriculture depends on phosphorus.
And because in order to get 15 percent of it to the plant, all the rest is lost, we have to add more and more.
Now, where will we get this phosphorus from?
Basically, we get it out of mines.
This is the cover of an extraordinary article published in Nature in 2009, which really launched the discussion about the phosphorus crisis.
Phosphorus, a nutrient essential to life, which is becoming increasingly scarce, yet nobody is talking about it.
And everyone agrees: Politicians and scientists are in agreement that we are headed for a phosphorus crisis.
What you are seeing here is an open-pit mine in the U.S., and to give you an idea of the dimensions of this mine, if you look in the top right-hand corner, the little crane you can see, that is a giant crane.
So that really puts it into perspective.
So, we get phosphorus from mines.
And if I make a comparison with oil, there’s an oil crisis, we talk about it, we talk about global warming, yet we never mention the phosphorus crisis.
To come back to the oil problem, oil is something we can replace.
We can use biofuels, or solar power, or hydropower, but phosphorus is an essential element, indispensable to life, and we can’t replace it.
What is the current state of the world's phosphorus reserves?
This graph gives you a rough idea of where we are today.
The black line represents predictions for phosphorus reserves.
In 2030, we’ll reach the peak.
By the end of this century, it will all be gone.
The dotted line shows where we are today.
As you can see, they meet in 2030, I’ll be retired by then.
But we are indeed heading for a major crisis, and I’d like people to become aware of this problem.
Do we have a solution?
What are we to do? We are faced with a paradox.
Less and less phosphorus will be available.
By 2050 there will be 9 billion of us, and according to the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization, we will need to produce twice as much food in 2050 than we do today.
So, we will have less phosphorus, but we'll need to produce more food.
What should we do?
It truly is a paradoxical situation.
Do we have a solution, or an alternative which will allow us to optimize phosphorus use?
Remember that 80 percent is destined to be lost.
The solution I'm offering today is one that has existed for a very long time, even before plants existed on Earth, and it's a microscopic mushroom that is very mysterious, very simple, and yet also extremely complex.
I've been fascinated by this little mushroom for over 16 years now.
It has led me to further my research and to use it as a model for my laboratory research.
This mushroom exists in symbiosis with the roots.
By symbiosis, I mean a bidirectional and mutually beneficial association which is also called mycorrhiza.
This slide illustrates the elements of a mycorrhiza.
You’re looking at the root of wheat, one of the world’s most important plants.
Normally, a root will find phosphorus all by itself.
It will go in search of phosphorus, but only within the one millimeter which surrounds it.
Beyond one millimeter, the root is ineffective.
It cannot go further in its search for phosphorus.
Now, imagine this tiny, microscopic mushroom.
It grows much faster, and is much better designed to seek out phosphorus.
It can go beyond the root’s one-millimeter scope to seek out phosphorus.
I haven’t invented anything at all; it's a biotechnology that has existed for 450 million years.
And over time, this mushroom has evolved and adapted to seek out even the tiniest trace of phosphorus, and to put it to use, to make it available to the plant.
What you’re seeing here, in the real world, is a carrot root, and the mushroom with its very fine filaments.
Looking closer, we can see that this mushroom is very gentle in its penetration.
It will proliferate between the root's cells, eventually penetrating a cell and starting to form a typical arbuscular structure, which will considerably increase the exchange interface between the plant and the mushroom.
And it is through this structure that mutual exchanges will occur.
It’s a win-win trade: I give you phosphorus, and you feed me.
True symbiosis.
Now let's add a mycorrhiza plant into the diagram I used earlier.
And instead of using a 100 percent dose, I’m going to reduce it to 25 percent.
You’ll see that of this 25 percent, most will benefit the plant, more than 90 percent.
A very small amount of phosphorus will remain in the soil.
That's completely natural.
What's more is that in certain cases, we don't even need to add phosphorus.
If you recall the graphs I showed you earlier, 85 percent of phosphorus is lost in the soil, and the plants are unable to access it.
Even though it is present in the soil, it is in insoluble form.
The plant is only able to seek out soluble forms.
The mushroom is capable of dissolving this insoluble form and making it available for the plant to use.
To further support my argument, here is a picture that speaks for itself.
These are trials in a field of sorghum.
On the left side, you see the yield produced using conventional agriculture, with a 100 percent phosphorus dose.
On the other side, the dose was reduced to 50 percent, and just look at the yield.
With only a half-dose, we achieved a better yield.
This is to show you that this method works.
And in some cases, in Cuba, Mexico and India, the dose can be reduced to 25 percent, and in several other cases, there's no need to add any phosphorus at all, because the mushrooms are so well adapted to finding phosphorus and drawing it from the soil.
This is an example of soy production in Canada.
Mycorrhiza was used in one field but not in the other.
And here, where blue indicates a better yield, and yellow a weaker yield.
The black rectangle is the plot from which the mycorrhiza was added.
In other words, as I already said, I have invented nothing.
Mycorrhiza has existed for 450 million years, and it has even helped modern-day plant species to diversify.
So, this it isn't something that is still undergoing lab tests.
Mycorrhiza exists, it works, it's produced at an industrial scale and commercialized worldwide.
The problem is that people are not aware of it.
People like food producers and farmers are still not aware of this problem.
We have a technology that works, and one that, if used correctly, will alleviate some of the pressure we are putting on the world's phosphorus reserves.
In conclusion, I am a scientist and a dreamer.
I'm passionate about this topic.
So if you were to ask me what my retirement dream is, which will be at the moment we reach that phosphorus peak, it would be that we use one label, "Made with mycorrhiza," and that my children and grandchildren buy products bearing that label too.
Thank you for your attention.
(Applause)
When we talk about corruption, there are typical types of individuals that spring to mind.
There's the former Soviet megalomaniacs.
Saparmurat Niyazov, he was one of them.
Until his death in 2006, he was the all-powerful leader of Turkmenistan, a Central Asian country rich in natural gas.
Now, he really loved to issue presidential decrees.
And one renamed the months of the year including after himself and his mother.
He spent millions of dollars creating a bizarre personality cult, and his crowning glory was the building of a 40-foot-high gold-plated statue of himself which stood proudly in the capital's central square and rotated to follow the sun.
He was a slightly unusual guy.
And then there's that cliché, the African dictator or minister or official.
There's Teodorín Obiang.
So his daddy is president for life of Equatorial Guinea, a West African nation that has exported billions of dollars of oil since the 1990s and yet has a truly appalling human rights record.
The vast majority of its people are living in really miserable poverty despite an income per capita that's on a par with that of Portugal.
So Obiang junior, well, he buys himself a $30 million mansion in Malibu, California.
I've been up to its front gates.
I can tell you it's a magnificent spread.
He bought an €18 million art collection that used to belong to fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent, a stack of fabulous sports cars, some costing a million dollars apiece -- oh, and a Gulfstream jet, too.
Now get this: Until recently, he was earning an official monthly salary of less than 7,000 dollars.
And there's Dan Etete.
Well, he was the former oil minister of Nigeria under President Abacha, and it just so happens he's a convicted money launderer too.
We've spent a great deal of time investigating a $1 billion -- that's right, a $1 billion — oil deal that he was involved with, and what we found was pretty shocking, but more about that later.
So it's easy to think that corruption happens somewhere over there, carried out by a bunch of greedy despots and individuals up to no good in countries that we, personally, may know very little about and feel really unconnected to and unaffected by what might be going on.
But does it just happen over there?
Well, at 22, I was very lucky.
My first job out of university was investigating the illegal trade in African ivory.
And that's how my relationship with corruption really began.
In 1993, with two friends who were colleagues, Simon Taylor and Patrick Alley, we set up an organization called Global Witness.
Our first campaign was investigating the role of illegal logging in funding the war in Cambodia.
So a few years later, and it's now 1997, and I'm in Angola undercover investigating blood diamonds.
Perhaps you saw the film, the Hollywood film "Blood Diamond," the one with Leonardo DiCaprio.
Well, some of that sprang from our work.
Luanda, it was full of land mine victims who were struggling to survive on the streets and war orphans living in sewers under the streets, and a tiny, very wealthy elite who gossiped about shopping trips to Brazil and Portugal.
And it was a slightly crazy place.
So I'm sitting in a hot and very stuffy hotel room feeling just totally overwhelmed.
But it wasn't about blood diamonds.
Because I'd been speaking to lots of people there who, well, they talked about a different problem: that of a massive web of corruption on a global scale and millions of oil dollars going missing.
And for what was then a very small organization of just a few people, trying to even begin to think how we might tackle that was an enormous challenge.
And in the years that I've been, and we've all been campaigning and investigating, I've repeatedly seen that what makes corruption on a global, massive scale possible, well it isn't just greed or the misuse of power or that nebulous phrase "weak governance."
I mean, yes, it's all of those, but corruption, it's made possible by the actions of global facilitators.
So let's go back to some of those people I talked about earlier.
Now, they're all people we've investigated, and they're all people who couldn't do what they do alone.
Take Obiang junior. Well, he didn't end up with high-end art and luxury houses without help.
He did business with global banks.
A bank in Paris held accounts of companies controlled by him, one of which was used to buy the art, and American banks, well, they funneled 73 million dollars into the States, some of which was used to buy that California mansion.
And he didn't do all of this in his own name either.
He used shell companies.
He used one to buy the property, and another, which was in somebody else's name, to pay the huge bills it cost to run the place.
And then there's Dan Etete.
Well, when he was oil minister, he awarded an oil block now worth over a billion dollars to a company that, guess what, yeah, he was the hidden owner of.
Now, it was then much later traded on with the kind assistance of the Nigerian government -- now I have to be careful what I say here — to subsidiaries of Shell and the Italian Eni, two of the biggest oil companies around.
So the reality is, is that the engine of corruption, well, it exists far beyond the shores of countries like Equatorial Guinea or Nigeria or Turkmenistan.
This engine, well, it's driven by our international banking system, by the problem of anonymous shell companies, and by the secrecy that we have afforded big oil, gas and mining operations, and, most of all, by the failure of our politicians to back up their rhetoric and do something really meaningful and systemic to tackle this stuff.
Now let's take the banks first.
Well, it's not going to come as any surprise for me to tell you that banks accept dirty money, but they prioritize their profits in other destructive ways too.
For example, in Sarawak, Malaysia.
Now this region, it has just five percent of its forests left intact. Five percent.
So how did that happen?
Well, because an elite and its facilitators have been making millions of dollars from supporting logging on an industrial scale for many years.
So we sent an undercover investigator in to secretly film meetings with members of the ruling elite, and the resulting footage, well, it made some people very angry, and you can see that on YouTube, but it proved what we had long suspected, because it showed how the state's chief minister, despite his later denials, used his control over land and forest licenses to enrich himself and his family.
And HSBC, well, we know that HSBC bankrolled the region's largest logging companies that were responsible for some of that destruction in Sarawak and elsewhere.
The bank violated its own sustainability policies in the process, but it earned around 130 million dollars.
Now shortly after our exposé, very shortly after our exposé earlier this year, the bank announced a policy review on this.
And is this progress? Maybe, but we're going to be keeping a very close eye on that case.
And then there's the problem of anonymous shell companies.
Well, we've all heard about what they are, I think, and we all know they're used quite a bit by people and companies who are trying to avoid paying their proper dues to society, also known as taxes.
But what doesn't usually come to light is how shell companies are used to steal huge sums of money, transformational sums of money, from poor countries.
In virtually every case of corruption that we've investigated, shell companies have appeared, and sometimes it's been impossible to find out who is really involved in the deal.
A recent study by the World Bank looked at 200 cases of corruption.
It found that over 70 percent of those cases had used anonymous shell companies, totaling almost 56 billion dollars.
Now many of these companies were in America or the United Kingdom, its overseas territories and Crown dependencies, and so it's not just an offshore problem, it's an on-shore one too.
You see, shell companies, they're central to the secret deals which may benefit wealthy elites rather than ordinary citizens.
One striking recent case that we've investigated is how the government in the Democratic Republic of Congo sold off a series of valuable, state-owned mining assets to shell companies in the British Virgin Islands.
So we spoke to sources in country, trawled through company documents and other information trying to piece together a really true picture of the deal.
And we were alarmed to find that these shell companies had quickly flipped many of the assets on for huge profits to major international mining companies listed in London.
Now, the Africa Progress Panel, led by Kofi Annan, they've calculated that Congo may have lost more than 1.3 billion dollars from these deals.
That's almost twice the country's annual health and education budget combined.
And will the people of Congo, will they ever get their money back?
Well, the answer to that question, and who was really involved and what really happened, well that's going to probably remain locked away in the secretive company registries of the British Virgin Islands and elsewhere unless we all do something about it.
And how about the oil, gas and mining companies?
Okay, maybe it's a bit of a cliché to talk about them.
Corruption in that sector, no surprise.
There's corruption everywhere, so why focus on that sector?
Well, because there's a lot at stake.
In 2011, natural resource exports outweighed aid flows by almost 19 to one in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Nineteen to one.
Now that's a hell of a lot of schools and universities and hospitals and business startups, many of which haven't materialized and never will because some of that money has simply been stolen away.
Now let's go back to the oil and mining companies, and let's go back to Dan Etete and that $1 billion deal.
And now forgive me, I'm going to read the next bit because it's a very live issue, and our lawyers have been through this in some detail and they want me to get it right.
Now, on the surface, the deal appeared straightforward.
Subsidiaries of Shell and Eni paid the Nigerian government for the block.
The Nigerian government transferred precisely the same amount, to the very dollar, to an account earmarked for a shell company whose hidden owner was Etete.
Now, that's not bad going for a convicted money launderer.
And here's the thing.
After many months of digging around and reading through hundreds of pages of court documents, we found evidence that, in fact, Shell and Eni had known that the funds would be transferred to that shell company, and frankly, it's hard to believe they didn't know who they were really dealing with there.
Now, it just shouldn't take these sorts of efforts to find out where the money in deals like this went.
I mean, these are state assets.
They're supposed to be used for the benefit of the people in the country.
But in some countries, citizens and journalists who are trying to expose stories like this have been harassed and arrested and some have even risked their lives to do so.
And finally, well, there are those who believe that corruption is unavoidable.
It's just how some business is done.
It's too complex and difficult to change.
So in effect, what? We just accept it.
But as a campaigner and investigator, I have a different view, because I've seen what can happen when an idea gains momentum.
In the oil and mining sector, for example, there is now the beginning of a truly worldwide transparency standard that could tackle some of these problems.
In 1999, when Global Witness called for oil companies to make payments on deals transparent, well, some people laughed at the extreme naiveté of that small idea.
But literally hundreds of civil society groups from around the world came together to fight for transparency, and now it's fast becoming the norm and the law.
Two thirds of the value of the world's oil and mining companies are now covered by transparency laws. Two thirds.
So this is change happening.
This is progress.
But we're not there yet, by far.
Because it really isn't about corruption somewhere over there, is it?
In a globalized world, corruption is a truly globalized business, and one that needs global solutions, supported and pushed by us all, as global citizens, right here.
Thank you.
(Applause)
There are three words that explain why I am here.
They are "Amy Krouse Rosenthal."
At the end of Amy's life, hyped up on morphine and home in hospice, the "New York Times" published an article she wrote for the "Modern Love" column on March 3, 2017.
It was read worldwide by over five million people.
The piece was unbearably sad, ironically funny and brutally honest.
While it was certainly about our life together, the focus of the piece was me.
It was called, "You May Want to Marry My Husband."
It was a creative play on a personal ad for me.
Amy quite literally left an empty space for me to fill with another love story.
Amy was my wife for half my life.
She was my partner in raising three wonderful, now grown children, and really, she was my girl, you know?
We had so much in common.
We loved the same art, the same documentaries, the same music.
Music was a huge part of our life together.
And we shared the same values.
We were in love, and our love grew stronger up until her last day.
Amy was a prolific author.
In addition to two groundbreaking memoirs, she published over 30 children's books.
Posthumously, the book she wrote with our daughter Paris, called "Dear Girl," reached the number one position on the "New York Times" bestseller list.
She was a self-described tiny filmmaker.
She was 5'1" and her films were not that long.
(Laughter) Her films exemplified her natural ability to gather people together.
She was also a terrific public speaker, talking with children and adults of all ages all over the world.
Now, my story of grief is only unique in the sense of it being rather public.
However, the grieving process itself was not my story alone.
Amy gave me permission to move forward, and I'm so grateful for that.
Now, just a little over a year into my new life, I've learned a few things.
I'm here to share with you part of the process of moving forward through and with grief.
But before I do that, I think it would be important to talk a little bit about the end of life, because it forms how I have been emotionally since then.
Death is such a taboo subject, right?
Amy ate her last meal on January 9, 2017.
She somehow lived an additional two months without solid food.
Her doctors told us we could do hospice at home or in the hospital.
They did not tell us that Amy would shrink to half her body weight, that she would never lay with her husband again, and that walking upstairs to our bedroom would soon feel like running a marathon.
Home hospice does have an aura of being a beautiful environment to die in.
How great that you don't have the sounds of machines beeping and going on and off all the time, no disruptions for mandatory drug administration, home with your family to die.
We did our best to make those weeks as meaningful as we could.
We talked often about death.
Everybody knows it's going to happen to them, like, for sure, but being able to talk openly about it was liberating.
We talked about subjects like parenting.
I asked Amy how I could be the best parent possible to our children in her absence.
In those conversations, she gave me confidence by stressing what a great relationship I had with each one of them, and that I can do it.
I know there will be many times where I wish she and I can make decisions together.
We were always so in sync.
May I be so audacious as to suggest that you have these conversations now, when healthy.
Please don't wait.
As part of our hospice experience, we organized groups of visitors.
How brave of Amy to receive them, even as she began her physical decline.
We had a Krouse night, her parents and three siblings.
Friends and family were next.
Each told beautiful stories of Amy and of us.
Amy made an immense impact on her loyal friends.
But home hospice is not so beautiful for the surviving family members.
I want to get a little personal here and tell you that to this date, I have memories of those final weeks that haunt me.
I remember walking backwards to the bathroom, assisting Amy with each step.
I felt so strong.
I'm not such a big guy, but my arms looked and felt so healthy compared to Amy's frail body.
And that body failed in our house.
On March 13 of last year, my wife died of ovarian cancer in our bed.
I carried her lifeless body down our stairs, through our dining room and our living room to a waiting gurney to have her body cremated.
I will never get that image out of my head.
If you know someone who has been through the hospice experience, acknowledge that.
Just say you heard this guy Jason talk about how tough it must be to have those memories and that you're there if they ever want to talk about it.
They may not want to talk, but it's nice to connect with someone living each day with those lasting images.
I know this sounds unbelievable, but I've never been asked that question.
Amy's essay caused me to experience grief in a public way.
Many of the readers who reached out to me wrote beautiful words of reflection.
The scope of Amy's impact was deeper and richer than even us and her family knew.
Some of the responses I received helped me with the intense grieving process because of their humor, like this email I received from a woman reader who read the article, declaring, "I will marry you when you are ready -- (Laughter) "provided you permanently stop drinking.
No other conditions.
I promise to outlive you.
Thank you very much."
Now, I do like a good tequila, but that really is not my issue.
Yet how could I say no to that proposal?
(Laughter) I laughed through the tears when I read this note from a family friend: "I remember Shabbat dinners at your home and Amy teaching me how to make cornbread croutons.
Only Amy could find creativity in croutons."
(Laughter) On July 27, just a few months after Amy's death, my dad died of complications related to a decades-long battle with Parkinson's disease.
I had to wonder: How much can the human condition handle?
What makes us capable of dealing with this intense loss and yet carry on?
Was this a test?
Why my family and my amazing children?
Looking for answers, I regret to say, is a lifelong mission, but the key to my being able to persevere is Amy's expressed and very public edict that I must go on.
Throughout this year, I have done just that.
I have attempted to step out and seek the joy and the beauty that I know this life is capable of providing.
But here's the reality: those family gatherings, attending weddings and events honoring Amy, as loving as they are, have all been very difficult to endure.
People say I'm amazing.
"How do you handle yourself that way during those times?"
They say, "You do it with such grace."
Well, guess what?
I really am sad a lot of the time.
I often feel like I'm kind of a mess, and I know these feelings apply to other surviving spouses, children, parents and other family members.
In Japanese Zen, there is a term "Shoji," which translates as "birth death."
There is no separation between life and death other than a thin line that connects the two.
Birth, or the joyous, wonderful, vital parts of life, and death, those things we want to get rid of, are said to be faced equally.
In this new life that I find myself in, I am doing my best to embrace this concept as I move forward with grieving.
In the early months following Amy's death, though, I was sure that the feeling of despair would be ever-present, that it would be all-consuming.
Soon I was fortunate to receive some promising advice.
Many members of the losing-a-spouse club reached out to me.
One friend in particular who had also lost her life partner kept repeating, "Jason, you will find joy."
I didn't even know what she was talking about.
How was that possible?
But because Amy gave me very public permission to also find happiness, I now have experienced joy from time to time.
There it was, dancing the night away at an LCD Soundsystem concert, traveling with my brother and best friend or with a college buddy on a boys' trip to meet a group of great guys I never met before.
From observing that my deck had sun beating down on it on a cold day, stepping out in it, laying there, the warmth consuming my body.
The joy comes from my three stunning children.
There was my son Justin, texting me a picture of himself with an older gentleman with a massive, strong forearm and the caption, "I just met Popeye," with a huge grin on his face.
(Laughter) There was his brother Miles, walking to the train for his first day of work after graduating college, who stopped and looked back at me and asked, "What am I forgetting?"
I assured him right away, "You are 100 percent ready. You got this."
And my daughter Paris, walking together through Battersea Park in London, the leaves piled high, the sun glistening in the early morning on our way to yoga.
I would add that beauty is also there to discover, and I mean beauty of the wabi-sabi variety but beauty nonetheless.
On the one hand, when I see something in this category, I want to say, "Amy, did you see that? Did you hear that?
It's too beautiful for you not to share with me."
On the other hand, I now experience these moments in an entirely new way.
There was the beauty I found in music, like the moment in the newest Manchester Orchestra album, when the song "The Alien" seamlessly transitions into "The Sunshine," or the haunting beauty of Luke Sital-Singh's "Killing Me," whose chorus reads, "And it's killing me that you're not here with me.
I'm living happily, but I'm feeling guilty."
There is beauty in the simple moments that life has to offer, a way of seeing that world that was so much a part of Amy's DNA, like on my morning commute, looking at the sun reflecting off of Lake Michigan, or stopping and truly seeing how the light shines at different times of the day in the house we built together; even after a Chicago storm, noticing the fresh buildup of snow throughout the neighborhood; or peeking into my daughter's room as she's practicing the bass guitar.
Listen, I want to make it clear that I'm a very fortunate person.
I have the most amazing family that loves and supports me.
I have the resources for personal growth during my time of grief.
But whether it's a divorce, losing a job you worked so hard at or having a family member die suddenly or of a slow-moving and painful death, I would like to offer you what I was given: a blank of sheet of paper.
What will you do with your intentional empty space, with your fresh start?
Thank you.
(Applause)
On the coast of Northern Ireland, a vast plateau of basalt slabs and columns called the Giant’s Causeway stretches into the ocean.
The scientific explanation for this is that it’s the result of molten lava contracting and fracturing as it cooled in the wake of a volcanic eruption.
But an ancient Irish myth has a different accounting.
According to legend, the giant Finn MacCool lived happily on the North Antrim coast with his wife Oonagh.
Their only disturbance came from the taunts and threats of the giant Benandonner, or the red man, who lived across the sea in Scotland.
The two roared insults and hurled rocks at each other in dramatic shows of strength.
Once, Finn tore up a great clump of land and heaved it at his rival, but it fell short of reaching land.
Instead, the clump became the Isle of Man, and the crater left from the disturbed earth filled with water to become Lough Neagh.
The giants’ tough talk continued, until one day Benandonner challenged Finn to a fight, face to face.
And so the Irish giant tossed enough boulders into the sea to create a bridge of stepping stones to the Scottish coast.
Finn marched across in a fit of rage.
When Scotland loomed before him, he made out the figure of Benandonner from afar.
Finn was a substantial size, but at the sight of his colossal enemy thundering towards him, his courage faltered.
With one look at Benandonner’s thick neck and crushing fists, Finn turned and ran.
Back home, with Benandonner fast approaching, Finn trembled as he described his enemy’s bulk to Oonagh.
They knew that if he faced Benandonner head on, he’d be crushed.
And so Oonagh hatched a cunning plan - they needed to create an illusion of size, to suggest Finn was a mountain of a man whilst keeping him out of sight.
As Benandonner neared the end of the bridge, Oonagh stuffed her husband in a huge cradle.
Disguised as an enormous baby, Finn lay quiet as Benandonnner pounded on the door.
The house shook as he stepped inside.
Oonagh told the enraged visitor that her husband wasn’t home, but welcomed him to sit and eat while he waited.
When Benandonner tore into the cakes placed before him, he cried out in pain for he’d shattered his teeth on the metal Oonagh had concealed inside.
She told him that this was Finn’s favorite bread, sowing a seed of doubt in Benandonner’s mind that he was any match for his rival.
When Finn let out a squawk, Benandonner’s attention was drawn to the gigantic baby in the corner.
So hefty was the infant swaddled under piles of blankets, Benandonner shuddered at the thought of what the father would look like.
He decided he’d rather not find out.
As he fled, Benandonner tore up the rocks connecting the shores, breaking up the causeway.
What remains are two identical rock formations: one on the North Antrim coast of Ireland and one at Fingal’s Cave in Scotland, right across the sea.
The villainous Dr. Schrödinger has developed a growth ray and intends to create an army of giant cats to terrorize the city.
Your team of secret agents has tracked him to his underground lab.
You burst in to find… that it’s a trap!
Dr. Schrödinger has slipped into the next room to activate his device and disabled the control panel on the way out.
Fortunately, your teammates are masters of spy-craft.
Agent Delta has hacked into the control panel and managed to reactivate some of its functionality.
Meanwhile, Agent Epsilon has searched through surveillance to find the code for the door: 2, 10, 14.
All you have to do is enter those numbers and you’ll be free.
But there’s a problem.
The control panel has only three buttons: one which adds 5 to the display number, one which adds 7, and one which takes the square root.
You need to make the display output the numbers 2, 10, and 14, in that order.
It’s okay if it outputs different numbers in between, but there’s no way to reset the display, so once you get to 2, you’ll have to continue on to 10 and 14 from there.
Not only that, Agent Delta explains that there are other traps built into the panel.
If it ever shows the same number more than once, a number greater than 60, or a non-whole number, the room will explode.
Right now, the display reads zero, and time is running out.
There’s only one way to solve the puzzle, with a few small variations.
How will you input the code to escape from Dr. Schrödinger’s lair and save the day?
Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself!
Answer in: 3 2 1.
You look over your options.
Adding 5 or 7 increases the number, and the square root button will make it smaller.
But there are only a few options where you can use that button: 4 9 16 25, 36, and 49.
You’d love to make 4 or 16.
Then you could hit the square root button once or twice to get 2.
But you can’t make either with just the 5 and 7 buttons.
What will you do?
You look at the other possible options for numbers you could take the square root of.
Nine you can’t reach.
Twenty-five and 49 would take you back to 5 or 7, and you can already get to each of those.
Thirty-six is your only option.
You add 5, 7, 5, 7, 5, 7, and then hit the square root button.
Why that series of 5s and 7s?
It’s somewhat arbitrary, but you know that you want to avoid 10, 14, and perfect squares, since you’ll need them later.
This gets you to 6.
Does that help?
Looking at your options, you see that 16 is now in your sights.
You add 5 twice more to reach it.
Then hit square root twice.
That gets you to 2.
You’re on your way!
Now to 10.
You can’t get straight there through addition alone, so you’re going to have to reach another square.
Taking the square root of 9 or 25 would get you to a good place, but it turns out that 25 is unreachable from 2.
So you add 7 to get to 9, then take the square root again.
That gets you to 3.
Adding 7 again makes 10.
Finally, you need to reach 14.
Thinking backwards, you imagine where you could be before 14: 7 or 9.
But 9 won’t work because you’ve already used 9.
However, you could get to 7 by reaching 49 first.
You add your way towards it, being careful not to hit any of the numbers you’ve hit so far.
You thread your way carefully, adding five 5s and two 7s.
Then, square root to 7, and add 7 more.
The door opens, and you’re out of the trap.
Thanks to your problem-solving skills, your team gets Schrödinger’s cats out of the box in the nick of time.
As for Schrödinger, you can be certain of one thing: he’ll be spending quite some time in a box of his own.
This is my grandfather.
And this is my son.
My grandfather taught me to work with wood when I was a little boy, and he also taught me the idea that if you cut down a tree to turn it into something, honor that tree's life and make it as beautiful as you possibly can.
My little boy reminded me that for all the technology and all the toys in the world, sometimes just a small block of wood, if you stack it up tall, actually is an incredibly inspiring thing.
These are my buildings.
I build all around the world out of our office in Vancouver and New York.
And we build buildings of different sizes and styles and different materials, depending on where we are.
But wood is the material that I love the most, and I'm going to tell you the story about wood.
And part of the reason I love it is that every time people go into my buildings that are wood, I notice they react completely differently.
I've never seen anybody walk into one of my buildings and hug a steel or a concrete column, but I've actually seen that happen in a wood building.
I've actually seen how people touch the wood, and I think there's a reason for it.
Just like snowflakes, no two pieces of wood can ever be the same anywhere on Earth.
That's a wonderful thing.
I like to think that wood gives Mother Nature fingerprints in our buildings.
It's Mother Nature's fingerprints that make our buildings connect us to nature in the built environment.
Now, I live in Vancouver, near a forest that grows to 33 stories tall.
Down the coast here in California, the redwood forest grows to 40 stories tall.
But the buildings that we think about in wood are only four stories tall in most places on Earth.
Even building codes actually limit the ability for us to build much taller than four stories in many places, and that's true here in the United States.
Now there are exceptions, but there needs to be some exceptions, and things are going to change, I'm hoping.
And the reason I think that way is that today half of us live in cities, and that number is going to grow to 75 percent.
Cities and density mean that our buildings are going to continue to be big, and I think there's a role for wood to play in cities.
And I feel that way because three billion people in the world today, over the next 20 years, will need a new home.
That's 40 percent of the world that are going to need a new building built for them in the next 20 years.
Now, one in three people living in cities today actually live in a slum.
That's one billion people in the world live in slums.
A hundred million people in the world are homeless.
The scale of the challenge for architects and for society to deal with in building is to find a solution to house these people.
But the challenge is, as we move to cities, cities are built in these two materials, steel and concrete, and they're great materials.
They're the materials of the last century.
But they're also materials with very high energy and very high greenhouse gas emissions in their process.
Steel represents about three percent of man's greenhouse gas emissions, and concrete is over five percent.
So if you think about that, eight percent of our contribution to greenhouse gases today comes from those two materials alone.
We don't think about it a lot, and unfortunately, we actually don't even think about buildings, I think, as much as we should.
This is a U.S. statistic about the impact of greenhouse gases.
Almost half of our greenhouse gases are related to the building industry, and if we look at energy, it's the same story.
You'll notice that transportation's sort of second down that list, but that's the conversation we mostly hear about.
And although a lot of that is about energy, it's also so much about carbon.
The problem I see is that, ultimately, the clash of how we solve that problem of serving those three billion people that need a home, and climate change, are a head-on collision about to happen, or already happening.
That challenge means that we have to start thinking in new ways, and I think wood is going to be part of that solution, and I'm going to tell you the story of why.
As an architect, wood is the only material, big material, that I can build with that's already grown by the power of the sun.
When a tree grows in the forest and gives off oxygen and soaks up carbon dioxide, and it dies and it falls to the forest floor, it gives that carbon dioxide back to the atmosphere or into the ground.
If it burns in a forest fire, it's going to give that carbon back to the atmosphere as well.
But if you take that wood and you put it into a building or into a piece of furniture or into that wooden toy, it actually has an amazing capacity to store the carbon and provide us with a sequestration.
One cubic meter of wood will store one tonne of carbon dioxide.
Now our two solutions to climate are obviously to reduce our emissions and find storage.
Wood is the only major material building material I can build with that actually does both those two things.
So I believe that we have an ethic that the Earth grows our food, and we need to move to an ethic in this century that the Earth should grow our homes.
Now, how are we going to do that when we're urbanizing at this rate and we think about wood buildings only at four stories?
We need to reduce the concrete and steel and we need to grow bigger, and what we've been working on is 30-story tall buildings made of wood.
We've been engineering them with an engineer named Eric Karsh who works with me on it, and we've been doing this new work because there are new wood products out there for us to use, and we call them mass timber panels.
These are panels made with young trees, small growth trees, small pieces of wood glued together to make panels that are enormous: eight feet wide, 64 feet long, and of various thicknesses.
The way I describe this best, I've found, is to say that we're all used to two-by-four construction when we think about wood.
That's what people jump to as a conclusion.
Two-by-four construction is sort of like the little eight-dot bricks of Lego that we all played with as kids, and you can make all kinds of cool things out of Lego at that size, and out of two-by-fours.
But do remember when you were a kid, and you kind of sifted through the pile in your basement, and you found that big 24-dot brick of Lego, and you were kind of like, "Cool, this is awesome. I can build something really big, and this is going to be great."
That's the change.
Mass timber panels are those 24-dot bricks.
They're changing the scale of what we can do, and what we've developed is something we call FFTT, which is a Creative Commons solution to building a very flexible system of building with these large panels where we tilt up six stories at a time if we want to.
This animation shows you how the building goes together in a very simple way, but these buildings are available for architects and engineers now to build on for different cultures in the world, different architectural styles and characters.
In order for us to build safely, we've engineered these buildings, actually, to work in a Vancouver context, where we're a high seismic zone, even at 30 stories tall.
Now obviously, every time I bring this up, people even, you know, here at the conference, say, "Are you serious? Thirty stories? How's that going to happen?"
And there's a lot of really good questions that are asked and important questions that we spent quite a long time working on the answers to as we put together our report and the peer reviewed report.
I'm just going to focus on a few of them, and let's start with fire, because I think fire is probably the first one that you're all thinking about right now.
Fair enough.
And the way I describe it is this.
If I asked you to take a match and light it and hold up a log and try to get that log to go on fire, it doesn't happen, right? We all know that.
But to build a fire, you kind of start with small pieces of wood and you work your way up, and eventually you can add the log to the fire, and when you do add the log to the fire, of course, it burns, but it burns slowly.
Well, mass timber panels, these new products that we're using, are much like the log.
It's hard to start them on fire, and when they do, they actually burn extraordinarily predictably, and we can use fire science in order to predict and make these buildings as safe as concrete and as safe as steel.
The next big issue, deforestation.
Eighteen percent of our contribution to greenhouse gas emissions worldwide is the result of deforestation.
The last thing we want to do is cut down trees.
Or, the last thing we want to do is cut down the wrong trees.
There are models for sustainable forestry that allow us to cut trees properly, and those are the only trees appropriate to use for these kinds of systems.
Now I actually think that these ideas will change the economics of deforestation.
In countries with deforestation issues, we need to find a way to provide better value for the forest and actually encourage people to make money through very fast growth cycles -- 10-, 12-, 15-year-old trees that make these products and allow us to build at this scale.
We've calculated a 20-story building: We'll grow enough wood in North America every 13 minutes.
That's how much it takes.
The carbon story here is a really good one.
If we built a 20-story building out of cement and concrete, the process would result in the manufacturing of that cement and 1,200 tonnes of carbon dioxide.
If we did it in wood, in this solution, we'd sequester about 3,100 tonnes, for a net difference of 4,300 tonnes.
That's the equivalent of about 900 cars removed from the road in one year.
Think back to that three billion people that need a new home, and maybe this is a contributor to reducing.
We're at the beginning of a revolution, I hope, in the way we build, because this is the first new way to build a skyscraper in probably 100 years or more.
But the challenge is changing society's perception of possibility, and it's a huge challenge.
The engineering is, truthfully, the easy part of this.
And the way I describe it is this.
The first skyscraper, technically -- and the definition of a skyscraper is 10 stories tall, believe it or not — but the first skyscraper was this one in Chicago, and people were terrified to walk underneath this building.
But only four years after it was built, Gustave Eiffel was building the Eiffel Tower, and as he built the Eiffel Tower, he changed the skylines of the cities of the world, changed and created a competition between places like New York City and Chicago, where developers started building bigger and bigger buildings and pushing the envelope up higher and higher with better and better engineering.
We built this model in New York, actually, as a theoretical model on the campus of a technical university soon to come, and the reason we picked this site to just show you what these buildings may look like, because the exterior can change.
It's really just the structure that we're talking about.
The reason we picked it is because this is a technical university, and I believe that wood is the most technologically advanced material I can build with.
It just happens to be that Mother Nature holds the patent, and we don't really feel comfortable with it.
But that's the way it should be, nature's fingerprints in the built environment.
I'm looking for this opportunity to create an Eiffel Tower moment, we call it.
Buildings are starting to go up around the world.
There's a building in London that's nine stories, a new building that just finished in Australia that I believe is 10 or 11.
We're starting to push the height up of these wood buildings, and we're hoping, and I'm hoping, that my hometown of Vancouver actually potentially announces the world's tallest at around 20 stories in the not-so-distant future.
That Eiffel Tower moment will break the ceiling, these arbitrary ceilings of height, and allow wood buildings to join the competition.
And I believe the race is ultimately on.
Thank you.
(Applause)
After 13.8 billion years of cosmic history, our universe has woken up and become aware of itself.
From a small blue planet, tiny, conscious parts of our universe have begun gazing out into the cosmos with telescopes, discovering something humbling.
We've discovered that our universe is vastly grander than our ancestors imagined and that life seems to be an almost imperceptibly small perturbation on an otherwise dead universe.
But we've also discovered something inspiring, which is that the technology we're developing has the potential to help life flourish like never before, not just for centuries but for billions of years, and not just on earth but throughout much of this amazing cosmos.
I think of the earliest life as "Life 1.0" because it was really dumb, like bacteria, unable to learn anything during its lifetime.
I think of us humans as "Life 2.0" because we can learn, which we in nerdy, geek speak, might think of as installing new software into our brains, like languages and job skills.
"Life 3.0," which can design not only its software but also its hardware of course doesn't exist yet.
But perhaps our technology has already made us "Life 2.1," with our artificial knees, pacemakers and cochlear implants.
So let's take a closer look at our relationship with technology, OK?
As an example, the Apollo 11 moon mission was both successful and inspiring, showing that when we humans use technology wisely, we can accomplish things that our ancestors could only dream of.
But there's an even more inspiring journey propelled by something more powerful than rocket engines, where the passengers aren't just three astronauts but all of humanity.
Let's talk about our collective journey into the future with artificial intelligence.
My friend Jaan Tallinn likes to point out that just as with rocketry, it's not enough to make our technology powerful.
We also have to figure out, if we're going to be really ambitious, how to steer it and where we want to go with it.
So let's talk about all three for artificial intelligence: the power, the steering and the destination.
Let's start with the power.
I define intelligence very inclusively -- simply as our ability to accomplish complex goals, because I want to include both biological and artificial intelligence.
And I want to avoid the silly carbon-chauvinism idea that you can only be smart if you're made of meat.
It's really amazing how the power of AI has grown recently.
Just think about it.
Not long ago, robots couldn't walk.
Now, they can do backflips.
Not long ago, we didn't have self-driving cars.
Now, we have self-flying rockets.
Not long ago, AI couldn't do face recognition.
Now, AI can generate fake faces and simulate your face saying stuff that you never said.
Not long ago, AI couldn't beat us at the game of Go.
Then, Google DeepMind's AlphaZero AI took 3,000 years of human Go games and Go wisdom, ignored it all and became the world's best player by just playing against itself.
And the most impressive feat here wasn't that it crushed human gamers, but that it crushed human AI researchers who had spent decades handcrafting game-playing software.
And AlphaZero crushed human AI researchers not just in Go but even at chess, which we have been working on since 1950.
So all this amazing recent progress in AI really begs the question: How far will it go?
I like to think about this question in terms of this abstract landscape of tasks, where the elevation represents how hard it is for AI to do each task at human level, and the sea level represents what AI can do today.
The sea level is rising as AI improves, so there's a kind of global warming going on here in the task landscape.
And the obvious takeaway is to avoid careers at the waterfront -- (Laughter) which will soon be automated and disrupted.
But there's a much bigger question as well.
How high will the water end up rising?
Will it eventually rise to flood everything, matching human intelligence at all tasks.
This is the definition of artificial general intelligence -- AGI, which has been the holy grail of AI research since its inception.
By this definition, people who say, "Ah, there will always be jobs that humans can do better than machines," are simply saying that we'll never get AGI.
Sure, we might still choose to have some human jobs or to give humans income and purpose with our jobs, but AGI will in any case transform life as we know it with humans no longer being the most intelligent.
Now, if the water level does reach AGI, then further AI progress will be driven mainly not by humans but by AI, which means that there's a possibility that further AI progress could be way faster than the typical human research and development timescale of years, raising the controversial possibility of an intelligence explosion where recursively self-improving AI rapidly leaves human intelligence far behind, creating what's known as superintelligence.
Alright, reality check: Are we going to get AGI any time soon?
Some famous AI researchers, like Rodney Brooks, think it won't happen for hundreds of years.
But others, like Google DeepMind founder Demis Hassabis, are more optimistic and are working to try to make it happen much sooner.
And recent surveys have shown that most AI researchers actually share Demis's optimism, expecting that we will get AGI within decades, so within the lifetime of many of us, which begs the question -- and then what?
What do we want the role of humans to be if machines can do everything better and cheaper than us?
The way I see it, we face a choice.
One option is to be complacent.
We can say, "Oh, let's just build machines that can do everything we can do and not worry about the consequences.
Come on, if we build technology that makes all humans obsolete, what could possibly go wrong?"
(Laughter) But I think that would be embarrassingly lame.
I think we should be more ambitious -- in the spirit of TED.
Let's envision a truly inspiring high-tech future and try to steer towards it.
This brings us to the second part of our rocket metaphor: the steering.
We're making AI more powerful, but how can we steer towards a future where AI helps humanity flourish rather than flounder?
To help with this, I cofounded the Future of Life Institute.
It's a small nonprofit promoting beneficial technology use, and our goal is simply for the future of life to exist and to be as inspiring as possible.
You know, I love technology.
Technology is why today is better than the Stone Age.
And I'm optimistic that we can create a really inspiring high-tech future ...
if -- and this is a big if -- if we win the wisdom race -- the race between the growing power of our technology and the growing wisdom with which we manage it.
But this is going to require a change of strategy because our old strategy has been learning from mistakes.
We invented fire, screwed up a bunch of times -- invented the fire extinguisher.
(Laughter) We invented the car, screwed up a bunch of times -- invented the traffic light, the seat belt and the airbag, but with more powerful technology like nuclear weapons and AGI, learning from mistakes is a lousy strategy, don't you think?
(Laughter) It's much better to be proactive rather than reactive; plan ahead and get things right the first time because that might be the only time we'll get.
But it is funny because sometimes people tell me, "Max, shhh, don't talk like that.
That's Luddite scaremongering."
But it's not scaremongering.
It's what we at MIT call safety engineering.
Think about it: before NASA launched the Apollo 11 mission, they systematically thought through everything that could go wrong when you put people on top of explosive fuel tanks and launch them somewhere where no one could help them.
And there was a lot that could go wrong.
Was that scaremongering?
No.
That's was precisely the safety engineering that ensured the success of the mission, and that is precisely the strategy I think we should take with AGI.
Think through what can go wrong to make sure it goes right.
So in this spirit, we've organized conferences, bringing together leading AI researchers and other thinkers to discuss how to grow this wisdom we need to keep AI beneficial.
Our last conference was in Asilomar, California last year and produced this list of 23 principles which have since been signed by over 1,000 AI researchers and key industry leaders, and I want to tell you about three of these principles.
One is that we should avoid an arms race and lethal autonomous weapons.
The idea here is that any science can be used for new ways of helping people or new ways of harming people.
For example, biology and chemistry are much more likely to be used for new medicines or new cures than for new ways of killing people, because biologists and chemists pushed hard -- and successfully -- for bans on biological and chemical weapons.
And in the same spirit, most AI researchers want to stigmatize and ban lethal autonomous weapons.
Another Asilomar AI principle is that we should mitigate AI-fueled income inequality.
I think that if we can grow the economic pie dramatically with AI and we still can't figure out how to divide this pie so that everyone is better off, then shame on us.
(Applause) Alright, now raise your hand if your computer has ever crashed.
(Laughter) Wow, that's a lot of hands.
Well, then you'll appreciate this principle that we should invest much more in AI safety research, because as we put AI in charge of even more decisions and infrastructure, we need to figure out how to transform today's buggy and hackable computers into robust AI systems that we can really trust, because otherwise, all this awesome new technology can malfunction and harm us, or get hacked and be turned against us.
And this AI safety work has to include work on AI value alignment, because the real threat from AGI isn't malice, like in silly Hollywood movies, but competence -- AGI accomplishing goals that just aren't aligned with ours.
For example, when we humans drove the West African black rhino extinct, we didn't do it because we were a bunch of evil rhinoceros haters, did we?
We did it because we were smarter than them and our goals weren't aligned with theirs.
But AGI is by definition smarter than us, so to make sure that we don't put ourselves in the position of those rhinos if we create AGI, we need to figure out how to make machines understand our goals, adopt our goals and retain our goals.
And whose goals should these be, anyway?
Which goals should they be?
This brings us to the third part of our rocket metaphor: the destination.
We're making AI more powerful, trying to figure out how to steer it, but where do we want to go with it?
This is the elephant in the room that almost nobody talks about -- not even here at TED -- because we're so fixated on short-term AI challenges.
Look, our species is trying to build AGI, motivated by curiosity and economics, but what sort of future society are we hoping for if we succeed?
We did an opinion poll on this recently, and I was struck to see that most people actually want us to build superintelligence: AI that's vastly smarter than us in all ways.
What there was the greatest agreement on was that we should be ambitious and help life spread into the cosmos, but there was much less agreement about who or what should be in charge.
And I was actually quite amused to see that there's some some people who want it to be just machines.
(Laughter) And there was total disagreement about what the role of humans should be, even at the most basic level, so let's take a closer look at possible futures that we might choose to steer toward, alright?
So don't get me wrong here.
I'm not talking about space travel, merely about humanity's metaphorical journey into the future.
So one option that some of my AI colleagues like is to build superintelligence and keep it under human control, like an enslaved god, disconnected from the internet and used to create unimaginable technology and wealth for whoever controls it.
But Lord Acton warned us that power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely, so you might worry that maybe we humans just aren't smart enough, or wise enough rather, to handle this much power.
Also, aside from any moral qualms you might have about enslaving superior minds, you might worry that maybe the superintelligence could outsmart us, break out and take over.
But I also have colleagues who are fine with AI taking over and even causing human extinction, as long as we feel the the AIs are our worthy descendants, like our children.
But how would we know that the AIs have adopted our best values and aren't just unconscious zombies tricking us into anthropomorphizing them?
Also, shouldn't those people who don't want human extinction have a say in the matter, too?
Now, if you didn't like either of those two high-tech options, it's important to remember that low-tech is suicide from a cosmic perspective, because if we don't go far beyond today's technology, the question isn't whether humanity is going to go extinct, merely whether we're going to get taken out by the next killer asteroid, supervolcano or some other problem that better technology could have solved.
So, how about having our cake and eating it ...
with AGI that's not enslaved but treats us well because its values are aligned with ours?
This is the gist of what Eliezer Yudkowsky has called "friendly AI," and if we can do this, it could be awesome.
It could not only eliminate negative experiences like disease, poverty, crime and other suffering, but it could also give us the freedom to choose from a fantastic new diversity of positive experiences -- basically making us the masters of our own destiny.
So in summary, our situation with technology is complicated, but the big picture is rather simple.
Most AI researchers expect AGI within decades, and if we just bumble into this unprepared, it will probably be the biggest mistake in human history -- let's face it.
It could enable brutal, global dictatorship with unprecedented inequality, surveillance and suffering, and maybe even human extinction.
But if we steer carefully, we could end up in a fantastic future where everybody's better off: the poor are richer, the rich are richer, everybody is healthy and free to live out their dreams.
Now, hang on.
Do you folks want the future that's politically right or left?
Do you want the pious society with strict moral rules, or do you an hedonistic free-for-all, more like Burning Man 24/7?
Do you want beautiful beaches, forests and lakes, or would you prefer to rearrange some of those atoms with the computers, enabling virtual experiences?
With friendly AI, we could simply build all of these societies and give people the freedom to choose which one they want to live in because we would no longer be limited by our intelligence, merely by the laws of physics.
So the resources and space for this would be astronomical -- literally.
So here's our choice.
We can either be complacent about our future, taking as an article of blind faith that any new technology is guaranteed to be beneficial, and just repeat that to ourselves as a mantra over and over and over again as we drift like a rudderless ship towards our own obsolescence.
Or we can be ambitious -- thinking hard about how to steer our technology and where we want to go with it to create the age of amazement.
We're all here to celebrate the age of amazement, and I feel that its essence should lie in becoming not overpowered but empowered by our technology.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Diana Reiss: You may think you're looking through a window at a dolphin spinning playfully, but what you're actually looking through is a two-way mirror at a dolphin looking at itself spinning playfully.
This is a dolphin that is self-aware.
This dolphin has self-awareness.
It's a young dolphin named Bayley.
I've been very interested in understanding the nature of the intelligence of dolphins for the past 30 years.
How do we explore intelligence in this animal that's so different from us?
And what I've used is a very simple research tool, a mirror, and we've gained great information, reflections of these animal minds.
Dolphins aren't the only animals, the only non-human animals, to show mirror self-recognition.
We used to think this was a uniquely human ability, but we learned that the great apes, our closest relatives, also show this ability.
Then we showed it in dolphins, and then later in elephants.
We did this work in my lab with the dolphins and elephants, and it's been recently shown in the magpie.
Now, it's interesting, because we've embraced this Darwinian view of a continuity in physical evolution, this physical continuity.
But we've been much more reticent, much slower at recognizing this continuity in cognition, in emotion, in consciousness in other animals.
Other animals are conscious.
They're emotional. They're aware.
There have been multitudes of studies with many species over the years that have given us exquisite evidence for thinking and consciousness in other animals, other animals that are quite different than we are in form.
We are not alone.
We are not alone in these abilities.
And I hope, and one of my biggest dreams, is that, with our growing awareness about the consciousness of others and our relationship with the rest of the animal world, that we'll give them the respect and protection that they deserve.
So that's a wish I'm throwing out here for everybody, and I hope I can really engage you in this idea.
Now, I want to return to dolphins, because these are the animals that I feel like I've been working up closely and personal with for over 30 years.
And these are real personalities.
They are not persons, but they're personalities in every sense of the word.
And you can't get more alien than the dolphin.
They are very different from us in body form.
They're radically different. They come from a radically different environment.
In fact, we're separated by 95 million years of divergent evolution.
Look at this body.
And in every sense of making a pun here, these are true non-terrestrials.
I wondered how we might interface with these animals.
In the 1980s, I developed an underwater keyboard.
This was a custom-made touch-screen keyboard.
What I wanted to do was give the dolphins choice and control.
These are big brains, highly social animals, and I thought, well, if we give them choice and control, if they can hit a symbol on this keyboard -- and by the way, it was interfaced by fiber optic cables from Hewlett-Packard with an Apple II computer.
This seems prehistoric now, but this was where we were with technology.
So the dolphins could hit a key, a symbol, they heard a computer-generated whistle, and they got an object or activity.
Now here's a little video.
This is Delphi and Pan, and you're going to see Delphi hitting a key, he hears a computer-generated whistle -- (Whistle) -- and gets a ball, so they can actually ask for things they want.
What was remarkable is, they explored this keyboard on their own. There was no intervention on our part.
They explored the keyboard. They played around with it.
They figured out how it worked.
And they started to quickly imitate the sounds they were hearing on the keyboard.
They imitated on their own.
Beyond that, though, they started learning associations between the symbols, the sounds and the objects.
What we saw was self-organized learning, and now I'm imagining, what can we do with new technologies?
How can we create interfaces, new windows into the minds of animals, with the technologies that exist today?
So I was thinking about this, and then, one day, I got a call from Peter.
Peter Gabriel: I make noises for a living.
On a good day, it's music, and I want to talk a little bit about the most amazing music-making experience I ever had.
I'm a farm boy. I grew up surrounded by animals, and I would look in these eyes and wonder what was going on there?
So as an adult, when I started to read about the amazing breakthroughs with Penny Patterson and Koko, with Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Kanzi, Panbanisha, Irene Pepperberg, Alex the parrot, I got all excited.
What was amazing to me also was they seemed a lot more adept at getting a handle on our language than we were on getting a handle on theirs.
I work with a lot of musicians from around the world, and often we don't have any common language at all, but we sit down behind our instruments, and suddenly there's a way for us to connect and emote.
So I started cold-calling, and eventually got through to Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, and she invited me down.
I went down, and the bonobos had had access to percussion instruments, musical toys, but never before to a keyboard.
At first they did what infants do, just bashed it with their fists, and then I asked, through Sue, if Panbanisha could try with one finger only.
Sue Savage-Rumbaugh: Can you play a grooming song?
I want to hear a grooming song.
Play a real quiet grooming song.
PG: So groom was the subject of the piece.
(Music) So I'm just behind, jamming, yeah, this is what we started with.
Sue's encouraging her to continue a little more.
(Music) She discovers a note she likes, finds the octave.
She'd never sat at a keyboard before.
Nice triplets.
SSR: You did good. That was very good.
PG: She hit good.
(Applause) So that night, we began to dream, and we thought, perhaps the most amazing tool that man's created is the Internet, and what would happen if we could somehow find new interfaces, visual-audio interfaces that would allow these remarkable sentient beings that we share the planet with access?
And Sue Savage-Rumbaugh got excited about that, called her friend Steve Woodruff, and we began hustling all sorts of people whose work related or was inspiring, which led us to Diana, and led us to Neil.
Neil Gershenfeld: Thanks, Peter. PG: Thank you.
(Applause) NG: So Peter approached me.
I lost it when I saw that clip.
He approached me with a vision of doing these things not for people, for animals.
And then I was struck in the history of the Internet.
This is what the Internet looked like when it was born and you can call that the Internet of middle-aged white men, mostly middle-aged white men.
Vint Cerf: (Laughs) (Laughter) NG: Speaking as one.
Then, when I first came to TED, which was where I met Peter, I showed this.
This is a $1 web server, and at the time that was radical.
And the possibility of making a web server for a dollar grew into what became known as the Internet of Things, which is literally an industry now with tremendous implications for health care, energy efficiency.
And we were happy with ourselves.
And then when Peter showed me that, I realized we had missed something, which is the rest of the planet.
So we started up this interspecies Internet project.
Now we started talking with TED about how you bring dolphins and great apes and elephants to TED, and we realized that wouldn't work.
So we're going to bring you to them.
So if we could switch to the audio from this computer, we've been video conferencing with cognitive animals, and we're going to have each of them just briefly introduce them.
And so if we could also have this up, great.
So the first site we're going to meet is Cameron Park Zoo in Waco, with orangutans.
In the daytime they live outside. It's nighttime there now.
So can you please go ahead?
Terri Cox: Hi, I'm Terri Cox with the Cameron Park Zoo in Waco, Texas, and with me I have KeraJaan and Mei, two of our Bornean orangutans.
During the day, they have a beautiful, large outdoor habitat, and at night, they come into this habitat, into their night quarters, where they can have a climate-controlled and secure environment to sleep in.
We participate in the Apps for Apes program Orangutan Outreach, and we use iPads to help stimulate and enrich the animals, and also help raise awareness for these critically endangered animals.
And they share 97 percent of our DNA and are incredibly intelligent, so it's so exciting to think of all the opportunities that we have via technology and the Internet to really enrich their lives and open up their world.
We're really excited about the possibility of an interspecies Internet, and K.J. has been enjoying the conference very much.
NG: That's great. When we were rehearsing last night, he had fun watching the elephants.
Next user group are the dolphins at the National Aquarium.
Please go ahead.
Allison Ginsburg: Good evening.
Well, my name is Allison Ginsburg, and we're live in Baltimore at the National Aquarium.
Joining me are three of our eight Atlantic bottlenose dolphins: 20-year-old Chesapeake, who was our first dolphin born here, her four-year-old daughter Bayley, and her half sister, 11-year-old Maya.
Now, here at the National Aquarium we are committed to excellence in animal care, to research, and to conservation.
The dolphins are pretty intrigued as to what's going on here tonight.
They're not really used to having cameras here at 8 o'clock at night.
In addition, we are very committed to doing different types of research.
As Diana mentioned, our animals are involved in many different research studies.
NG: Those are for you.
Okay, that's great, thank you.
And the third user group, in Thailand, is Think Elephants. Go ahead, Josh.
Josh Plotnik: Hi, my name is Josh Plotnik, and I'm with Think Elephants International, and we're here in the Golden Triangle of Thailand with the Golden Triangle Asian Elephant Foundation elephants.
And we have 26 elephants here, and our research is focused on the evolution of intelligence with elephants, but our foundation Think Elephants is focused on bringing elephants into classrooms around the world virtually like this and showing people how incredible these animals are.
So we're able to bring the camera right up to the elephant, put food into the elephant's mouth, show people what's going on inside their mouths, and show everyone around the world how incredible these animals really are.
NG: Okay, that's great. Thanks Josh.
And once again, we've been building great relationships among them just since we've been rehearsing.
So at that point, if we can go back to the other computer, we were starting to think about how you integrate the rest of the biomass of the planet into the Internet, and we went to the best possible person I can think of, which is Vint Cerf, who is one of the founders who gave us the Internet. Vint?
VC: Thank you, Neil.
(Applause) A long time ago in a galaxy — oops, wrong script.
Forty years ago, Bob Kahn and I did the design of the Internet.
Thirty years ago, we turned it on.
Just last year, we turned on the production Internet.
You've been using the experimental version for the last 30 years.
The production version, it uses IP version 6.
It has 3.4 times 10 to the 38th possible terminations.
That's a number only that Congress can appreciate.
But it leads to what is coming next.
When Bob and I did this design, we thought we were building a system to connect computers together.
What we very quickly discovered is that this was a system for connecting people together.
And what you've seen tonight tells you that we should not restrict this network to one species, that these other intelligent, sentient species should be part of the system too.
This is the system as it looks today, by the way.
This is what the Internet looks like to a computer that's trying to figure out where the traffic is supposed to go.
This is generated by a program that's looking at the connectivity of the Internet, and how all the various networks are connected together.
There are about 400,000 networks, interconnected, run independently by 400,000 different operating agencies, and the only reason this works is that they all use the same standard TCP/IP protocols.
Well, you know where this is headed.
The Internet of Things tell us that a lot of computer-enabled appliances and devices are going to become part of this system too: appliances that you use around the house, that you use in your office, that you carry around with yourself or in the car.
That's the Internet of Things that's coming.
Now, what's important about what these people are doing is that they're beginning to learn how to communicate with species that are not us but share a common sensory environment.
We're beginning to explore what it means to communicate with something that isn't just another person.
Well, you can see what's coming next.
All kinds of possible sentient beings may be interconnected through this system, and I can't wait to see these experiments unfold.
What happens after that?
Well, let's see.
There are machines that need to talk to machines and that we need to talk to, and so as time goes on, we're going to have to learn how to communicate with computers and how to get computers to communicate with us in the way that we're accustomed to, not with keyboards, not with mice, but with speech and gestures and all the natural human language that we're accustomed to.
So we'll need something like C3PO to become a translator between ourselves and some of the other machines we live with.
Now, there is a project that's underway called the interplanetary Internet.
It's in operation between Earth and Mars.
It's operating on the International Space Station.
It's part of the spacecraft that's in orbit around the Sun that's rendezvoused with two planets.
So the interplanetary system is on its way, but there's a last project, which the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which funded the original ARPANET, funded the Internet, funded the interplanetary architecture, is now funding a project to design a spacecraft to get to the nearest star in 100 years' time.
What that means is that what we're learning with these interactions with other species will teach us, ultimately, how we might interact with an alien from another world.
I can hardly wait.
(Applause) June Cohen: So first of all, thank you, and I would like to acknowledge that four people who could talk to us for full four days actually managed to stay to four minutes each, and we thank you for that.
I have so many questions, but maybe a few practical things that the audience might want to know.
You're launching this idea here at TED — PG: Today.
JC: Today. This is the first time you're talking about it.
Tell me a little bit about where you're going to take the idea.
What's next?
PG: I think we want to engage as many people here as possible in helping us think of smart interfaces that will make all this possible.
NG: And just mechanically, there's a 501(c)(3) and web infrastructure and all of that, but it's not quite ready to turn on, so we'll roll that out, and contact us if you want the information on it.
The idea is this will be -- much like the Internet functions as a network of networks, which is Vint's core contribution, this will be a wrapper around all of these initiatives, that are wonderful individually, to link them globally.
JC: Right, and do you have a web address that we might look for yet?
NG: Shortly. JC: Shortly. We will come back to you on that.
And very quickly, just to clarify.
Some people might have looked at the video that you showed and thought, well, that's just a webcam.
What's special about it?
If you could talk for just a moment about how you want to go past that?
NG: So this is scalable video infrastructure, not for a few to a few but many to many, so that it scales to symmetrical video sharing and content sharing across these sites around the planet.
So there's a lot of back-end signal processing, not for one to many, but for many to many.
JC: Right, and then on a practical level, which technologies are you looking at first?
I know you mentioned that a keyboard is a really key part of this.
DR: We're trying to develop an interactive touch screen for dolphins.
This is sort of a continuation of some of the earlier work, and we just got our first seed money today towards that, so it's our first project.
JC: Before the talk, even. DR: Yeah.
JC: Wow. Well done.
All right, well thank you all so much for joining us.
It's such a delight to have you on the stage.
DR: Thank you. VC: Thank you.
(Applause)
Have you ever experienced a moment in your life that was so painful and confusing, that all you wanted to do was learn as much as you could to make sense of it all?
When I was 13, a close family friend who was like an uncle to me passed away from pancreatic cancer.
When the disease hit so close to home, I knew I needed to learn more.
So I went online to find answers.
Using the Internet, I found a variety of statistics on pancreatic cancer, and what I had found shocked me.
Over 85 percent of all pancreatic cancers are diagnosed late, when someone has less than a two percent chance of survival.
Why are we so bad at detecting pancreatic cancer?
The reason?
Today's current "modern" medicine is a 60-year-old technique.
That's older than my dad.
(Laughter) But also, it's extremely expensive, costing 800 dollars per test, and it's grossly inaccurate, missing 30 percent of all pancreatic cancers.
Your doctor would have to be ridiculously suspicious that you have the cancer in order to give you this test.
Learning this, I knew there had to be a better way.
So, I set up scientific criteria as to what a sensor would have to look like in order to effectively diagnose pancreatic cancer.
The sensor would have to be: inexpensive, rapid, simple, sensitive, selective, and minimally invasive.
Now, there's a reason why this test hasn't been updated in over six decades.
And that's because when we're looking for pancreatic cancer, we're looking at your bloodstream, which is already abundant in all these tons and tons of protein, and you're looking for this miniscule difference in this tiny amount of protein.
Just this one protein.
That's next to impossible.
However, undeterred due to my teenage optimism -- (Laughter) (Applause) I went online to a teenager's two best friends, Google and Wikipedia.
I got everything for my homework from those two sources.
(Laughter) And what I had found was an article that listed a database of over 8,000 different proteins that are found when you have pancreatic cancer.
So, I decided to go and make it my new mission to go through all these proteins, and see which ones could serve as a bio-marker for pancreatic cancer.
And to make it a bit simpler for myself, I decided to map out scientific criteria, and here it is.
Essentially, first, the protein would have to be found in all pancreatic cancers, at high levels in the bloodstream, in the earliest stages, but also only in cancer.
And so I'm just plugging and chugging through this gargantuan task, and finally, on the 4,000th try, when I'm close to losing my sanity, I find the protein.
And the name of the protein I'd located was called mesothelin, and it's just your ordinary, run-of-the-mill type protein, unless, of course, you have pancreatic, ovarian or lung cancer, in which case it's found at these very high levels in your bloodstream.
But also, the key is that it's found in the earliest stages of the disease, when someone has close to 100 percent chance of survival.
So now that I'd found a reliable protein I could detect, I then shifted my focus to actually detecting that protein, and thus, pancreatic cancer.
Now, my breakthrough came in a very unlikely place, possibly the most unlikely place for innovation -- my high school biology class, the absolute stifler of innovation.
(Laughter) (Applause) And I had snuck in this article on these things called carbon nanotubes, and that's just a long, thin pipe of carbon that's an atom thick, and one 50,000th the diameter of your hair.
And despite their extremely small sizes, they have these incredible properties.
They're kind of like the superheroes of material science.
And while I was sneakily reading this article under my desk in my biology class, we were supposed to be paying attention to these other kind of cool molecules, called antibodies.
And these are pretty cool because they only react with one specific protein, but they're not nearly as interesting as carbon nanotubes.
And so then, I was sitting in class, and suddenly it hit me: I could combine what I was reading about, carbon nanotubes, with what I was supposed to be thinking about, antibodies.
Essentially, I could weave a bunch of these antibodies into a network of carbon nanotubes, such that you have a network that only reacts with one protein, but also, due to the properties of these nanotubes, it will change its electrical properties, based on the amount of protein present.
However, there's a catch.
These networks of carbon nanotubes are extremely flimsy.
And since they're so delicate, they need to be supported.
So that's why I chose to use paper.
Making a cancer sensor out of paper is about as simple as making chocolate chip cookies, which I love.
(Laughs) You start with some water, pour in some nanotubes, add antibodies, mix it up, take some paper, dip it, dry it, and you can detect cancer.
(Applause) Then, suddenly, a thought occurred that kind of put a blemish on my amazing plan here.
I can't really do cancer research on my kitchen countertop.
My mom wouldn't really like that.
So instead, I decided to go for a lab.
So I typed up a budget, a materials list, a timeline, and a procedure, and I emailed it to 200 different professors at Johns Hopkins University and the National Institutes of Health -- essentially, anyone that had anything to do with pancreatic cancer.
I sat back waiting for these positive emails to be pouring in, saying, "You're a genius! You're going to save us all!"
And -- (Laughter) Then reality took hold, and over the course of a month, I got 199 rejections out of those 200 emails.
One professor even went through my entire procedure, painstakingly -- I'm not really sure where he got all this time -- and he went through and said why each and every step was like the worst mistake I could ever make.
Clearly, the professors did not have as high of an opinion of my work as I did.
However, there is a silver lining. 
