Upon her return to Warsaw, though, she found that securing an academic position as a woman remained a challenge.
All was not lost.
Back in Paris, the lovelorn Pierre was waiting, and the pair quickly married and became a formidable scientific team.
Another physicist's work sparked Marie Curie's interest.
In 1896, Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium spontaneously emitted a mysterious X-ray-like radiation that could interact with photographic film.
Curie soon found that the element thorium emitted similar radiation.
Most importantly, the strength of the radiation depended solely on the element's quantity, and was not affected by physical or chemical changes.
This led her to conclude that radiation was coming from something fundamental within the atoms of each element.
The idea was radical and helped to disprove the long-standing model of atoms as indivisible objects.
Next, by focusing on a super radioactive ore called pitchblende, the Curies realized that uranium alone couldn't be creating all the radiation.
So, were there other radioactive elements that might be responsible?
In 1898, they reported two new elements, polonium, named for Marie's native Poland, and radium, the Latin word for ray.
They also coined the term radioactivity along the way.
By 1902, the Curies had extracted a tenth of a gram of pure radium chloride salt from several tons of pitchblende, an incredible feat at the time.
Later that year, Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel were nominated for the Nobel Prize in physics, but Marie was overlooked.
Pierre took a stand in support of his wife's well-earned recognition.
And so both of the Curies and Becquerel shared the 1903 Nobel Prize, making Marie Curie the first female Nobel Laureate.
Well funded and well respected, the Curies were on a roll.
But tragedy struck in 1906 when Pierre was crushed by a horse-drawn cart as he crossed a busy intersection.
Marie, devastated, immersed herself in her research and took over Pierre's teaching position at the Sorbonne, becoming the school's first female professor.
Her solo work was fruitful.
In 1911, she won yet another Nobel, this time in chemistry for her earlier discovery of radium and polonium, and her extraction and analysis of pure radium and its compounds.
This made her the first, and to this date, only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences.
Professor Curie put her discoveries to work, changing the landscape of medical research and treatments.
She opened mobile radiology units during World War I, and investigated radiation's effects on tumors.
However, these benefits to humanity may have come at a high personal cost.
Curie died in 1934 of a bone marrow disease, which many today think was caused by her radiation exposure.
Marie Curie's revolutionary research laid the groundwork for our understanding of physics and chemistry, blazing trails in oncology, technology, medicine, and nuclear physics, to name a few.
For good or ill, her discoveries in radiation launched a new era, unearthing some of science's greatest secrets.
When Reverend Jim Jones founded the Peoples Temple in 1955, few could have imagined its horrifying end.
This progressive religious movement rose in popularity and gained support from some of San Francisco's most prominent politicians.
But in 1977, amidst revelations of brainwashing and abuse, Jones moved with several hundred followers to establish the commune of Jonestown in Guyana.
Billed as a utopian paradise, the colony was more like a prison camp, and when a congressional delegation arrived to investigate its conditions, Jones executed his final plan.
On November 18, 1978, 909 men, women, and children died after being forced to drink poisoned Flavor Aid.
That grizzly image has since been immortalized as shorthand slang for single-minded cult-like thinking, "They drank the Kool-aid."
Today, there are thousands of cults around the world.
It's important to note two things about them.
First, not all cults are religious.
Some are political, therapy-based, focused on self-improvement, or otherwise.
And on the flip side, not all new religions are what we're referring to as cults.
So what exactly defines our modern understanding of cults, and why do people join them?
Broadly speaking, a cult is a group or movement with a shared commitment to a usually extreme ideology that's typically embodied in a charismatic leader.
And while few turn out as deadly as Jonestown or Heaven's Gate, which ended in a mass suicide of 39 people in 1997, most cults share some basic characteristics.
A typical cult requires a high level of commitment from its members and maintains a strict hierarchy, separating unsuspecting supporters and recruits from the inner workings.
It claims to provide answers to life's biggest questions through its doctrine, along with the required recipe for change that shapes a new member into a true believer.
And most importantly, it uses both formal and informal systems of influence and control to keep members obedient, with little tolerance for internal disagreement or external scrutiny.
You might wonder whether some of these descriptions might also apply to established religions.
In fact, the world "cultus" originally described people who cultivated the worship of certain gods by performing rituals and maintaining temples.
But in time, it came to mean excessive devotion.
Many religions began as cults, but integrated into the fabric of the larger society as they grew.
A modern cult, by contrast, separates its members from others.
Rather than providing guidelines for members to live better lives, a cult seeks to directly control them, from personal and family relationships, to financial assets and living arrangements.
Cults also demand obedience to human leaders who tend to be highly persuasive people with authoritarian and narcissistic streaks motivated by money, sex, power, or all three.
While a cult leader uses personal charisma to attract initial followers, further expansion works like a pyramid scheme, with early members recruiting new ones.
Cults are skilled at knowing whom to target, often focusing on those new to an area, or who have recently undergone some personal or professional loss.
Loneliness and a desire for meaning make one susceptible to friendly people offering community.
The recruitment process can be subtle, sometimes taking months to establish a relationship.
In fact, more than two-thirds of cult members are recruited by a friend, family member, or co-worker whose invitations are harder to refuse.
Once in the cult, members are subjected to multiple forms of indoctrination.
Some play on our natural inclination to mimic social behaviors or follow orders.
Other methods may be more intense using techniques of coercive persuasion involving guilt, shame, and fear.
And in many cases, members may willingly submit out of desire to belong and to attain the promised rewards.
The cult environment discourages critical thinking, making it hard to voice doubts when everyone around you is modeling absolute faith.
The resulting internal conflict, known as cognitive dissonance, keeps you trapped, as each compromise makes it more painful to admit you've been deceived.
And though most cults don't lead members to their death, they can still be harmful.
By denying basic freedoms of thought, speech, and association, cults stunt their members' psychological and emotional growth, a particular problem for children, who are deprived of normal developmental activities and milestones.
Nevertheless, many cult members eventually find a way out, whether through their own realizations, the help of family and friends, or when the cult falls apart due to external pressure or scandals.
Many cults may be hard to identify, and for some, their beliefs, no matter how strange, are protected under religious freedom.
But when their practices involve harassment, threats, illegal activities, or abuse, the law can intervene.
Believing in something should not come at the cost of your family and friends, and if someone tells you to sacrifice your relationships or morality for the greater good, they're most likely exploiting you for their own.
Imagine you're asked to invent something new.
It could be whatever you want made from anything you choose in any shape or size.
That kind of creative freedom sounds so liberating, doesn't it?
Or does it?
If you're like most people, you'd probably be paralyzed by this task.
Without more guidance, where would you even begin?
As it turns out, boundless freedom isn't always helpful.
In reality, any project is restricted by many factors, such as the cost, what materials you have at your disposal, and unbreakable laws of physics.
These factors are called creative constraints, and they're the requirements and limitations we have to address in order to accomplish a goal.
Creative constraints apply across professions, to architects and artists, writers, engineers, and scientists.
In many fields, constraints play a special role as drivers of discovery and invention.
During the scientific process in particular, constraints are an essential part of experimental design.
For instance, a scientist studying a new virus would consider, "How can I use the tools and techniques at hand to create an experiment that tells me how this virus infects the body's cells?
And what are the limits of my knowledge that prevent me from understanding this new viral pathway?"
In engineering, constraints have us apply our scientific discoveries to invent something new and useful.
Take, for example, the landers Viking 1 and 2, which relied on thrusters to arrive safely on the surface of Mars.
The problem?
Those thrusters left foreign chemicals on the ground, contaminating soil samples.
So a new constraint was introduced.
How can we land a probe on Mars without introducing chemicals from Earth?
The next Pathfinder mission used an airbag system to allow the rover to bounce and roll to a halt without burning contaminating fuel.
Years later, we wanted to send a much larger rover: Curiosity.
However, it was too large for the airbag design, so another constraint was defined.
How can we land a large rover while still keeping rocket fuel away from the Martian soil?
In response, engineers had a wild idea.
They designed a skycrane.
Similar to the claw machine at toy stores, it would lower the rover from high above the surface.
With each invention, the engineers demonstrated an essential habit of scientific thinking - that solutions must recognize the limitations of current technology in order to advance it.
Sometimes this progress is iterative, as in, "How can I make a better parachute to land my rover?"
And sometimes, it's innovative, like how to reach our goal when the best possible parachute isn't going to work.
In both cases, the constraints guide decision-making to ensure we reach each objective.
Here's another Mars problem yet to be solved.
Say we want to send astronauts who will need water.
They'd rely on a filtration system that keeps the water very clean and enables 100% recovery.
Those are some pretty tough constraints, and we may not have the technology for it now.
But in the process of trying to meet these objectives, we might discover other applications of any inventions that result.
Building an innovative water filtration system could provide a solution for farmers working in drought-stricken regions, or a way to clean municipal water in polluted cities.
In fact, many scientific advances have occurred when serendipitous failures in one field address the constraints of another.
When scientist Alexander Fleming mistakenly contaminated a Petri dish in the lab, it led to the discovery of the first antibiotic, penicillin.
The same is true of synthetic dye, plastic, and gunpowder.
All were created mistakenly, but went on to address the constraints of other problems.
Understanding constraints guides scientific progress, and what's true in science is also true in many other fields.
Constraints aren't the boundaries of creativity, but the foundation of it.
So, as researchers, something that we often do is use immense resources to achieve certain capabilities, or achieve certain goals.
And this is essential to the progress of science, or exploration of what is possible.
But it creates this unfortunate situation where a tiny, tiny fraction of the world can actually participate in this exploration or can benefit from that technology.
Something that motivates me, and gets me really excited about my research, is when I see simple opportunities to drastically change that distribution and make the technology accessible to a much wider percentage of the population.
I'm going to show you two videos that have gotten a lot of attention that I think embody this philosophy.
For those of you who aren't familiar with this device, it's a $40 video game controller.
And it's mostly advertised for its motion-sensing capabilities: so you can swing a tennis racket, or hit a baseball bat.
But what actually interests me a lot more is the fact that in the tip of each controller is a relatively high-performing infrared camera.
And I'm going to show you two demos of why this is useful.
So here, I have my computer set up with the projector, and I have a Wii Remote sitting on top of it.
And, for example, if you're in a school that doesn't have a lot money, probably a lot of schools, or if you're in an office environment, and you want an interactive whiteboard, normally these cost about two to three thousand dollars.
So I'm going to show you how to create one with a Wii Remote.
Now, this requires another piece of hardware, which is this infrared pen.
You can probably make this yourself for about five dollars with a quick trip to the Radio Shack.
It's got a battery, a button and an infrared LED -- you guys can't see it -- but it turns on whenever I push the button.
Now, what this means is that if I run this piece of software, the camera sees the infrared dot, and I can register the location of the camera pixels to the projector pixels.
And now this is like an interactive whiteboard surface.
(Applause) So for about $50 of hardware, you can have your own whiteboard.
This is Adobe Photoshop.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Laughter) The software for this I've actually put on my website and have let people download it for free.
In the three months this project has been public, it's been downloaded over half a million times.
So teachers and students all around the world are already using this.
(Applause) Although it does do it for 50 dollars, there are some limitations of this approach.
You get about 80 percent of the way there, for one percent of the cost.
Another nice thing is that a camera can see multiple dots, so this is actually a multi-touch, interactive whiteboard system as well.
(Applause) For the second demo, I have this Wii Remote that's actually next to the TV.
So it's pointing away from the display, rather than pointing at the display.
And why this is interesting is that if you put on, say, a pair of safety glasses, that have two infrared dots in them, they are going to give the computer an approximation of your head location.
And why this is interesting is I have this sort of application running on the computer monitor, which has a 3D room, with some targets floating in it.
kind of like a video game, it sort of looks 3D, but for the most part, the image looks pretty flat, and bound to the surface of the screen.
But if we turn on head tracking -- the computer can change the image that's on the screen and make it respond to the head movements.
So let's switch back to that.
(Laughter) (Applause) So this has actually been a little bit startling to the game-development community.
(Laughter) Because this is about 10 dollars of additional hardware if you already have a Nintendo Wii.
So I'm looking forward to seeing some games, and actually Louis Castle, that's him down there, last week announced that Electronic Arts, one of the largest game publishers, is releasing a game in May that has a little Easter egg feature for supporting this type of head tracking.
And that's from less than five months from a prototype in my lab to a major commercial product.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) But actually, to me, what's almost more interesting than either of these two projects is how people actually found out about them.
YouTube has really changed the way, or changed the speed, in which a single individual can actually spread an idea around the world.
I'm doing some research in my lab with a video camera, and within the first week, a million people had seen this work, and literally within days, engineers, teachers and students from around the world were already posting their own YouTube videos of them using my system or derivatives of this work.
So I hope to see more of that in the future, and hope online video distribution to be embraced by the research community.
So thank you very much.
Behold the human brain, it's lumpy landscape visibly split into a left and right side.
This structure has inspired one of the most pervasive ideas about the brain, that the left side controls logic and the right, creativity.
And yet, this is a myth unsupported by scientific evidence.
So how did this misleading idea come about, and what does it get wrong?
It's true that the brain has a right and a left side.
This is most apparent with the outer layer, or the cortex.
Internal regions, like the striatum, hypothalamus, thalamus, and brain stem appear to be made from continuous tissue, but in fact, they're also organized with left and right sides.
The left and the right sides of the brain do control different body functions, such as movement and sight.
The brain's right side controls the motion of the left arm and leg and vice versa.
The visual system is even more complex.
Each eye has a left and right visual field.
Both left visual fields are sent to the right side of the brain, and both right fields are sent to the left side.
So the brain uses both sides to make a complete image of the world.
Scientists don't know for sure why we have that crossing over.
One theory is it began soon after animals developed more complex nervous systems because it gave the survival advantage of quicker reflexes.
If an animal sees a predator coming from its left side, it's best off escaping to the right.
So we can say that vision and movement control are two systems that rely on this left-right structure, but problems arise when we over-extend that idea to logic and creativity.
This misconception began in the mid-1800s when two neurologists, Broca and Wernicke, examined patients who had problems communicating due to injuries.
The researchers found damage to the patients' left temporal lobes, so they suggested that language is controlled by the left side of the brain.
That captured the popular imagination.
Author Robert Louis Stevenson then introduced the idea of a logical left hemisphere competing with an emotional right hemisphere represented by his characters Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.
But this idea didn't hold up when doctors and scientists examined patients who were missing a hemisphere or had their two hemispheres separated.
These patients showed a complete range of behaviors, both logical and creative.
Later research showed that one side of the brain is more active than the other for some functions.
Language is more localized to the left and attention to the right.
So one side of the brain may do more work, but this varies by system rather than by person.
There isn't any evidence to suggest that individuals have dominant sides of the brain, or to support the idea of a left-right split between logic and creativity.
Some people may be particularly logical or creative, but that has nothing to do with the sides of their brains.
And even the idea of logic and creativity being at odds with each other doesn't hold up well.
Solving complex math problems requires inspired creativity and many vibrant works of art have intricate logical frameworks.
Almost every feat of creativity and logic carries the mark of the whole brain functioning as one.
Each year in the United States, players of sports and recreational activities receive between 2.5 and 4 million concussions.
How dangerous are all those concussions?
The answer is complicated, and lies in how the brain responds when something strikes it.
The brain is made of soft fatty tissue, with a consistency something like jello.
Inside its protective membranes and the skull's hard casing, this delicate organ is usually well-shielded.
But a sudden jolt can make the brain shift and bump against the skull's hard interior, and unlike jello, the brain's tissue isn't uniform.
It's made of a vast network of 90 billion neurons, which relay signals through their long axons to communicate throughout the brain and control our bodies.
This spindly structure makes them very fragile so that when impacted, neurons will stretch and even tear.
That not only disrupts their ability to communicate but as destroyed axons begin to degenerate, they also release toxins causing the death of other neurons, too.
This combination of events causes a concussion.
The damage can manifest in many different ways including blackout, headache, blurry vision, balance problems, altered mood and behavior, problems with memory, thinking, and sleeping, and the onset of anxiety and depression.
Every brain is different, which explains why people's experiences of concussions vary so widely.
Luckily, the majority of concussions fully heal and symptoms disappear within a matter of days or weeks.
Lots of rest and a gradual return to activity allows the brain to heal itself.
On the subject of rest, many people have heard that you're not supposed to sleep shortly after receiving a concussion because you might slip into a coma.
That's a myth.
So long as doctors aren't concerned there may also be a more severe brain injury, like a brain bleed, there's no documented problem with going to sleep after a concussion.
Sometimes, victims of concussion can experience something called post-concussion syndrome, or PCS.
People with PCS may experience constant headaches, learning difficulties, and behavioral symptoms that even affect their personal relationships for months or years after the injury.
Trying to play through a concussion, even for only a few minutes, or returning to sports too soon after a concussion, makes it more likely to develop PCS.
In some cases, a concussion can be hard to diagnose because the symptoms unfold slowly over time.
That's often true of subconcussive impacts which result from lower impact jolts to the head than those that cause concussions.
This category of injury doesn't cause noticable symptoms right away, but can lead to severe degenerative brain diseases over time if it happens repeatedly.
Take soccer players, who are known for repeatedly heading soccer balls.
Using a technique called Diffusion Tensor Imaging, we're beginning to find out what effect that has on the brain.
This method allows scientists to find large axon bundles and see how milder blows might alter them structurally.
In 2013, researchers using this technique discovered that athletes who had headed the ball most, about 1,800 times a year, had damaged the structural integrity of their axon bundles.
The damage was similar to how a rope will fail when the individual fibers start to fray.
Those players also performed worse on short-term memory tests, so even though no one suffered full-blown concussions, these subconcussive hits added up to measurable damage over time.
In fact, researchers know that an overload of subconcussive hits is linked to a degenerative brain disease known as Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy, or CTE.
People with CTE suffer from changes in their mood and behavior that begin appearing in their 30s or 40s followed by problems with thinking and memory that can, in some cases, even result in dementia.
The culprit is a protein called tau.
Usually, tau proteins support tiny tubes inside our axons called microtubules.
It's thought that repeated subconcussive hits damage the microtubules, causing the tau proteins to dislodge and clump together.
The clumps disrupt transport and communication along the neuron and drive the breakdown of connections within the brain.
Once the tau proteins start clumping together, they cause more clumps to form and continue to spread throughout the brain, even after head impacts have stopped.
The data show that at least among football players, between 50 and 80% of concussions go unreported and untreated.
Sometimes that's because it's hard to tell a concussion has occurred in the first place.
But it's also often due to pressure or a desire to keep going despite the fact that something's wrong.
This doesn't just undermine recovery.
It's also dangerous.
Our brains aren't invincible.
They still need us to shield them from harm and help them undo damage once it's been done.
Fish are in trouble.
The cod population off Canada's East Coast collapsed in the 1990s, intense recreational and commercial fishing has decimated goliath grouper populations in South Florida, and most populations of tuna have plummeted by over 50%, with the Southern Atlantic bluefin on the verge of extinction.
Those are just a couple of many examples.
Overfishing is happening all over the world.
How did this happen?
When some people think of fishing, they imagine relaxing in a boat and patiently reeling in the day's catch.
But modern industrial fishing, the kind that stocks our grocery shelves, looks more like warfare.
In fact, the technologies they employ were developed for war.
Radar, sonar, helicopters, and spotter planes are all used to guide factory ships towards dwindling schools of fish.
Long lines with hundreds of hooks or huge nets round up massive amounts of fish, along with other species, like seabirds, turtles, and dolphins.
And fish are hauled up onto giant boats, complete with onboard flash freezing and processing facilities.
All of these technologies have enabled us to catch fish at greater depths and farther out at sea than ever before.
And as the distance and depth of fishing have expanded, so has the variety of species we target.
For example, the Patagonian toothfish neither sounds nor looks very appetizing.
And fishermen ignored it until the late 1970s.
Then it was rebranded and marketed to chefs in the U.S. as Chilean sea bass, despite the animal actually being a type of cod.
Soon it was popping up in markets all over the world and is now a delicacy.
Unfortunately, these deep water fish don't reproduce until they're at least ten years old, making them extremely vulnerable to overfishing when the young are caught before they've had the chance to spawn.
Consumer taste and prices can also have harmful effects.
For example, shark fin soup is considered such a delicacy in China and Vietnam that the fin has become the most profitable part of the shark.
This leads many fishermen to fill their boats with fins leaving millions of dead sharks behind.
The problems aren't unique to toothfish and sharks.
Almost 31% of the world's fish populations are overfished, and another 58% are fished at the maximum sustainable level.
Wild fish simply can't reproduce as fast as 7 billion people can eat them.
Fishing also has impacts on broader ecosystems.
Wild shrimp are typically caught by dragging nets the size of a football field along the ocean bottom, disrupting or destroying seafloor habitats.
The catch is often as little as 5% shrimp.
The rest is by-catch, unwanted animals that are thrown back dead.
And coastal shrimp farming isn't much better.
Mangroves are bulldozed to make room for shrimp farms, robbing coastal communities of storm protection and natural water filtration and depriving fish of key nursery habitats.
So what does it look like to give fish a break and let them recover?
Protection can take many forms.
In national waters, governments can set limits about how, when, where, and how much fishing occurs, with restrictions on certain boats and equipment.
Harmful practices, such as bottom trawling, can be banned altogether, and we can establish marine reserves closed to all fishing to help ecosystems restore themselves.
There's also a role for consumer awareness and boycotts to reduce wasteful practices, like shark finning, and push fishing industries towards more sustainable practices.
Past interventions have successfully helped depleted fish populations recover.
There are many solutions.
The best approach for each fishery must be considered based on science, respect for the local communities that rely on the ocean, and for fish as wild animals.
And then the rules must be enforced.
International collaboration is often needed, too, because fish don't care about our borders.
We need to end overfishing.
Ecosystems, food security, jobs, economies, and coastal cultures all depend on it.
There we were, souls and bodies packed into a Texas church on the last night of our lives.
Packed into a room just like this, but with creaky wooden pews draped in worn-down red fabric, with an organ to my left and a choir at my back and a baptism pool built into the wall behind them.
A room like this, nonetheless.
With the same great feelings of suspense, the same deep hopes for salvation, the same sweat in the palms and the same people in the back not paying attention.
(Laughter) This was December 31, 1999, the night of the Second Coming of Christ, and the end of the world as I knew it.
I had turned 12 that year and had reached the age of accountability.
And once I stopped complaining about how unfair it was that Jesus would return as soon as I had to be accountable for all that I had done, I figured I had better get my house in order very quickly.
So I went to church as often as I could.
I listened for silence as anxiously as one might listen for noise, trying to be sure that the Lord hadn't pulled a fast one on me and decided to come back early.
And just in case he did, I built a backup plan, by reading the "Left Behind" books that were all the rage at the time.
And I found in their pages that if I was not taken in the rapture at midnight, I had another shot.
All I had to do was avoid taking the mark of the beast, fight off demons, plagues and the Antichrist himself.
It would be hard -- (Laughter) but I knew I could do it.
(Laughter) But planning time was over now.
It was 11:50pm.
We had 10 minutes left, and my pastor called us out of the pews and down to the altar because he wanted to be praying when midnight struck.
So every faction of the congregation took its place.
The choir stayed in the choir stand, the deacons and their wives -- or the Baptist Bourgeoisie as I like to call them -- (Laughter) took first position in front of the altar.
You see, in America, even the Second Coming of Christ has a VIP section.
(Laughter) (Applause) And right behind the Baptist Bourgeoisie were the elderly -- these men and women whose young backs had been bent under hot suns in the cotton fields of East Texas, and whose skin seemed to be burnt a creaseless noble brown, just like the clay of East Texas, and whose hopes and dreams for what life might become outside of East Texas had sometimes been bent and broken even further than their backs.
Yes, these men and women were the stars of the show for me.
They had waited their whole lives for this moment, just as their medieval predecessors had longed for the end of the world, and just as my grandmother waited for the Oprah Winfrey Show to come on Channel 8 every day at 4 o'clock.
And as she made her way to the altar, I snuck right in behind her, because I knew for sure that my grandmother was going to heaven.
And I thought that if I held on to her hand during this prayer, I might go right on with her.
So I held on and I closed my eyes to listen, to wait.
And the prayers got louder.
And the shouts of response to the call of the prayer went up higher even still.
And the organ rolled on in to add the dirge.
And the heat came on to add to the sweat.
And my hand gripped firmer, so I wouldn't be the one left in the field.
My eyes clenched tighter so I wouldn't see the wheat being separated from the chaff.
And then a voice rang out above us: "Amen."
It was over.
I looked at the clock.
It was after midnight.
I looked at the elder believers whose savior had not come, who were too proud to show any signs of disappointment, who had believed too much and for too long to start doubting now.
But I was upset on their behalf.
They had been duped, hoodwinked, bamboozled, and I had gone right along with them.
I had prayed their prayers, I had yielded not to temptation as best I could.
I had dipped my head not once, but twice in that snot-inducing baptism pool.
I had believed.
Now what?
I got home just in time to turn on the television and watch Peter Jennings announce the new millennium as it rolled in around the world.
It struck me that it would have been strange anyway, for Jesus to come back again and again based on the different time zones.
(Laughter) And this made me feel even more ridiculous -- hurt, really.
But there on that night, I did not stop believing.
I just believed a new thing: that it was possible not to believe.
It was possible the answers I had were wrong, that the questions themselves were wrong.
And now, where there was once a mountain of certitude, there was, running right down to its foundation, a spring of doubt, a spring that promised rivers.
I can trace the whole drama of my life back to that night in that church when my savior did not come for me; when the thing I believed most certainly turned out to be, if not a lie, then not quite the truth.
And even though most of you prepared for Y2K in a very different way, I'm convinced that you are here because some part of you has done the same thing that I have done since the dawn of this new century, since my mother left and my father stayed away and my Lord refused to come.
And I held out my hand, reaching for something to believe in.
I held on when I arrived at Yale at 18, with the faith that my journey from Oak Cliff, Texas was a chance to leave behind all the challenges I had known, the broken dreams and broken bodies I had seen.
But when I found myself back home one winter break, with my face planted in the floor, my hands tied behind my back and a burglar's gun pressed to my head, I knew that even the best education couldn't save me.
I held on when I showed up at Lehman Brothers as an intern in 2008.
(Laughter) So hopeful -- (Laughter) that I called home to inform my family that we'd never be poor again.
(Laughter) But as I witnessed this temple of finance come crashing down before my eyes, I knew that even the best job couldn't save me.
I held on when I showed up in Washington DC as a young staffer, who had heard a voice call out from Illinois, saying, "It's been a long time coming, but in this election, change has come to America."
But as the Congress ground to a halt and the country ripped at the seams and hope and change began to feel like a cruel joke, I knew that even the political second coming could not save me.
I had knelt faithfully at the altar of the American Dream, praying to the gods of my time of success, and money, and power.
But over and over again, midnight struck, and I opened my eyes to see that all of these gods were dead.
And from that graveyard, I began the search once more, not because I was brave, but because I knew that I would either believe or I would die.
So I took a pilgrimage to yet another mecca, Harvard Business School -- (Laughter) this time, knowing that I could not simply accept the salvation that it claimed to offer.
No, I knew there'd be more work to do.
The work began in the dark corner of a crowded party, in the late night of an early, miserable Cambridge winter, when three friends and I asked a question that young folks searching for something real have asked for a very long time: "What if we took a road trip?"
(Laughter) We didn't know where'd we go or how we'd get there, but we knew we had to do it.
Because all our lives we yearned, as Jack Kerouac wrote, to "sneak out into the night and disappear somewhere," and go find out what everybody was doing all over the country.
So even though there were other voices who said that the risk was too great and the proof too thin, we went on anyhow.
We went on 8,000 miles across America in the summer of 2013, through the cow pastures of Montana, through the desolation of Detroit, through the swamps of New Orleans, where we found and worked with men and women who were building small businesses that made purpose their bottom line.
And having been trained at the West Point of capitalism, this struck us as a revolutionary idea.
(Laughter) And this idea spread, growing into a nonprofit called MBAs Across America, a movement that landed me here on this stage today.
It spread because we found a great hunger in our generation for purpose, for meaning.
It spread because we found countless entrepreneurs in the nooks and crannies of America who were creating jobs and changing lives and who needed a little help.
But if I'm being honest, it also spread because I fought to spread it.
There was no length to which I would not go to preach this gospel, to get more people to believe that we could bind the wounds of a broken country, one social business at a time.
But it was this journey of evangelism that led me to the rather different gospel that I've come to share with you today.
It began one evening almost a year ago at the Museum of Natural History in New York City, at a gala for alumni of Harvard Business School.
Under a full-size replica of a whale, I sat with the titans of our time as they celebrated their peers and their good deeds.
There was pride in a room where net worth and assets under management surpassed half a trillion dollars.
We looked over all that we had made, and it was good.
(Laughter) But it just so happened, two days later, I had to travel up the road to Harlem, where I found myself sitting in an urban farm that had once been a vacant lot, listening to a man named Tony tell me of the kids that showed up there every day.
All of them lived below the poverty line.
Many of them carried all of their belongings in a backpack to avoid losing them in a homeless shelter.
Some of them came to Tony's program, called Harlem Grown, to get the only meal they had each day.
Tony told me that he started Harlem Grown with money from his pension, after 20 years as a cab driver.
He told me that he didn't give himself a salary, because despite success, the program struggled for resources.
He told me that he would take any help that he could get.
And I was there as that help.
But as I left Tony, I felt the sting and salt of tears welling up in my eyes.
I felt the weight of revelation that I could sit in one room on one night, where a few hundred people had half a trillion dollars, and another room, two days later, just 50 blocks up the road, where a man was going without a salary to get a child her only meal of the day.
And it wasn't the glaring inequality that made me want to cry, it wasn't the thought of hungry, homeless kids, it wasn't rage toward the one percent or pity toward the 99.
No, I was disturbed because I had finally realized that I was the dialysis for a country that needed a kidney transplant.
I realized that my story stood in for all those who were expected to pick themselves up by their bootstraps, even if they didn't have any boots; that my organization stood in for all the structural, systemic help that never went to Harlem or Appalachia or the Lower 9th Ward; that my voice stood in for all those voices that seemed too unlearned, too unwashed, too unaccommodated.
And the shame of that, that shame washed over me like the shame of sitting in front of the television, watching Peter Jennings announce the new millennium again and again and again.
I had been duped, hoodwinked, bamboozled.
But this time, the false savior was me.
You see, I've come a long way from that altar on the night I thought the world would end, from a world where people spoke in tongues and saw suffering as a necessary act of God and took a text to be infallible truth.
Yes, I've come so far that I'm right back where I started.
Because it simply is not true to say that we live in an age of disbelief -- no, we believe today just as much as any time that came before.
Some of us may believe in the prophecy of Brené Brown or Tony Robbins.
We may believe in the bible of The New Yorker or the Harvard Business Review.
We may believe most deeply when we worship right here at the church of TED, but we desperately want to believe, we need to believe.
We speak in the tongues of charismatic leaders that promise to solve all our problems.
We see suffering as a necessary act of the capitalism that is our god, we take the text of technological progress to be infallible truth.
And we hardly realize the human price we pay when we fail to question one brick, because we fear it might shake our whole foundation.
But if you are disturbed by the unconscionable things that we have come to accept, then it must be questioning time.
So I have not a gospel of disruption or innovation or a triple bottom line.
I do not have a gospel of faith to share with you today, in fact.
I have and I offer a gospel of doubt.
The gospel of doubt does not ask that you stop believing, it asks that you believe a new thing: that it is possible not to believe.
It is possible the answers we have are wrong, it is possible the questions themselves are wrong.
Yes, the gospel of doubt means that it is possible that we, on this stage, in this room, are wrong.
Because it raises the question, "Why?"
With all the power that we hold in our hands, why are people still suffering so bad?
This doubt leads me to share that we are putting my organization, MBAs Across America, out of business.
We have shed our staff and closed our doors and we will share our model freely with anyone who sees their power to do this work without waiting for our permission.
This doubt compels me to renounce the role of savior that some have placed on me, because our time is too short and our odds are too long to wait for second comings, when the truth is that there will be no miracles here.
And this doubt, it fuels me, it gives me hope that when our troubles overwhelm us, when the paths laid out for us seem to lead to our demise, when our healers bring no comfort to our wounds, it will not be our blind faith -- no, it will be our humble doubt that shines a little light into the darkness of our lives and of our world and lets us raise our voice to whisper or to shout or to say simply, very simply, "There must be another way."
Thank you.
(Applause)
For most jobs, it's understood that you can be fired, whether for crime, incompetence, or just poor performance.
But what if your job happens to be the most powerful position in the country, or the world?
That's where impeachment comes in.
Impeachment isn't the same as actually removing someone from office.
Like an indictment in criminal court, it's only the formal accusation that launches a trial, which could end in conviction or acquittal.
Originating in the United Kingdom, impeachment allowed Parliament to vote for removing a government official from office even without the king's consent.
Although this was an important check on royal power, the king couldn't be impeached because the monarch was considered the source of all government power.
But for the founders of the American Republic, there was no higher authority beyond the people themselves.
And so impeachment was adopted in the United States as a power of Congress applying to any civil officers, up to and including the president.
Although demands for impeachment can come from any members of the public, only the House of Representatives has the power to actually initiate the process.
It begins by referring the matter to a committee, usually the House Committee on Rules and the House Committee on the Judiciary.
These committees review the accusations, examine the evidence, and issue a recommendation.
If they find sufficient grounds to proceed, the House holds a separate vote on each of the specific charges, known as Articles of Impeachment.
If one or more passes by a simple majority, the official is impeached and the stage is set for trial.
The actual trial that follows impeachment is held in the Senate.
Selected members of the House, known as managers, act as the prosecution, while the impeached official and their lawyers present their defense.
The Senate acts as both judge and jury, conducting the trial and deliberating after hearing all the arguments.
If it's the president or vice president being impeached, the chief justice of the Supreme Court presides.
A conviction requires a supermajority of two-thirds and results in automatic removal from power.
Depending on the original charges, it can also disqualify them from holding office in the future and open them to standard criminal prosecution.
So what exactly can get someone impeached?
That's a bit more complicated.
Unlike in the United Kingdom, impeachment in the U.S. pits an elected legislature against other democratically elected members of government.
Therefore, to prevent the process from being used as a political weapon, the Constitution specifies that an official can only be impeached for treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.
That still leaves a lot of room for interpretation, not to mention politics, and many impeachment trials have split along partisan lines.
But the process is generally understood to be reserved for serious abuses of power.
The first official to be impeached was Tennesse Senator William Blount in 1797 for conspiring with Britain to cease the Spanish colony of Louisiana.
Since then, the House has launched impeachment investigations about 60 times, but only 19 have led to actual impeachment proceedings.
The eight cases that ended in a conviction and removal from office were all federal judges.
And impeachment of a sitting president is even more rare.
Andrew Johnson was impeached in 1868 for attempting to replace Secretary of War Edwin Stanton without consulting the Senate.
Over a century later, Bill Clinton was impeached for making false statements under oath during a sexual harassment trial.
Both were ultimately acquitted when the Senate's votes to convict fell short of the required two-thirds majority.
And contrary to popular belief, Richard Nixon was never actually impeached for the Watergate scandal.
He resigned before it could happen knowing he would almost certainly be convicted.
Theoretically, the U.S. government is already designed to prevent abuses of power, limiting different branches through a system of checks and balances, term limits, and free elections.
But impeachment can be seen as an emergency brake for when these safeguards fail.
In case you are wondering, no, I'm not wearing a dress, and no, I'm not saying what I'm wearing underneath.
(Laughter) This is a gho.
This is my national dress.
This is how all men dress in Bhutan.
That is how our women dress.
Like our women, we men get to wear pretty bright colors, but unlike our women, we get to show off our legs.
(Laughter) Our national dress is unique, but this is not the only thing that's unique about my country.
Our promise to remain carbon neutral is also unique, and this is what I'd like to speak about today, our promise to remain carbon neutral.
But before I proceed, I should set you the context.
I should tell you our story.
Bhutan is a small country in the Himalayas.
We've been called Shangri-La, even the last Shangri-La.
But let me tell you right off the bat, we are not Shangri-La.
My country is not one big monastery populated with happy monks.
(Laughter) The reality is that there are barely 700,000 of us sandwiched between two of the most populated countries on earth, China and India.
The reality is that we are a small, underdeveloped country doing our best to survive.
But we are doing OK. We are surviving.
In fact, we are thriving, and the reason we are thriving is because we've been blessed with extraordinary kings.
Our enlightened monarchs have worked tirelessly to develop our country, balancing economic growth carefully with social development, environmental sustainability and cultural preservation, all within the framework of good governance.
We call this holistic approach to development "Gross National Happiness," or GNH.
Back in the 1970s, our fourth king famously pronounced that for Bhutan, Gross National Happiness is more important than Gross National Product.
(Applause) Ever since, all development in Bhutan is driven by GNH, a pioneering vision that aims to improve the happiness and well-being of our people.
But that's easier said than done, especially when you are one of the smallest economies in the world.
Our entire GDP is less than two billion dollars.
I know that some of you here are worth more -- (Laughter) individually than the entire economy of my country.
So our economy is small, but here is where it gets interesting.
Education is completely free.
All citizens are guaranteed free school education, and those that work hard are given free college education.
Healthcare is also completely free.
Medical consultation, medical treatment, medicines: they are all provided by the state.
We manage this because we use our limited resources very carefully, and because we stay faithful to the core mission of GNH, which is development with values.
Our economy is small, and we must strengthen it.
Economic growth is important, but that economic growth must not come from undermining our unique culture or our pristine environment.
Today, our culture is flourishing.
We continue to celebrate our art and architecture, food and festivals, monks and monasteries.
And yes, we celebrate our national dress, too.
This is why I can wear my gho with pride.
Here's a fun fact: you're looking at the world's biggest pocket.
(Laughter) It starts here, goes around the back, and comes out from inside here.
In this pocket we store all manner of personal goods from phones and wallets to iPads, office files and books.
(Laughter) (Applause) But sometimes -- sometimes even precious cargo.
So our culture is flourishing, but so is our environment.
72 percent of my country is under forest cover.
Our constitution demands that a minimum of 60 percent of Bhutan's total land shall remain under forest cover for all time.
(Applause) Our constitution, this constitution, imposes forest cover on us.
Incidentally, our king used this constitution to impose democracy on us.
You see, we the people didn't want democracy.
We didn't ask for it, we didn't demand it, and we certainly didn't fight for it.
Instead, our king imposed democracy on us by insisting that he include it in the constitution.
But he went further.
He included provisions in the constitution that empower the people to impeach their kings, and included provisions in here that require all our kings to retire at the age of 65.
(Applause) Fact is, we already have a king in retirement: our previous king, the Great Fourth, retired 10 years ago at the peak of his popularity.
He was all of 51 years at that time.
So as I was saying, 72 percent of our country is under forest cover, and all that forest is pristine.
That's why we are one of the few remaining global biodiversity hotspots in the world, and that's why we are a carbon neutral country.
In a world that is threatened with climate change, we are a carbon neutral country.
Turns out, it's a big deal.
Of the 200-odd countries in the world today, it looks like we are the only one that's carbon neutral.
Actually, that's not quite accurate.
Bhutan is not carbon neutral.
Bhutan is carbon negative.
Our entire country generates 2.2 million tons of carbon dioxide, but our forests, they sequester more than three times that amount, so we are a net carbon sink for more than four million tons of carbon dioxide each year.
But that's not all.
(Applause) We export most of the renewable electricity we generate from our fast-flowing rivers.
So today, the clean energy that we export offsets about six million tons of carbon dioxide in our neighborhood.
By 2020, we'll be exporting enough electricity to offset 17 million tons of carbon dioxide.
And if we were to harness even half our hydropower potential, and that's exactly what we are working at, the clean, green energy that we export would offset something like 50 million tons of carbon dioxide a year.
That is more CO2 than what the entire city of New York generates in one year.
So inside our country, we are a net carbon sink.
Outside, we are offsetting carbon.
And this is important stuff.
You see, the world is getting warmer, and climate change is a reality.
Climate change is affecting my country.
Our glaciers are melting, causing flash floods and landslides, which in turn are causing disaster and widespread destruction in our country.
I was at that lake recently.
It's stunning.
That's how it looked 10 years ago, and that's how it looked 20 years ago.
Just 20 years ago, that lake didn't exist.
It was a solid glacier.
A few years ago, a similar lake breached its dams and wreaked havoc in the valleys below.
That destruction was caused by one glacier lake.
We have 2,700 of them to contend with.
The point is this: my country and my people have done nothing to contribute to global warming, but we are already bearing the brunt of its consequences.
And for a small, poor country, one that is landlocked and mountainous, it is very difficult.
But we are not going to sit on our hands doing nothing.
We will fight climate change.
That's why we have promised to remain carbon neutral.
We first made this promise in 2009 during COP 15 in Copenhagen, but nobody noticed.
Governments were so busy arguing with one another and blaming each other for causing climate change, that when a small country raised our hands and announced, "We promise to remain carbon neutral for all time," nobody heard us.
Nobody cared.
Last December in Paris, at COP 21, we reiterated our promise to remain carbon neutral for all time to come.
This time, we were heard.
We were noticed, and everybody cared.
What was different in Paris was that governments came round together to accept the realities of climate change, and were willing to come together and act together and work together.
All countries, from the very small to the very large, committed to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions.
The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change says that if these so-called intended commitments are kept, we'd be closer to containing global warming by two degrees Celsius.
By the way, I've requested the TED organizers here to turn up the heat in here by two degrees, so if some of you are feeling warmer than usual, you know who to blame.
It's crucial that all of us keep our commitments.
As far as Bhutan is concerned, we will keep our promise to remain carbon neutral.
Here are some of the ways we are doing it.
We are providing free electricity to our rural farmers.
The idea is that, with free electricity, they will no longer have to use firewood to cook their food.
We are investing in sustainable transport and subsidizing the purchase of electric vehicles.
Similarly, we are subsidizing the cost of LED lights, and our entire government is trying to go paperless.
We are cleaning up our entire country through Clean Bhutan, a national program, and we are planting trees throughout our country through Green Bhutan, another national program.
But it is our protected areas that are at the core of our carbon neutral strategy.
Our protected areas are our carbon sink.
They are our lungs.
Today, more than half our country is protected, as national parks, nature reserves and wildlife sanctuaries.
But the beauty is that we've connected them all with one another through a network of biological corridors.
Now, what this means is that our animals are free to roam throughout our country.
Take this tiger, for example.
It was spotted at 250 meters above sea level in the hot, subtropical jungles.
Two years later, that same tiger was spotted near 4,000 meters in our cold alpine mountains.
Isn't that awesome?
(Applause) We must keep it that way.
We must keep our parks awesome.
So every year, we set aside resources to prevent poaching, hunting, mining and pollution in our parks, and resources to help communities who live in those parks manage their forests, adapt to climate change, and lead better lives while continuing to live in harmony with Mother Nature.
But that is expensive.
Over the next few years, our small economy won't have the resources to cover all the costs that are required to protect our environment.
In fact, when we run the numbers, it looks like it'll take us at least 15 years before we can fully finance all our conservation efforts.
But neither Bhutan, nor the world can afford to spend 15 years going backwards.
This is why His Majesty the King started Bhutan For Life.
Bhutan For Life gives us the time we need.
It gives us breathing room.
It is essentially a funding mechanism to look after our parks, to protect our parks, until our government can take over on our own fully.
The idea is to raise a transition fund from individual donors, corporations and institutions, but the deal is closed only after predetermined conditions are met and all funds committed.
So multiparty, single closing: an idea we borrowed from Wall Street.
This means that individual donors can commit without having to worry that they'll be left supporting an underfunded plan.
It's something like a Kickstarter project, only with a 15-year time horizon and millions of tons of carbon dioxide at stake.
Once the deal is closed, we use the transition fund to protect our parks, giving our government time to increase our own funding gradually until the end of the 15-year period.
After that, our government guarantees full funding forever.
We are almost there.
We expect to close later this year.
Naturally, I'm pretty excited.
(Applause) The World Wildlife Fund is our principle partner in this journey, and I want to give them a big shoutout for the excellent work they are doing in Bhutan and across the world.
(Applause) Whew, it is getting warm in here.
I thank you for listening to our story, a story of how we are keeping our promise to remain carbon neutral, a story of how we are keeping our country pristine, for ourselves, our children, for your children and for the world.
But we are not here to tell stories, are we?
We are here to dream together.
So in closing, I'd like to share one more dream that I have.
What if we could mobilize our leadership and our resources, our influence and our passion, to replicate the Bhutan For Life idea to other countries so that they too can conserve their protected areas for all time.
After all, there are many other countries who face the same issues that we face.
They too have natural resources that can help win the world's fight for sustainability, only they may not have the ability to invest in them now.
So what if we set up Earth For Life, a global fund, to kickstart the Bhutan For Life throughout the world?
I invite you to help me, to carry this dream beyond our borders to all those who care about our planet's future.
After all, we're here to dream together, to work together, to fight climate change together, to protect our planet together.
Because the reality is we are in it together.
Some of us might dress differently, but we are in it together.
Thank you very much, and kadrin chhe la. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you, thank you, thank you.
The following are my opinions, and do not reflect the opinions or policies of any particular prosecutor's office.
(Laughter) I am a prosecutor.
I believe in law and order.
I am the adopted son of a police officer, a Marine and a hairdresser.
I believe in accountability and that we should all be safe in our communities.
I love my job and the people that do it.
I just think that it's our responsibility to do it better.
By a show of hands, how many of you, by the age of 25, had either acted up in school, went somewhere you were specifically told to stay out of, or drank alcohol before your legal age?
(Laughter) All right.
How many of you shoplifted, tried an illegal drug or got into a physical fight -- yes, even with a sibling?
Now, how many of you ever spent one day in jail for any of those decisions?
How many of you sitting here today think that you're a danger to society or should be defined by those actions of youthful indiscretion?
(Laughter) Point taken.
When we talk about criminal justice reform, we often focus on a few things, and that's what I want to talk to you about today.
But first I'm going to -- since you shared with me, I'm going to give you a confession on my part.
I went to law school to make money.
I had no interest in being a public servant, I had no interest in criminal law, and I definitely didn't think that I would ever be a prosecutor.
Near the end of my first year of law school, I got an internship in the Roxbury Division of Boston Municipal Court.
I knew of Roxbury as an impoverished neighborhood in Boston, plagued by gun violence and drug crime.
My life and my legal career changed the first day of that internship.
I walked into a courtroom, and I saw an auditorium of people who, one by one, would approach the front of that courtroom to say two words and two words only: "Not guilty."
They were predominately black and brown.
And then a judge, a defense attorney and a prosecutor would make life-altering decisions about that person without their input.
They were predominately white.
As each person, one by one, approached the front of that courtroom, I couldn't stop but think: How did they get here?
I wanted to know their stories.
And as the prosecutor read the facts of each case, I was thinking to myself, we could have predicted that.
That seems so preventable...
not because I was an expert in criminal law, but because it was common sense.
Over the course of the internship, I began to recognize people in the auditorium, not because they were criminal masterminds but because they were coming to us for help and we were sending them out without any.
My second year of law school I worked as a paralegal for a defense attorney, and in that experience I met many young men accused of murder.
Even in our "worst," I saw human stories.
And they all contained childhood trauma, victimization, poverty, loss, disengagement from school, early interaction with the police and the criminal justice system, all leading to a seat in a courtroom.
Those convicted of murder were condemned to die in prison, and it was during those meetings with those men that I couldn't fathom why we would spend so much money to keep this one person in jail for the next 80 years when we could have reinvested it up front, and perhaps prevented the whole thing from happening in the first place.
(Applause) My third year of law school, I defended people accused of small street crimes, mostly mentally ill, mostly homeless, mostly drug-addicted, all in need of help.
They would come to us, and we would send them away without that help.
They were in need of our assistance.
But we weren't giving them any.
Prosecuted, adjudged and defended by people who knew nothing about them.
The staggering inefficiency is what drove me to criminal justice work.
The unfairness of it all made me want to be a defender.
The power dynamic that I came to understand made me become a prosecutor.
I don't want to spend a lot of time talking about the problem.
We know the criminal justice system needs reform, we know there are 2.3 million people in American jails and prisons, making us the most incarcerated nation on the planet.
We know there's another seven million people on probation or parole, we know that the criminal justice system disproportionately affects people of color, particularly poor people of color.
And we know there are system failures happening everywhere that bring people to our courtrooms.
But what we do not discuss is how ill-equipped our prosecutors are to receive them.
When we talk about criminal justice reform, we, as a society, focus on three things.
We complain, we tweet, we protest about the police, about sentencing laws and about prison.
We rarely, if ever, talk about the prosecutor.
In the fall of 2009, a young man was arrested by the Boston Police Department.
He was 18 years old, he was African American and he was a senior at a local public school.
He had his sights set on college but his part-time, minimum-wage job wasn't providing the financial opportunity he needed to enroll in school.
In a series of bad decisions, he stole 30 laptops from a store and sold them on the Internet.
This led to his arrest and a criminal complaint of 30 felony charges.
The potential jail time he faced is what stressed Christopher out the most.
But what he had little understanding of was the impact a criminal record would have on his future.
I was standing in arraignments that day when Christopher's case came across my desk.
And at the risk of sounding dramatic, in that moment, I had Christopher's life in my hands.
I was 29 years old, a brand-new prosecutor, and I had little appreciation for how the decisions I would make would impact Christopher's life.
Christopher's case was a serious one and it needed to be dealt with as such, but I didn't think branding him a felon for the rest of his life was the right answer.
For the most part, prosecutors step onto the job with little appreciation of the impact of our decisions, regardless of our intent.
Despite our broad discretion, we learn to avoid risk at all cost, rendering our discretion basically useless.
History has conditioned us to believe that somehow, the criminal justice system brings about accountability and improves public safety, despite evidence to the contrary.
We're judged internally and externally by our convictions and our trial wins, so prosecutors aren't really incentivized to be creative at our case dispositions, or to take risks on people we might not otherwise.
We stick to an outdated method, counterproductive to achieving the very goal that we all want, and that's safer communities.
Yet most prosecutors standing in my space would have arraigned Christopher.
They have little appreciation for what we can do.
Arraigning Christopher would give him a criminal record, making it harder for him to get a job, setting in motion a cycle that defines the failing criminal justice system today.
With a criminal record and without a job, Christopher would be unable to find employment, education or stable housing.
Without those protective factors in his life, Christopher would be more likely to commit further, more serious crime.
The more contact Christopher had with the criminal justice system, the more likely it would be that he would return again and again and again -- all at tremendous social cost to his children, to his family and to his peers.
And, ladies and gentlemen, it is a terrible public safety outcome for the rest of us.
When I came out of law school, I did the same thing as everybody else.
I came out as a prosecutor expected to do justice, but I never learned what justice was in my classes -- none of us do.
None of us do.
And yet, prosecutors are the most powerful actors in the criminal justice system.
Our power is virtually boundless.
In most cases, not the judge, not the police, not the legislature, not the mayor, not the governor, not the President can tell us how to prosecute our cases.
The decision to arraign Christopher and give him a criminal record was exclusively mine.
I would choose whether to prosecute him for 30 felonies, for one felony, for a misdemeanor, or at all.
I would choose whether to leverage Christopher into a plea deal or take the case to trial, and ultimately, I would be in a position to ask for Christopher to go to jail.
These are decisions that prosecutors make every day unfettered, and we are unaware and untrained of the grave consequences of those decisions.
One night this past summer, I was at a small gathering of professional men of color from around the city.
As I stood there stuffing free finger sandwiches into my mouth, as you do as public servant -- (Laughter) I noticed across the room, a young man waving and smiling at me and approaching me.
And I recognized him, but I couldn't place from where, and before I knew it, this young man was hugging me.
And thanking me.
"You cared about me, and you changed my life."
It was Christopher.
See, I never arraigned Christopher.
He never faced a judge or a jail, he never had a criminal record.
Instead, I worked with Christopher; first on being accountable for his actions, and then, putting him in a position where he wouldn't re-offend.
We recovered 75 percent of the computers that he sold and gave them back to Best Buy, and came up with a financial plan to repay for the computers we couldn't recover.
Christopher did community service.
He wrote an essay reflecting on how this case could impact his future and that of the community.
He applied to college, he obtained financial aid, and he went on to graduate from a four-year school.
(Applause) After we finished hugging, I looked at his name tag, to learn that Christopher was the manager of a large bank in Boston.
Christopher had accomplished -- and making a lot more money than me -- (Laughter) He had accomplished all of this in the six years since I had first seen him in Roxbury Court.
I can't take credit for Christopher's journey to success, but I certainly did my part to keep him on the path.
There are thousands of Christophers out there, some locked in our jails and prisons.
We need thousands of prosecutors to recognize that and to protect them.
An employed Christopher is better for public safety than a condemned one.
It's a bigger win for all of us.
In retrospect, the decision not to throw the book at Christopher makes perfect sense.
When I saw him that first day in Roxbury Court, I didn't see a criminal standing there.
As an individual caught selling a large quantity of drugs in my late teens, I knew firsthand the power of opportunity as opposed to the wrath of the criminal justice system.
Along the way, with the help and guidance of my district attorney, my supervisor and judges, I learned the power of the prosecutor to change lives instead of ruining them.
And that's how we do it in Boston.
We helped a woman who was arrested for stealing groceries to feed her kids get a job.
Instead of putting an abused teenager in adult jail for punching another teenager, we secured mental health treatment and community supervision.
A runaway girl who was arrested for prostituting, to survive on the streets, needed a safe place to live and grow -- something we could help her with.
I even helped a young man who was so afraid of the older gang kids showing up after school, that one morning instead of a lunchbox into his backpack, he put a loaded 9-millimeter.
We would spend our time that we'd normally take prepping our cases for months and months for trial down the road by coming up with real solutions to the problems as they presented.
Which is the better way to spend our time?
How would you prefer your prosecutors to spend theirs?
Why are we spending 80 billion dollars on a prison industry that we know is failing, when we could take that money and reallocate it into education, into mental health treatment, into substance abuse treatment and to community investment so we can develop our neighborhoods?
(Applause) So why should this matter to you?
Well, one, we're spending a lot of money.
Our money.
It costs 109,000 dollars in some states to lock up a teenager for a year, with a 60 percent chance that that person will return to the very same system.
That is a terrible return on investment.
Number two: it's the right thing to do.
If prosecutors were a part of creating the problem, it's incumbent on us to create a solution and we can do that using other disciplines that have already done the data and research for us.
And number three: your voice and your vote can make that happen.
The next time there's a local district attorney's election in your jurisdiction, ask candidates these questions.
Two: What data are you collecting, and how are you training your prosecutors to make sure that it's working?
And number three: If it's not working for everybody, what are you doing to fix it?
If they can't answer the questions, they shouldn't be doing the job.
Each one of you that raised your hand at the beginning of this talk is a living, breathing example of the power of opportunity, of intervention, of support and of love.
While each of you may have faced your own brand of discipline for whatever malfeasances you committed, barely any of you needed a day in jail to make you the people that you are today -- some of the greatest minds on the planet.
Every day, thousands of times a day, prosecutors around the United States wield power so great that it can bring about catastrophe as quickly as it can bring about opportunity, intervention, support and yes, even love.
Those qualities are the hallmarks of a strong community, and a strong community is a safe one.
If our communities are broken, don't let the lawyers that you elect fix them with outdated, inefficient, expensive methods.
Demand more; vote for the prosecutor who's helping people stay out of jail, not putting them in.
Demand better.
You deserve it, your children deserve it, the people who are tied up in the system deserve it, but most of all, the people that we are sworn to protect and do justice for demand it.
We must, we must do better.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much.
In India, we have these huge families.
I bet a lot of you all must have heard about it.
Which means that there are a lot of family events.
So as a child, my parents used to drag me to these family events.
But the one thing that I always looked forward to was playing around with my cousins.
And there was always this one uncle who used to be there, always ready, jumping around with us, having games for us, making us kids have the time of our lives.
This man was extremely successful: he was confident and powerful.
But then I saw this hale and hearty person deteriorate in health.
He was diagnosed with Parkinson's.
Parkinson's is a disease that causes degeneration of the nervous system, which means that this person who used to be independent suddenly finds tasks like drinking coffee, because of tremors, much more difficult.
My uncle started using a walker to walk, and to take a turn, he literally had to take one step at a time, like this, and it took forever.
So this person, who used to be the center of attention in every family gathering, was suddenly hiding behind people.
He was hiding from the pitiful look in people's eyes.
And he's not the only one in the world.
Every year, 60,000 people are newly diagnosed with Parkinson's, and this number is only rising.
As designers, we dream that our designs solve these multifaceted problems, one solution that solves it all, but it need not always be like that.
You can also target simple problems and create small solutions for them and eventually make a big impact.
So my aim here was to not cure Parkinson's, but to make their everyday tasks much more simple, and then make an impact.
Well, the first thing I targeted was tremors, right?
My uncle told me that he had stopped drinking coffee or tea in public just out of embarrassment, so, well, I designed the no-spill cup.
It works just purely on its form.
The curve on top deflects the liquid back inside every time they have tremors, and this keeps the liquid inside compared to a normal cup.
But the key here is that it is not tagged as a Parkinson's patient product.
It looks like a cup that could be used by you, me, any clumsy person, and that makes it much more comforting for them to use, to blend in.
So, well, one problem solved, many more to go.
All this while, I was interviewing him, questioning him, and then I realized that I was getting very superficial information, or just answers to my questions.
But I really needed to dig deeper to get a new perspective.
So I thought, well, let's observe him in his daily tasks, while he's eating, while he's watching TV.
And then, when I was actually observing him walking to his dining table, it struck me, this man who finds it so difficult to walk on flat land, how does he climb a staircase?
Because in India we do not have a fancy rail that takes you up a staircase like in the developed countries.
One actually has to climb the stairs.
So he told me, "Well, let me show you how I do it."
Let's take a look at what I saw.
So he took really long to reach this position, and then all this while, I'm thinking, "Oh my God, is he really going to do it?
Is he really, really going to do it without his walker?"
And then ...
(Laughter) And the turns, he took them so easily.
So -- shocked?
Well, I was too.
So this person who could not walk on flat land was suddenly a pro at climbing stairs.
On researching this, I realized that it's because it's a continuous motion.
There's this other man who also suffers from the same symptoms and uses a walker, but the moment he's put on a cycle, all his symptoms vanish, because it is a continuous motion.
So the key for me was to translate this feeling of walking on a staircase back to flat land.
And a lot of ideas were tested and tried on him, but the one that finally worked was this one. Let's take a look.
(Laughter) (Applause) He walked faster, right?
(Applause) I call this the staircase illusion, and actually when the staircase illusion abruptly ended, he froze, and this is called freezing of gait.
So it happens a lot, so why not have a staircase illusion flowing through all their rooms, making them feel much more confident?
You know, technology is not always it.
What we need are human-centered solutions.
I could have easily made it into a projection, or a Google Glass, or something like that.
But I stuck to simple print on the floor.
This print could be taken into hospitals to make them feel much more welcome.
What I wish to do is make every Parkinson's patient feel like my uncle felt that day.
He told me that I made him feel like his old self again.
"Smart" in today's world has become synonymous to high tech, and the world is only getting smarter and smarter day by day.
But why can't smart be something that's simple and yet effective?
All we need is a little bit of empathy and some curiosity, to go out there, observe.
But let's not stop at that.
Let's find these complex problems. Don't be scared of them.
Break them, boil them down into much smaller problems, and then find simple solutions for them.
Test these solutions, fail if needed, but with newer insights to make it better.
Imagine what we all could do if we all came up with simple solutions.
What would the world be like if we combined all our simple solutions?
Let's make a smarter world, but with simplicity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Are you as good at things as you think you are?
How good are you at managing money?
What about reading people's emotions?
How healthy are you compared to other people you know?
Are you better than average at grammar?
Knowing how competent we are and how are skill stack up against other people's is more than a self-esteem boost.
It helps us figure out when we can forge ahead on our own decisions and instincts and when we need, instead, to seek out advice.
But psychological research suggests that we're not very good at evaluating ourselves accurately.
In fact, we frequently overestimate our own abilities.
Researchers have a name for this phenomena, the Dunning-Kruger effect.
This effect explains why more than 100 studies have shown that people display illusory superiority.
We judge ourselves as better than others to a degree that violates the laws of math.
When software engineers at two companies were asked to rate their performance, 32% of the engineers at one company and 42% at the other put themselves in the top 5%.
In another study, 88% of American drivers described themselves as having above average driving skills.
These aren't isolated findings.
On average, people tend to rate themselves better than most in disciplines ranging from health, leadership skills, ethics, and beyond.
What's particularly interesting is that those with the least ability are often the most likely to overrate their skills to the greatest extent.
People measurably poor at logical reasoning, grammar, financial knowledge, math, emotional intelligence, running medical lab tests, and chess all tend to rate their expertise almost as favorably as actual experts do.
So who's most vulnerable to this delusion?
Sadly, all of us because we all have pockets of incompetence we don't recognize.
But why?
When psychologists Dunning and Kruger first described the effect in 1999, they argued that people lacking knowledge and skill in particular areas suffer a double curse.
First, they make mistakes and reach poor decisions.
But second, those same knowledge gaps also prevent them from catching their errors.
In other words, poor performers lack the very expertise needed to recognize how badly they're doing.
For example, when the researchers studied participants in a college debate tournament, the bottom 25% of teams in preliminary rounds lost nearly four out of every five matches.
But they thought they were winning almost 60%.
WIthout a strong grasp of the rules of debate, the students simply couldn't recognize when or how often their arguments broke down.
The Dunning-Kruger effect isn't a question of ego blinding us to our weaknesses.
People usually do admit their deficits once they can spot them.
In one study, students who had initially done badly on a logic quiz and then took a mini course on logic were quite willing to label their original performances as awful.
That may be why people with a moderate amount of experience or expertise often have less confidence in their abilities.
They know enough to know that there's a lot they don't know.
Meanwhile, experts tend to be aware of just how knowledgeable they are.
But they often make a different mistake: they assume that everyone else is knowledgeable, too.
The result is that people, whether they're inept or highly skilled, are often caught in a bubble of inaccurate self-perception.
When they're unskilled, they can't see their own faults.
When they're exceptionally competent, they don't perceive how unusual their abilities are.
So if the Dunning-Kruger effect is invisible to those experiencing it, what can you do to find out how good you actually are at various things?
First, ask for feedback from other people, and consider it, even if it's hard to hear.
Second, and more important, keep learning.
The more knowledgeable we become, the less likely we are to have invisible holes in our competence.
Perhaps it all boils down to that old proverb: When arguing with a fool, first make sure the other person isn't doing the same thing.
So, this is a story about how we know what we know.
It's a story about this woman, Natalia Rybczynski.
She's a paleobiologist, which means she specializes in digging up really old dead stuff.
(Audio) Natalia Rybczynski: Yeah, I had someone call me "Dr. Dead Things."
Latif Nasser: And I think she's particularly interesting because of where she digs that stuff up, way above the Arctic Circle in the remote Canadian tundra.
Now, one summer day in 2006, she was at a dig site called the Fyles Leaf Bed, which is less than 10 degrees latitude away from the magnetic north pole.
(Audio) NR: Really, it's not going to sound very exciting, because it was a day of walking with your backpack and your GPS and notebook and just picking up anything that might be a fossil.
LN: And at some point, she noticed something.
(Audio) NR: Rusty, kind of rust-colored, about the size of the palm of my hand.
It was just lying on the surface.
LN: And at first she thought it was just a splinter of wood, because that's the sort of thing people had found at the Fyles Leaf Bed before -- prehistoric plant parts.
But that night, back at camp ...
(Audio) NR: ... I get out the hand lens, I'm looking a little bit more closely and realizing it doesn't quite look like this has tree rings.
Maybe it's a preservation thing, but it looks really like ...
bone.
LN: Huh. So over the next four years, she went to that spot over and over, and eventually collected 30 fragments of that exact same bone, most of them really tiny.
(Audio) NR: It's not a whole lot. It fits in a small Ziploc bag.
LN: And she tried to piece them together like a jigsaw puzzle.
But it was challenging.
(Audio) NR: It's broken up into so many little tiny pieces, I'm trying to use sand and putty, and it's not looking good.
So finally, we used a 3D surface scanner.
LN: Ooh! NR: Yeah, right?
(Laughter) LN: It turns out it was way easier to do it virtually.
(Audio) NR: It's kind of magical when it all fits together.
LN: How certain were you that you had it right, that you had put it together in the right way?
Was there a potential that you'd put it together a different way and have, like, a parakeet or something?
(Laughter) (Audio) NR: (Laughs) Um, no. No, we got this.
LN: What she had, she discovered, was a tibia, a leg bone, and specifically, one that belonged to a cloven-hoofed mammal, so something like a cow or a sheep.
But it couldn't have been either of those.
It was just too big.
(Audio) NR: The size of this thing, it was huge. It's a really big animal.
LN: So what animal could it be?
Having hit a wall, she showed one of the fragments to some colleagues of hers in Colorado, and they had an idea.
(Audio) NR: We took a saw, and we nicked just the edge of it, and there was this really interesting smell that comes from it.
LN: It smelled kind of like singed flesh.
It was a smell that Natalia recognized from cutting up skulls in her gross anatomy lab: collagen.
Collagen is what gives structure to our bones.
And usually, after so many years, it breaks down.
But in this case, the Arctic had acted like a natural freezer and preserved it.
Then a year or two later, Natalia was at a conference in Bristol, and she saw that a colleague of hers named Mike Buckley was demoing this new process that he called "collagen fingerprinting."
It turns out that different species have slightly different structures of collagen, so if you get a collagen profile of an unknown bone, you can compare it to those of known species, and, who knows, maybe you get a match.
So she shipped him one of the fragments, FedEx.
(Audio) NR: Yeah, you want to track it. It's kind of important.
(Laughter) LN: And he processed it, and compared it to 37 known and modern-day mammal species.
And he found a match.
It turns out that the 3.5 million-year-old bone that Natalia had dug out of the High Arctic belonged to ...
a camel.
(Laughter) (Audio) NR: And I'm thinking, what? That's amazing -- if it's true.
LN: So they tested a bunch of the fragments, and they got the same result for each one.
However, based on the size of the bone that they found, it meant that this camel was 30 percent larger than modern-day camels.
So this camel would have been about nine feet tall, weighed around a ton.
(Audience reacts) Yeah.
Natalia had found a Giant Arctic camel.
(Laughter) Now, when you hear the word "camel," what may come to mind is one of these, the Bactrian camel of East and Central Asia.
But chances are the postcard image you have in your brain is one of these, the dromedary, quintessential desert creature -- hangs out in sandy, hot places like the Middle East and the Sahara, has a big old hump on its back for storing water for those long desert treks, has big, broad feet to help it tromp over sand dunes.
So how on earth would one of these guys end up in the High Arctic?
Well, scientists have known for a long time, turns out, even before Natalia's discovery, that camels are actually originally American.
(Music: The Star-Spangled Banner) (Laughter) They started here.
For nearly 40 of the 45 million years that camels have been around, you could only find them in North America, around 20 different species, maybe more.
(Audio) LN: If I put them all in a lineup, would they look different?
NR: Yeah, you're going to have different body sizes.
You'll have some with really long necks, so they're actually functionally like giraffes.
LN: Some had snouts, like crocodiles.
(Audio) NR: The really primitive, early ones would have been really small, almost like rabbits.
LN: What? Rabbit-sized camels?
(Audio) NR: The earliest ones.
So those ones you probably would not recognize.
LN: Oh my God, I want a pet rabbit-camel.
(Audio) NR: I know, wouldn't that be great?
(Laughter) LN: And then about three to seven million years ago, one branch of camels went down to South America, where they became llamas and alpacas, and another branch crossed over the Bering Land Bridge into Asia and Africa.
And then around the end of the last ice age, North American camels went extinct.
So, scientists knew all of that already, but it still doesn't fully explain how Natalia found one so far north.
Like, this is, temperature-wise, the polar opposite of the Sahara.
Now to be fair, three and a half million years ago, it was on average 22 degrees Celsius warmer than it is now.
So it would have been boreal forest, so more like the Yukon or Siberia today.
But still, like, they would have six-month-long winters where the ponds would freeze over.
You'd have blizzards.
You'd have 24 hours a day of straight darkness.
Like, how ... How?
How is it that one of these Saharan superstars could ever have survived those arctic conditions?
(Laughter) Natalia and her colleagues think they have an answer.
And it's kind of brilliant.
What if the very features that we imagine make the camel so well-suited to places like the Sahara, actually evolved to help it get through the winter?
What if those broad feet were meant to tromp not over sand, but over snow, like a pair of snowshoes?
What if that hump -- which, huge news to me, does not contain water, it contains fat -- (Laughter) was there to help the camel get through that six-month-long winter, when food was scarce?
And then, only later, long after it crossed over the land bridge did it retrofit those winter features for a hot desert environment?
Like, for instance, the hump may be helpful to camels in hotter climes because having all your fat in one place, like a, you know, fat backpack, means that you don't have to have that insulation all over the rest of your body.
So it helps heat dissipate easier.
It's this crazy idea, that what seems like proof of the camel's quintessential desert nature could actually be proof of its High Arctic past.
Now, I'm not the first person to tell this story.
Others have told it as a way to marvel at evolutionary biology or as a keyhole into the future of climate change.
But I love it for a totally different reason.
For me, it's a story about us, about how we see the world and about how that changes.
So I was trained as a historian.
And I've learned that, actually, a lot of scientists are historians, too.
They make sense of the past.
They tell the history of our universe, of our planet, of life on this planet.
And as a historian, you start with an idea in your mind of how the story goes.
(Audio) NR: We make up stories and we stick with it, like the camel in the desert, right?
That's a great story! It's totally adapted for that.
Clearly, it always lived there.
LN: But at any moment, you could uncover some tiny bit of evidence.
You could learn some tiny thing that forces you to reframe everything you thought you knew.
Like, in this case, this one scientist finds this one shard of what she thought was wood, and because of that, science has a totally new and totally counterintuitive theory about why this absurd Dr. Seuss-looking creature looks the way it does.
And for me, it completely upended the way I think of the camel.
It went from being this ridiculously niche creature suited only to this one specific environment, to being this world traveler that just happens to be in the Sahara, and could end up virtually anywhere.
(Applause) This is Azuri.
Azuri, hi, how are you doing?
OK, here, I've got one of these for you here.
(Laughter) So Azuri is on a break from her regular gig at the Radio City Music Hall.
(Laughter) That's not even a joke.
Anyway -- But really, Azuri is here as a living reminder that the story of our world is a dynamic one.
It requires our willingness to readjust, to reimagine.
(Laughter) Right, Azuri?
And, really, that we're all just one shard of bone away from seeing the world anew.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In the summer of 1997, NASA's Pathfinder spacecraft landed on the surface of Mars, and began transmitting incredible, iconic images back to Earth.
But several days in, something went terribly wrong.
The transmissions stopped.
Pathfinder was, in effect, procrastinating: keeping itself fully occupied but failing to do its most important work.
What was going on?
There was a bug, it turned out, in its scheduler.
Every operating system has something called the scheduler that tells the CPU how long to work on each task before switching, and what to switch to.
Done right, computers move so fluidly between their various responsibilities, they give the illusion of doing everything simultaneously.
But we all know what happens when things go wrong.
This should give us, if nothing else, some measure of consolation.
Even computers get overwhelmed sometimes.
Maybe learning about the computer science of scheduling can give us some ideas about our own human struggles with time.
One of the first insights is that all the time you spend prioritizing your work is time you aren't spending doing it.
For instance, let's say when you check your inbox, you scan all the messages, choosing which is the most important.
Once you've dealt with that one, you repeat.
Seems sensible, but there's a problem here.
This is what's known as a quadratic-time algorithm.
With an inbox that's twice as full, these passes will take twice as long and you'll need to do twice as many of them!
This means four times the work.
The programmers of the operating system Linux encountered a similar problem in 2003.
Linux would rank every single one of its tasks in order of importance, and sometimes spent more time ranking tasks than doing them.
The programmers’ counterintuitive solution was to replace this full ranking with a limited number of priority “buckets.” The system was less precise about what to do next but more than made up for it by spending more time making progress.
So with your emails, insisting on always doing the very most important thing first could lead to a meltdown.
Waking up to an inbox three times fuller than normal could take nine times longer to clear.
You’d be better off replying in chronological order, or even at random!
Surprisingly, sometimes giving up on doing things in the perfect order may be the key to getting them done.
Another insight that emerges from computer scheduling has to do with one of the most prevalent features of modern life: interruptions.
When a computer goes from one task to another, it has to do what's called a context switch, bookmarking its place in one task, moving old data out of its memory and new data in.
Each of these actions comes at a cost.
The insight here is that there’s a fundamental tradeoff between productivity and responsiveness.
Getting serious work done means minimizing context switches.
But being responsive means reacting anytime something comes up.
These two principles are fundamentally in tension.
Recognizing this tension allows us to decide where we want to strike that balance.
The obvious solution is to minimize interruptions.
The less obvious one is to group them.
If no notification or email requires a response more urgently than once an hour, say, then that’s exactly how often you should check them. No more.
In computer science, this idea goes by the name of interrupt coalescing.
Rather than dealing with things as they come up – Oh, the mouse was moved?
A key was pressed?
More of that file downloaded? – the system groups these interruptions together based on how long they can afford to wait.
In 2013, interrupt coalescing triggered a massive improvement in laptop battery life.
This is because deferring interruptions lets a system check everything at once, then quickly re-enter a low-power state.
As with computers, so it is with us.
Perhaps adopting a similar approach might allow us users to reclaim our own attention, and give us back one of the things that feels so rare in modern life: rest.
A mosquito lands on your arm, injects its chemicals into your skin, and begins to feed.
You wouldn’t even know it was there, if not for the red lump that appears, accompanied by a telltale itch.
It’s a nuisance, but that bump is an important signal that you’re protected by your immune system, your body’s major safeguard against infection, illness, and disease.
This system is a vast network of cells, tissues, and organs that coordinate your body’s defenses against any threats to your health.
Without it, you’d be exposed to billions of bacteria, viruses, and toxins that could make something as minor as a paper cut or a seasonal cold fatal.
The immune system relies on millions of defensive white blood cells, also known as leukocytes, that originate in our bone marrow.
These cells migrate into the bloodstream and the lymphatic system, a network of vessels which helps clear bodily toxins and waste.
Our bodies are teeming with leukocytes: there are between 4,000 and 11,000 in every microliter of blood.
As they move around, leukocytes work like security personnel, constantly screening the blood, tissues, and organs for suspicious signs.
This system mainly relies on cues called antigens.
These molecular traces on the surface of pathogens and other foreign substances betray the presence of invaders.
As soon as the leukocytes detect them, it takes only minutes for the body’s protective immune response to kick in.
Threats to our bodies are hugely variable, so the immune response has to be equally adaptable.
That means relying on many different types of leukocytes to tackle threats in different ways.
Despite this diversity, we classify leukocytes in two main cellular groups, which coordinate a two-pronged attack.
First, phagocytes trigger the immune response by sending macrophages and dendritic cells into the blood.
As these circulate, they destroy any foreign cells they encounter, simply by consuming them.
That allows phagocytes to identify the antigen on the invaders they just ingested and transmit this information to the second major cell group orchestrating the defense, the lymphocytes.
A group of lymphocyte cells called T-cells go in search of infected body cells and swiftly kill them off.
Meanwhile, B-cells and helper T-cells use the information gathered from the unique antigens to start producing special proteins called antibodies.
This is the pièce de résistance: Each antigen has a unique, matching antibody that can latch onto it like a lock and key, and destroy the invading cells.
B-cells can produce millions of these, which then cycle through the body and attack the invaders until the worst of the threat is neutralized.
While all of this is going on, familiar symptoms, like high temperatures and swelling, are actually processes designed to aid the immune response.
A warmer body makes it harder for bacteria and viruses to reproduce and spread because they’re temperature-sensitive.
And when body cells are damaged, they release chemicals that make fluid leak into the surrounding tissues, causing swelling.
That also attracts phagocytes, which consume the invaders and the damaged cells.
Usually, an immune response will eradicate a threat within a few days.
It won’t always stop you from getting ill, but that’s not its purpose.
Its actual job is to stop a threat from escalating to dangerous levels inside your body.
And through constant surveillance over time, the immune system provides another benefit: it helps us develop long-term immunity.
When B- and T-cells identify antigens, they can use that information to recognize invaders in the future.
So, when a threat revisits, the cells can swiftly deploy the right antibodies to tackle it before it affects any more cells.
That’s how you can develop immunity to certain diseases, like chickenpox.
It doesn’t always work so well.
Some people have autoimmune diseases, which trick the immune system into attacking the body’s own perfectly healthy cells.
No one knows exactly what causes them, but these disorders sabotage the immune system to varying degrees, and underlie problems like arthritis, Type I diabetes, and multiple sclerosis.
For most individuals, however, a healthy immune system will successfully fight off an estimated 300 colds and innumerable other potential infections over the course of a lifetime.
Without it, those threats would escalate into something far more dangerous.
So the next time you catch a cold or scratch a mosquito bite, think of the immune system.
We owe it our lives.
I come from one of the most liberal, tolerant, progressive places in the United States, Seattle, Washington.
And I grew up with a family of great Seattlites.
My mother was an artist, my father was a college professor, and I am truly grateful for my upbringing, because I always felt completely comfortable designing my life exactly as I saw fit.
And in point of fact, I took a route that was not exactly what my parents had in mind.
When I was 19, I dropped out of college -- dropped out, kicked out, splitting hairs.
(Laughter) And I went on the road as a professional French horn player, which was my lifelong dream.
I played chamber music all over the United States and Europe, and I toured for a couple of years with a great jazz guitar player named Charlie Bird.
And by the end of my 20s, I wound up as a member of the Barcelona Symphony Orchestra in Spain.
What a great life.
And you know, my parents never complained.
They supported me all the way through it.
It wasn't their dream.
They used to tell their neighbors and friends, "Our son, he's taking a gap decade."
(Laughter) And -- There was, however, one awkward conversation about my lifestyle that I want to tell you about.
I was 27, and I was home from Barcelona, and I was visiting my parents for Christmas, and I was cooking dinner with my mother, and we were alone in the kitchen.
And she was quiet, too quiet.
Something was wrong.
And so I said, "Mom, what's on your mind?"
And she said, "Your dad and I are really worried about you."
And I said, "What?" I mean, what could it be, at this point?
And she said, "I want you to be completely honest with me: have you been voting for Republicans?"
(Laughter) Now, the truth is, I wasn't really political, I was just a French horn player.
But I had a bit of an epiphany, and they had detected it, and it was causing some confusion.
You see, I had become an enthusiast for capitalism, and I want to tell you why that is.
It stems from a lifelong interest of mine in, believe it or not, poverty.
See, when I was a kid growing up in Seattle, I remember the first time I saw real poverty.
We were a lower middle class family, but that's of course not real poverty.
That's not even close.
The first time I saw poverty, and poverty's face, was when I was six or seven years old, early 1970s.
And it was like a lot of you, kind of a prosaic example, kind of trite.
It was a picture in the National Geographic Magazine of a kid who was my age in East Africa, and there were flies on his face and a distended belly.
And he wasn't going to make it, and I knew that, and I was helpless.
Some of you remember that picture, not exactly that picture, one just like it.
It introduced the West to grinding poverty around the world.
Well, that vision kind of haunted me as I grew up and I went to school and I dropped out and dropped in and started my family.
And I wondered, what happened to that kid?
Or to people just like him all over the world?
And so I started to study, even though I wasn't in college, I was looking for the answer: what happened to the world's poorest people?
Has it gotten worse? Has it gotten better? What?
And I found the answer, and it changed my life, and I want to share it with you.
See -- most Americans believe that poverty has gotten worse since we were children, since they saw that vision.
If you ask Americans, "Has poverty gotten worse or better around the world?", 70 percent will say that hunger has gotten worse since the early 1970s.
But here's the truth.
Here's the epiphany that I had that changed my thinking.
From 1970 until today, the percentage of the world's population living in starvation levels, living on a dollar a day or less, obviously adjusted for inflation, that percentage has declined by 80 percent.
There's been an 80 percent decline in the world's worst poverty since I was a kid.
This, my friends, that's a miracle.
That's something we ought to celebrate.
It's the greatest antipoverty achievement in the history of mankind, and it happened in our lifetimes.
(Applause) So when I learned this, I asked, what did that? What made it possible?
Because if you don't know why, you can't do it again.
If you want to replicate it and get the next two billion people out of poverty, because that's what we're talking about: since I was a kid, two billion of the least of these, our brothers and sisters, have been pulled out of poverty.
I want the next two billion, so I've got to know why.
And I went in search of an answer.
And it wasn't a political answer, because I didn't care.
You know what, I still don't care.
I wanted the best answer from mainstream economists left, right and center.
And here it is.
Here are the reasons.
There are five reasons that two billion of our brothers and sisters have been pulled out of poverty since I was a kid.
Number one: globalization.
Number two: free trade.
Number three: property rights.
Number four: rule of law.
Number five: entrepreneurship.
It was the free enterprise system spreading around the world after 1970 that did that.
Now, I'm not naive.
I know that free enterprise isn't perfect, and I know that free enterprise isn't everything we need to build a better world.
But that is great.
And that's beyond politics.
Here's what I learned. This is the epiphany.
Capitalism is not just about accumulation.
At its best, it's about aspiration, which is what so many people on this stage talk about, is the aspiration that comes from dreams that are embedded in the free enterprise system.
And we've got to share it with more people.
Now, I want to tell you about a second epiphany that's related to that first one that I think can bring us progress, not just around the world, but right here at home.
The best quote I've ever heard to summarize the thoughts that I've just given you about pulling people out of poverty is as follows: "Free markets have created more wealth than any system in history.
They have lifted billions out of poverty."
Who said it?
It sounds like Milton Friedman or Ronald Reagan.
Wrong.
President Barack Obama said that.
Why do I know it by heart?
Because he said it to me.
Crazy.
And I said, "Hallelujah."
But more than that, I said, "What an opportunity."
You know what I was thinking?
It was at an event that we were doing on the subject at Georgetown University in May of 2015.
And I thought, this is the solution to the biggest problem facing America today. What?
It's coming together around these ideas, liberals and conservatives, to help people who need us the most.
Now, I don't have to tell anybody in this room that we're in a crisis, in America and many countries around the world with political polarization.
It's risen to critical, crisis levels.
It's unpleasant. It's not right.
There was an article last year in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, which is one of the most prestigious scientific journals published in the West.
And it was an article in 2014 on political motive asymmetry.
What's that? That's what psychologists call the phenomenon of assuming that your ideology is based in love but your opponents' ideology is based in hate.
It's common in world conflict.
You expect to see this between Palestinians and Israelis, for example.
What the authors of this article found was that in America today, a majority of Republicans and Democrats suffer from political motive asymmetry.
A majority of people in our country today who are politically active believe that they are motivated by love but the other side is motivated by hate.
Think about it. Think about it.
Most people are walking around saying, "You know, my ideology is based on basic benevolence, I want to help people, but the other guys, they're evil and out to get me."
You can't progress as a society when you have this kind of asymmetry.
It's impossible.
How do we solve it?
Well, first, let's be honest: there are differences.
Let's not minimize the differences. That would be really naïve.
There's a lot of good research on this.
A veteran of the TED stage is my friend Jonathan Haidt.
He's a psychology professor at New York University.
He does work on the ideology and values and morals of different people to see how they differ.
And he's shown, for example, that conservatives and liberals have a very different emphasis on what they think is important.
For example, Jon Haidt has shown that liberals care about poverty 59 percent more than they care about economic liberty.
And conservatives care about economic liberty 28 percent more than they care about poverty.
Irreconcilable differences, right?
We'll never come together. Wrong.
That is diversity in which lies our strength.
Remember what pulled up the poor.
It was the obsession with poverty, accompanied by the method of economic freedom spreading around the world.
We need each other, in other words, if we want to help people and get the next two billion people out of poverty.
There's no other way.
Hmm.
How are we going to get that?
It's a tricky thing, isn't it.
We need innovative thinking.
A lot of it's on this stage.
Social entrepreneurship. Yeah. Absolutely. Phenomenal.
We need investment overseas in a sustainable, responsible, ethical and moral way. Yes. Yes.
But you know what we really need?
We need a new day in flexible ideology.
We need to be less predictable.
Don't we?
Do you ever feel like your own ideology is starting to get predictable?
Kinda conventional?
Do you ever feel like you're always listening to people who agree with you?
Why is that dangerous?
Because when we talk in this country about economics, on the right, conservatives, you're always talking about taxes and regulations and big government.
And on the left, liberals, you're talking about economics, it's always about income inequality.
Right? Now those are important things, really important to me, really important to you.
But when it comes to lifting people up who are starving and need us today, those are distractions.
We need to come together around the best ways to mitigate poverty using the best tools at our disposal, and that comes only when conservatives recognize that they need liberals and their obsession with poverty, and liberals need conservatives and their obsession with free markets.
That's the diversity in which lies the future strength of this country, if we choose to take it.
So how are we going to do it? How are we going to do it together?
I've got to have some action items, not just for you but for me.
Number one. Action item number one: remember, it's not good enough just to tolerate people who disagree.
It's not good enough.
We have to remember that we need people who disagree with us, because there are people who need all of us who are still waiting for these tools.
Now, what are you going to do? How are you going to express that?
Where does this start? It starts here.
You know, all of us in this room, we're blessed.
We're blessed with people who listen to us.
We're blessed with prosperity. We're blessed with leadership.
When people hear us, with the kind of unpredictable ideology, then maybe people will listen.
Maybe progress will start at that point.
That's number one. Number two.
Number two: I'm asking you and I'm asking me to be the person specifically who blurs the lines, who is ambiguous, who is hard to classify.
If you're a conservative, be the conservative who is always going on about poverty and the moral obligation to be a warrior for the poor.
And if you're a liberal, be a liberal who is always talking about the beauty of free markets to solve our problems when we use them responsibly.
If we do that, we get two things.
Number one: we get to start to work on the next two billion and be the solution that we've seen so much of in the past and we need to see more of in the future. That's what we get.
And the second is that we might just be able to take the ghastly holy war of ideology that we're suffering under in this country and turn it into a competition of ideas based on solidarity and mutual respect.
And then maybe, just maybe, we'll all realize that our big differences aren't really that big after all.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hannah is excited to be going to college.
She couldn't wait to get out of her parents' house, to prove to them that she's an adult, and to prove to her new friends that she belongs.
She heads to a campus party where she sees a guy that she has a crush on.
Let's call him Mike.
The next day, Hannah wakes up with a pounding headache.
She can only remember the night in flashes.
But what she does remember is throwing up in the hall outside Mike's room and staring at the wall silently while he was inside her, wanting it to stop, then shakily stumbling home.
She doesn't feel good about what happened, but she thinks, "Maybe this is just what sex in college is?"
One in five women and one in 13 men will be sexually assaulted at some point during their college career in the United States.
Less than 10 percent will ever report their assault to their school or to the police.
And those who do, on average, wait 11 months to make the report.
Hannah initially just feels like dealing with what happened on her own.
But when she sees Mike taking girls home from parties, she's worried about them.
After graduation, Hannah learns that she was one of five women who Mike did the exact same thing to.
And this is not an unlikely scenario because 90 percent of sexual assaults are committed by repeat offenders.
But with such low reporting rates, it's fairly unlikely that even repeat perpetrators will be reported, much less anything happen if they are.
In fact, only six percent of assaults reported to the police end with the assailant spending a single day in prison.
Meaning, there's a 99 percent chance that they'll get away with it.
This means there's practically no deterrent to assault in the United States.
Now, I'm an infectious disease epidemiologist by training.
I'm interested in systems and networks and where we can concentrate our resources to do the most good.
So this, to me, is a tragic but a solvable problem.
So when the issue of campus assault started hitting the news a few years ago, it felt like a unique opportunity to make a change.
And so we did.
We started by talking to college survivors.
And what they wish they'd had in college is pretty simple; they wanted a website, one they could use at the time and place that felt safest to them with clearly written information about their reporting options, with the ability to electronically report their assault, rather than having the first step to go in and talk to someone who may or may not believe them.
With the option to create a secure, timestamped document of what happened to them, preserving evidence even if they don't want to report yet.
And lastly, and perhaps most critically, with the ability to report their assault only if someone else reported the same assailant.
You see, knowing that you weren't the only one changes everything.
It changes the way you frame your own experience, it changes the way you think about your perpetrator, it means that if you do come forward, you'll have someone else's back and they'll have yours.
We created a website that actually does this and we launched it [...] in August, on two college campuses.
And we included a unique matching system where if Mike's first victim had come forward, saved her record, entered into the matching system and named Mike, and Mike's second victim had done the same thing a few months later, they would have matched and the verified contact information of both survivors would have been sent to the authorities at the same time for investigation and follow up.
If a system like this had existed for Hannah and her peers, it's more likely that they would have reported, that they would have been believed, and that Mike would have been kicked off campus, gone to jail, or at least gotten the help that he needed.
And if we were able to stop repeat offenders like Mike after just their second assault following a match, survivors like Hannah would never even be assaulted in the first place.
We could prevent 59 percent of sexual assaults just by stopping repeat perpetrators earlier on.
And because we're creating a real deterrent to assault, for perhaps the first time, maybe the Mikes of the world would never even try to assault anyone.
The type of system I'm describing, the type of system that survivors want is a type of information escrow, meaning an entity that holds on to information for you and only releases it to a third party when certain pre-agreed upon conditions are met, such as a match.
The application that we built is for college campuses.
But the same type of system could be used in the military or even the workplace.
We don't have to live in a world where 99 percent of rapists get away with it.
We can create one where those who do wrong are held accountable, where survivors get the support and justice they deserve, where the authorities get the information they need, and where there's a real deterrent to violating the rights of another human being.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So in college, I was a government major, which means I had to write a lot of papers.
Now, when a normal student writes a paper, they might spread the work out a little like this.
So, you know -- (Laughter) you get started maybe a little slowly, but you get enough done in the first week that, with some heavier days later on, everything gets done, things stay civil.
(Laughter) And I would want to do that like that.
That would be the plan.
I would have it all ready to go, but then, actually, the paper would come along, and then I would kind of do this.
(Laughter) And that would happen every single paper.
But then came my 90-page senior thesis, a paper you're supposed to spend a year on.
And I knew for a paper like that, my normal work flow was not an option.
It was way too big a project.
So I planned things out, and I decided I kind of had to go something like this.
This is how the year would go.
So I'd start off light, and I'd bump it up in the middle months, and then at the end, I would kick it up into high gear just like a little staircase.
How hard could it be to walk up the stairs?
No big deal, right?
But then, the funniest thing happened.
Those first few months?
They came and went, and I couldn't quite do stuff.
So we had an awesome new revised plan.
(Laughter) And then -- (Laughter) But then those middle months actually went by, and I didn't really write words, and so we were here.
And then two months turned into one month, which turned into two weeks.
And one day I woke up with three days until the deadline, still not having written a word, and so I did the only thing I could: I wrote 90 pages over 72 hours, pulling not one but two all-nighters -- humans are not supposed to pull two all-nighters -- sprinted across campus, dove in slow motion, and got it in just at the deadline.
I thought that was the end of everything.
But a week later I get a call, and it's the school.
And they say, "Is this Tim Urban?"
And I say, "Yeah."
And they say, "We need to talk about your thesis."
And I say, "OK."
And they say, "It's the best one we've ever seen."
(Laughter) (Applause) That did not happen.
(Laughter) It was a very, very bad thesis.
(Laughter) I just wanted to enjoy that one moment when all of you thought, "This guy is amazing!"
(Laughter) No, no, it was very, very bad.
Anyway, today I'm a writer-blogger guy.
And a couple of years ago, I decided to write about procrastination.
My behavior has always perplexed the non-procrastinators around me, and I wanted to explain to the non-procrastinators of the world what goes on in the heads of procrastinators, and why we are the way we are.
Now, I had a hypothesis that the brains of procrastinators were actually different than the brains of other people.
And to test this, I found an MRI lab that actually let me scan both my brain and the brain of a proven non-procrastinator, so I could compare them.
I actually brought them here to show you today.
I want you to take a look carefully to see if you can notice a difference.
I know that if you're not a trained brain expert, it's not that obvious, but just take a look, OK?
So here's the brain of a non-procrastinator.
(Laughter) Now ...
here's my brain.
(Laughter) There is a difference.
Both brains have a Rational Decision-Maker in them, but the procrastinator's brain also has an Instant Gratification Monkey.
Now, what does this mean for the procrastinator?
Well, it means everything's fine until this happens.
[This is a perfect time to get some work done.] [Nope!] So the Rational Decision-Maker will make the rational decision to do something productive, but the Monkey doesn't like that plan, so he actually takes the wheel, and he says, "Actually, let's read the entire Wikipedia page of the Nancy Kerrigan/ Tonya Harding scandal, because I just remembered that that happened.
(Laughter) Then -- (Laughter) Then we're going to go over to the fridge, to see if there's anything new in there since 10 minutes ago.
After that, we're going to go on a YouTube spiral that starts with videos of Richard Feynman talking about magnets and ends much, much later with us watching interviews with Justin Bieber's mom.
(Laughter) "All of that's going to take a while, so we're not going to really have room on the schedule for any work today.
(Sigh) Now, what is going on here?
The Instant Gratification Monkey does not seem like a guy you want behind the wheel.
He lives entirely in the present moment.
He has no memory of the past, no knowledge of the future, and he only cares about two things: easy and fun.
Now, in the animal world, that works fine.
If you're a dog and you spend your whole life doing nothing other than easy and fun things, you're a huge success!
(Laughter) And to the Monkey, humans are just another animal species.
You have to keep well-slept, well-fed and propagating into the next generation, which in tribal times might have worked OK.
But, if you haven't noticed, now we're not in tribal times.
We're in an advanced civilization, and the Monkey does not know what that is.
Which is why we have another guy in our brain, the Rational Decision-Maker, who gives us the ability to do things no other animal can do.
We can visualize the future.
We can see the big picture.
We can make long-term plans.
And he wants to take all of that into account.
And he wants to just have us do whatever makes sense to be doing right now.
Now, sometimes it makes sense to be doing things that are easy and fun, like when you're having dinner or going to bed or enjoying well-earned leisure time.
That's why there's an overlap.
Sometimes they agree.
But other times, it makes much more sense to be doing things that are harder and less pleasant, for the sake of the big picture.
And that's when we have a conflict.
And for the procrastinator, that conflict tends to end a certain way every time, leaving him spending a lot of time in this orange zone, an easy and fun place that's entirely out of the Makes Sense circle.
I call it the Dark Playground.
(Laughter) Now, the Dark Playground is a place that all of you procrastinators out there know very well.
It's where leisure activities happen at times when leisure activities are not supposed to be happening.
The fun you have in the Dark Playground isn't actually fun, because it's completely unearned, and the air is filled with guilt, dread, anxiety, self-hatred -- all of those good procrastinator feelings.
And the question is, in this situation, with the Monkey behind the wheel, how does the procrastinator ever get himself over here to this blue zone, a less pleasant place, but where really important things happen?
Well, turns out the procrastinator has a guardian angel, someone who's always looking down on him and watching over him in his darkest moments -- someone called the Panic Monster.
(Laughter) Now, the Panic Monster is dormant most of the time, but he suddenly wakes up anytime a deadline gets too close or there's danger of public embarrassment, a career disaster or some other scary consequence.
And importantly, he's the only thing the Monkey is terrified of.
Now, he became very relevant in my life pretty recently, because the people of TED reached out to me about six months ago and invited me to do a TED Talk.
(Laughter) Now, of course, I said yes.
It's always been a dream of mine to have done a TED Talk in the past.
(Laughter) (Applause) But in the middle of all this excitement, the Rational Decision-Maker seemed to have something else on his mind.
He was saying, "Are we clear on what we just accepted?
Do we get what's going to be now happening one day in the future?
We need to sit down and work on this right now."
And the Monkey said, "Totally agree, but let's just open Google Earth and zoom in to the bottom of India, like 200 feet above the ground, and scroll up for two and a half hours til we get to the top of the country, so we can get a better feel for India."
(Laughter) So that's what we did that day.
(Laughter) As six months turned into four and then two and then one, the people of TED decided to release the speakers.
And I opened up the website, and there was my face staring right back at me.
And guess who woke up?
(Laughter) So the Panic Monster starts losing his mind, and a few seconds later, the whole system's in mayhem.
(Laughter) And the Monkey -- remember, he's terrified of the Panic Monster -- boom, he's up the tree!
And finally, finally, the Rational Decision-Maker can take the wheel and I can start working on the talk.
Now, the Panic Monster explains all kinds of pretty insane procrastinator behavior, like how someone like me could spend two weeks unable to start the opening sentence of a paper, and then miraculously find the unbelievable work ethic to stay up all night and write eight pages.
And this entire situation, with the three characters -- this is the procrastinator's system.
It's not pretty, but in the end, it works.
This is what I decided to write about on the blog a couple of years ago.
When I did, I was amazed by the response.
Literally thousands of emails came in, from all different kinds of people from all over the world, doing all different kinds of things.
These are people who were nurses, bankers, painters, engineers and lots and lots of PhD students.
(Laughter) And they were all writing, saying the same thing: "I have this problem too."
But what struck me was the contrast between the light tone of the post and the heaviness of these emails.
These people were writing with intense frustration about what procrastination had done to their lives, about what this Monkey had done to them.
And I thought about this, and I said, well, if the procrastinator's system works, then what's going on?
Why are all of these people in such a dark place?
Well, it turns out that there's two kinds of procrastination.
Everything I've talked about today, the examples I've given, they all have deadlines.
And when there's deadlines, the effects of procrastination are contained to the short term because the Panic Monster gets involved.
But there's a second kind of procrastination that happens in situations when there is no deadline.
So if you wanted a career where you're a self-starter -- something in the arts, something entrepreneurial -- there's no deadlines on those things at first, because nothing's happening, not until you've gone out and done the hard work to get momentum, get things going.
There's also all kinds of important things outside of your career that don't involve any deadlines, like seeing your family or exercising and taking care of your health, working on your relationship or getting out of a relationship that isn't working.
Now if the procrastinator's only mechanism of doing these hard things is the Panic Monster, that's a problem, because in all of these non-deadline situations, the Panic Monster doesn't show up.
He has nothing to wake up for, so the effects of procrastination, they're not contained; they just extend outward forever.
And it's this long-term kind of procrastination that's much less visible and much less talked about than the funnier, short-term deadline-based kind.
It's usually suffered quietly and privately.
And it can be the source of a huge amount of long-term unhappiness, and regrets.
And I thought, that's why those people are emailing, and that's why they're in such a bad place.
It's not that they're cramming for some project.
It's that long-term procrastination has made them feel like a spectator, at times, in their own lives.
The frustration is not that they couldn't achieve their dreams; it's that they weren't even able to start chasing them.
So I read these emails and I had a little bit of an epiphany -- that I don't think non-procrastinators exist.
That's right -- I think all of you are procrastinators.
Now, you might not all be a mess, like some of us, (Laughter) and some of you may have a healthy relationship with deadlines, but remember: the Monkey's sneakiest trick is when the deadlines aren't there.
Now, I want to show you one last thing.
I call this a Life Calendar.
That's one box for every week of a 90-year life.
That's not that many boxes, especially since we've already used a bunch of those.
So I think we need to all take a long, hard look at that calendar.
We need to think about what we're really procrastinating on, because everyone is procrastinating on something in life.
We need to stay aware of the Instant Gratification Monkey.
That's a job for all of us.
And because there's not that many boxes on there, it's a job that should probably start today.
Well, maybe not today, but ...
(Laughter) You know.
Sometime soon.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In ancient Greece, headaches were considered powerful afflictions.
Victims prayed for relief from Asclepius, the god of medicine.
And if pain continued, a medical practitioner would perform the best-known remedy— drilling a small hole in the skull to drain supposedly infected blood.
This dire technique, called trepanation, often replaced the headache with a more permanent condition.
Fortunately, doctors today don’t resort to power tools to cure headaches.
But we still have a lot to learn about this ancient ailment.
Today, we’ve classified headaches into two camps— primary headaches and secondary headaches.
The former are not symptomatic of an underlying disease, injury, or condition; they are the condition.
But we’ll come back to them in a minute because while primary headaches account for 50% of reported cases, we actually know much more about secondary headaches.
These are caused by other health problems, with triggers ranging from dehydration and caffeine withdrawal to head and neck injury, and heart disease.
Doctors have classified over 150 diagnosable types, all with different potential causes, symptoms, and treatments.
But we’ll take just one common case —a sinus infection—as an example.
The sinuses are a system of cavities that spread behind our foreheads, noses, and upper cheeks.
When our sinuses are infected, our immune response heats up the area, roasting the bacteria and inflaming the cavities well past their usual size.
The engorged sinuses put pressure on the cranial arteries and veins, as well as muscles in the neck and head.
Their pain receptors, called nociceptors, trigger in response, cueing the brain to release a flood of neuropeptides that inflame the cranial blood vessels, swelling and heating up the head.
This discomfort, paired with hyper-sensitive head muscles, creates the sore, throbbing pain of a headache.
Not all headache pain comes from swelling.
Tense muscles and inflamed, sensitive nerves cause varying degrees of discomfort in each headache.
But all cases are reactions to some cranial irritant.
While the cause is clear in secondary headaches, the origins of primary headaches remain unknown.
Scientists are still investigating potential triggers for the three types of primary headaches: recurring, long-lasting migraines; intensely painful, rapid-fire cluster headaches; and, most common of all, the tension headache.
As the name suggests, tension headaches are known for creating the sensation of a tight band squeezed around the head.
These headaches increase the tenderness of the pericranial muscles, which then painfully pulse with blood and oxygen.
Patients report stress, dehydration, and hormone changes as triggers, but these don’t fit the symptoms quite right.
For example, in dehydration headaches, the frontal lobe actually shrinks away from the skull, creating forehead swelling that doesn’t match the location of the pain in tension headaches.
Scientists have theories for what the actual cause is, ranging from spasming blood vessels to overly sensitive nociceptors, but no one knows for sure.
Meanwhile, most headache research is focused on more severe primary headaches.
Migraines are recurring headaches, which create a vise-like sensation on the skull that can last from four hours to three days.
In 20% of cases, these attacks are intense enough to overload the brain with electrical energy, which hyper-excites sensory nerve endings.
This produces hallucinations called auras, which can include seeing flashing lights and geometric patterns and experiencing tingling sensations.
Cluster headaches, another primary headache type, cause burning, stabbing bursts of pain behind one eye, leading to a red eye, constricted pupil, and drooping eyelid.
What can be done about these conditions, which dramatically affect many people’s quality of life?
Tension headaches and most secondary cases can be treated with over-the-counter pain medications, such as anti-inflammatory drugs that reduce cranial swelling.
And many secondary headache triggers, like dehydration, eye strain, and stress, can be proactively avoided.
Migraines and cluster headaches are more complicated, and we haven’t yet discovered reliable treatments that work for everyone.
But thankfully, pharmacologists and neurologists are hard at work cracking these pressing mysteries that weigh so heavily on our minds.
Today's computers are so amazing that we fail to notice how terrible they really are.
I'd like to talk to you today about this problem, and how we can fix it with neuroscience.
First, I'd like to take you back to a frosty night in Harlem in 2011 that had a profound impact on me.
I was sitting in a dive bar outside of Columbia University, where I studied computer science and neuroscience, and I was having this great conversation with a fellow student about the power of holograms to one day replace computers.
And just as we were getting to the best part of the conversation, of course, his phone lights up.
And he pulls it towards himself, and he looks down and he starts typing.
And then he forces his eyeballs back up to mine and he goes, "Keep going. I'm with you."
But of course his eyes were glazed over, and the moment was dead.
Meanwhile across the bar, I noticed another student holding his phone, this time towards a group.
He was swiping through pictures on Instagram, and these kids were laughing hysterically.
And that dichotomy between how crappy I was feeling and how happy they were feeling about the same technology, really got me thinking.
And the more I thought of it, the more I realized it was clearly not the digital information that was the bad guy here, it was simply the display position that was separating me from my friend and that was binding those kids together.
See, they were connected around something, just like our ancestors who evolved their social cognitions telling stories around the campfire.
And that's exactly what tools should do, I think.
They should extend our bodies.
And I think computers today are doing quite the opposite.
Whether you're sending an email to your wife or you're composing a symphony or just consoling a friend, you're doing it in pretty much the same way.
You're hunched over these rectangles, fumbling with buttons and menus and more rectangles.
And I think this is the wrong way, I think we can start using a much more natural machine.
We should use machines that bring our work back into the world.
We should use machines that use the principles of neuroscience to extend our senses versus going against them.
Now it just so happens that I have such a machine here.
It's called the Meta 2.
Let's try it out.
Now in front of me right now, I can see the audience, and I can see my very hands.
And in three, two, one, we're going to see an immersive hologram appear, a very realistic hologram appear in front of me, of our very glasses I'm wearing on my head right now.
And of course this could be anything that we're shopping for or learning from, and I can use my hands to very nicely kind of move it around with fine control.
And I think Iron Man would be proud.
We're going to come back to this in just a bit.
(Applause) Now if you're anything like me, your mind is already reeling with the possibilities of what we can do with this kind of technology, so let's look at a few.
My mom is an architect, so naturally the first thing I imagined was laying out a building in 3D space instead of having to use these 2D floor plans.
She's actually touching graphics right now and selecting an interior decor.
This was all shot through a GoPro through our very glasses.
And this next use case is very personal to me, it's Professor Adam Gazzaley's glass brain project, courtesy of UCSF.
As a neuroscience student, I would always fantasize about the ability to learn and memorize these complex brain structures with an actual machine, where I could touch and play with the various brain structures.
Now what you're seeing is called augmented reality, but to me, it's part of a much more important story -- a story of how we can begin to extend our bodies with digital devices, instead of the other way around.
Now ...
in the next few years, humanity's going to go through a shift, I think.
We're going to start putting an entire layer of digital information on the real world.
Just imagine for a moment what this could mean for storytellers, for painters, for brain surgeons, for interior decorators and maybe for all of us here today.
And what I think we need to do as a community, is really try and make an effort to imagine how we can create this new reality in a way that extends the human experience, instead of gamifying our reality or cluttering it with digital information.
And that's what I'm very passionate about.
Now, I want to tell you a little secret.
In about five years -- this is not the smallest device -- in about five years, these are all going to look like strips of glass on our eyes that project holograms.
And just like we don't care so much about which phone we buy in terms of the hardware -- we buy it for the operating system -- as a neuroscientist, I always dreamt of building the iOS of the mind, if you will.
And it's very, very important that we get this right, because we might be living inside of these things for at least as long as we've lived with the Windows graphical user interface.
And I don't know about you, but living inside of Windows scares me.
(Laughter) To isolate the single most intuitive interface out of infinity, we use neuroscience to drive our design guidelines, instead of letting a bunch of designers fight it out in the boardroom.
And the principle we all revolve around is what's called the "Neural Path of Least Resistance."
At every turn, we're connecting the iOS of the brain with our brain on, for the first time, our brain's terms.
In other words, we're trying to create a zero learning-curve computer.
We're building a system that you've always known how to use.
Here are the first three design guidelines that we employ in this brand-new form of user experience.
First and foremost, you are the operating system.
Traditional file systems are complex and abstract, and they take your brain extra steps to decode them.
We're going against the Neural Path of Least Resistance.
Meanwhile, in augmented reality, you can of course place your holographic TED panel over here, and your holographic email on the other side of the desk, and your spatial memory evolved just fine to go ahead and retrieve them.
You could put your holographic Tesla that you're shopping for -- or whatever model my legal team told me to put in right before the show.
(Laughter) Perfect. And your brain knows exactly how to get it back.
The second interface guideline we call "touch to see."
What do babies do when they see something that grabs their interest?
They try and reach out and touch it.
And that's exactly how the natural machine should work as well.
Turns out the visual system gets a fundamental boost from a sense we call proprioception -- that's the sense of our body parts in space.
So by touching our work directly, we're not only going to control it better, we're also going to understand it much more deeply.
Hence, touch to see.
But it's not enough to experience things ourselves.
We're inherently these social primates.
And this leads me to our third guideline, the holographic campfire from our first story.
Our mirror-neuron subsystem suggests that we can connect with each other and with our work much better if we can see each other's faces and hands in 3D.
So if you look at the video behind me, you can see two Meta users playing around with the same hologram, making eye contact, connected around this thing, instead of being distracted by external devices.
Let's go ahead and try this again with neuroscience in mind.
So again, our favorite interface, the iOS of the mind.
I'm going to now take a step further and go ahead and grab this pair of glasses and leave it right here by the desk.
I'm now with you, I'm in the moment, we're connecting.
My spatial memory kicks in, and I can go ahead and grab it and bring it right back here, reminding me that I am the operating system.
And now my proprioception is working, and I can go ahead and explode these glasses into a thousand parts and touch the very sensor that is currently scanning my hand.
But it's not enough to see things alone, so in a second, my co-founder Ray is going to make a 3D call -- Ray?
(Ringing) Hey Ray, how's it going?
Guys, I can see this guy in front me in full 3D.
And he is photo-realistic.
(Applause) Thank you.
My mirror-neuron subsystem suggests that this is going to replace phones in not too long.
Ray, how's it going?
Ray: Great. We're live today.
(Applause) MG: Ray, give the crowd a gift of the holographic brain we saw from the video earlier.
Guys, this is not only going to change phones, it's also going to change the way we collaborate.
Thank you so much.
Thanks, Ray.
Ray: You're welcome.
(Applause) MG: So folks, this is the message that I discovered in that bar in 2011: The future of computers is not locked inside one of these screens.
It's right here, inside of us.
(Applause) So if there's one idea that I could leave you with here today, it's that the natural machine is not some figment of the future, it's right here in 2016.
Which is why all hundred of us at Meta, including the administrative staff, the executives, the designers, the engineers -- before TED2017, we're all going to be throwing away our external monitors and replacing them with a truly and profoundly more natural machine.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you, appreciate it.
Thanks, guys.
Chris Anderson: So help me out on one thing, because there've been a few augmented reality demos shown over the last year or so out there.
And there's sometimes a debate among technologists about, are we really seeing the real thing on-screen?
There's this issue of field of view, that somehow the technology is showing a broader view than you would actually see wearing the glasses.
Were we seeing the real deal there?
MG: Absolutely the real deal.
Not only that, we took extra measures to shoot it with a GoPro through the actual lens in the various videos that you've seen here.
We want to try to simulate the experience for the world that we're actually seeing through the glasses, and not cut any corners.
CA: Thank you so much for showing us that.
MG: Thanks so much, I appreciate that.
The first idea I'd like to suggest is that we all love music a great deal. It means a lot to us.
But music is even more powerful if you don't just listen to it, but you make it yourself.
So, that's my first idea. And we all know about the Mozart effect -- the idea that's been around for the last five to 10 years -- that just by listening to music or by playing music to your baby [in utero], that it'll raise our IQ points 10, 20, 30 percent.
Great idea, but it doesn't work at all.
So, you can't just listen to music, you have to make it somehow.
And I'd add to that, that it's not just making it, but everybody, each of us, everybody in the world has the power to create and be part of music in a very dynamic way, and that's one of the main parts of my work.
So, with the MIT Media Lab, for quite a while now, we've been engaged in a field called active music.
What are all the possible ways that we can think of to get everybody in the middle of a musical experience, not just listening, but making music?
And we started by making instruments for some of the world's greatest performers -- we call these hyperinstruments -- for Yo-Yo Ma, Peter Gabriel, Prince, orchestras, rock bands. Instruments where they're all kinds of sensors built right into the instrument, so the instrument knows how it's being played.
And just by changing the interpretation and the feeling, I can turn my cello into a voice, or into a whole orchestra, or into something that nobody has ever heard before.
When we started making these, I started thinking, why can't we make wonderful instruments like that for everybody, people who aren't fantastic Yo-Yo Mas or Princes?
So, we've made a whole series of instruments.
One of the largest collections is called the Brain Opera.
It's a whole orchestra of about 100 instruments, all designed for anybody to play using natural skill.
So, you can play a video game, drive through a piece of music, use your body gesture to control huge masses of sound, touch a special surface to make melodies, use your voice to make a whole aura.
And when we make the Brain Opera, we invite the public to come in, to try these instruments and then collaborate with us to help make each performance of the Brain Opera.
We toured that for a long time. It is now permanently in Vienna, where we built a museum around it.
And that led to something which you probably do know.
Guitar Hero came out of our lab, and my two teenage daughters and most of the students at the MIT Media Lab are proof that if you make the right kind of interface, people are really interested in being in the middle of a piece of music, and playing it over and over and over again.
So, the model works, but it's only the tip of the iceberg, because my second idea is that it's not enough just to want to make music in something like Guitar Hero.
And music is very fun, but it's also transformative.
It's very, very important.
Music can change your life, more than almost anything.
It can change the way you communicate with others, it can change your body, it can change your mind. So, we're trying to go to the next step of how you build on top of something like Guitar Hero.
We are very involved in education. We have a long-term project called Toy Symphony, where we make all kinds of instruments that are also addictive, but for little kids, so the kids will fall in love with making music, want to spend their time doing it, and then will demand to know how it works, how to make more, how to create. So, we make squeezy instruments, like these Music Shapers that measure the electricity in your fingers, Beatbugs that let you tap in rhythms -- they gather your rhythm, and like hot potato, you send your rhythm to your friends, who then have to imitate or respond to what your doing -- and a software package called Hyperscore, which lets anybody use lines and color to make quite sophisticated music. Extremely easy to use, but once you use it, you can go quite deep -- music in any style. And then, by pressing a button, it turns into music notation so that live musicians can play your pieces.
We've had good enough, really, very powerful effects with kids around the world, and now people of all ages, using Hyperscore.
So, we've gotten more and more interested in using these kinds of creative activities in a much broader context, for all kinds of people who don't usually have the opportunity to make music.
So, one of the growing fields that we're working on at the Media Lab right now is music, mind and health.
A lot of you have probably seen Oliver Sacks' wonderful new book called "Musicophilia". It's on sale in the bookstore. It's a great book.
If you haven't seen it, it's worth reading. He's a pianist himself, and he details his whole career of looking at and observing incredibly powerful effects that music has had on peoples' lives in unusual situations.
So we know, for instance, that music is almost always the last thing that people with advanced Alzheimer's can still respond to.
Maybe many of you have noticed this with loved ones, you can find somebody who can't recognize their face in the mirror, or can't tell anyone in their family, but you can still find a shard of music that that person will jump out of the chair and start singing. And with that you can bring back parts of people's memories and personalities.
Music is the best way to restore speech to people who have lost it through strokes, movement to people with Parkinson's disease.
It's very powerful for depression, schizophrenia, many, many things.
So, we're working on understanding those underlying principles and then building activities which will let music really improve people's health.
And we do this in many ways. We work with many different hospitals.
One of them is right near Boston, called Tewksbury Hospital.
It's a long-term state hospital, where several years ago we started working with Hyperscore and patients with physical and mental disabilities.
This has become a central part of the treatment at Tewksbury hospital, so everybody there clamors to work on musical activities.
It's the activity that seems to accelerate people's treatment the most and it also brings the entire hospital together as a kind of musical community.
I wanted to show you a quick video of some of this work before I go on.
Video: They're manipulating each other's rhythms.
It's a real experience, not only to learn how to play and listen to rhythms, but to train your musical memory and playing music in a group.
To get their hands on music, to shape it themselves, change it, to experiment with it, to make their own music.
So Hyperscore lets you start from scratch very quickly.
Everybody can experience music in a profound way, we just have to make different tools.
The third idea I want to share with you is that music, paradoxically, I think even more than words, is one of the very best ways we have of showing who we really are. I love giving talks, although strangely I feel more nervous giving talks than playing music.
If I were here playing cello, or playing on a synth, or sharing my music with you, I'd be able to show things about myself that I can't tell you in words, more personal things, perhaps deeper things.
I think that's true for many of us, and I want to give you two examples of how music is one of the most powerful interfaces we have, from ourselves to the outside world.
The first is a really crazy project that we're building right now, called Death and the Powers. And it's a big opera, one of the larger opera projects going on in the world right now.
And it's about a man, rich, successful, powerful, who wants to live forever.
So, he figures out a way to download himself into his environment, actually into a series of books.
So this guy wants to live forever, he downloads himself into his environment.
The main singer disappears at the beginning of the opera and the entire stage becomes the main character. It becomes his legacy.
And the opera is about what we can share, what we can pass on to others, to the people we love, and what we can't.
Every object in the opera comes alive and is a gigantic music instrument, like this chandelier. It takes up the whole stage. It looks like a chandelier, but it's actually a robotic music instrument.
So, as you can see in this prototype, gigantic piano strings, each string is controlled with a little robotic element -- either little bows that stroke the strings, propellers that tickle the strings, acoustic signals that vibrate the strings. We also have an army of robots on stage.
These robots are the kind of the intermediary between the main character, Simon Powers, and his family. There are a whole series of them, kind of like a Greek chorus.
They observe the action. We've designed these square robots that we're testing right now at MIT called OperaBots. These OperaBots follow my music.
They follow the characters. They're smart enough, we hope, not to bump into each other. They go off on their own.
And then they can also, when you snap, line up exactly the way you'd like to.
Even though they're cubes, they actually have a lot of personality.
The largest set piece in the opera is called The System. It's a series of books.
Every single book is robotic, so they all move, they all make sound, and when you put them all together, they turn into these walls, which have the gesture and the personality of Simon Powers. So he's disappeared, but the whole physical environment becomes this person.
This is how he's chosen to represent himself.
The books also have high-packed LEDs on the spines. So it's all display.
And here's the great baritone James Maddalena as he enters The System.
This is a sneak preview.
This premieres in Monaco -- it's in September 2009. If by any chance you can't make it, another idea with this project -- here's this guy building his legacy through this very unusual form, through music and through the environment.
But we're also making this available both online and in public spaces, as a way of each of us to use music and images from our lives to make our own legacy or to make a legacy of someone we love.
So instead of being grand opera, this opera will turn into what we're thinking of as personal opera.
And, if you're going to make a personal opera, what about a personal instrument?
Everything I've shown you so far -- whether it's a hyper-cello for Yo-Yo Ma or squeezy toy for a child -- the instruments stayed the same and are valuable for a certain class of person: a virtuoso, a child.
But what if I could make an instrument that could be adapted to the way I personally behave, to the way my hands work, to what I do very skillfully, perhaps, to what I don't do so skillfully?
I think that this is the future of interface, it's the future of music, the future of instruments.
And I'd like now to invite two very special people on the stage, so that I can give you an example of what personal instruments might be like.
So, can you give a hand to Adam Boulanger, Ph.D. student from the MIT Media Lab, and Dan Ellsey. Dan, thanks to TED and to Bombardier Flexjet, Dan is here with us today all the way from Tewksbury. He's a resident at Tewksbury Hospital.
This is by far the farthest he's strayed from Tewksbury Hospital, I can tell you that, because he's motivated to meet with you today and show you his own music.
So, first of all, Dan, do you want to say hi to everyone and tell everyone who you are?
Dan Ellsey: Hello. My name is Dan Ellsey. I am 34 years old and I have cerebral palsy.
I have always loved music and I am excited to be able to conduct my own music with this new software.
Tod Machover: And we're really excited to have you here, really Dan. (Applause) So we met Dan about three years ago, three and a half years ago, when we started working at Tewksbury. Everybody we met there was fantastic, did fantastic music. Dan had never made music before, and it turned out he was really fantastic at it. He's a born composer.
He's very shy, too.
So, turned out he's a fantastic composer, and over the last few years has been a constant collaborator of ours. He has made many, many pieces.
He makes his own CDs. Actually, he is quite well known in the Boston area -- mentors people at the hospital and children, locally, in how to make their own music.
And I'll let Adam tell you. So, Adam is a Ph.D. student at MIT, an expert in music technology and medicine. And Adam and Dan have become close collaborators.
What Adam's been working on for this last period is not only how to have Dan be able easily to make his own pieces, but how he can perform his piece using this kind of personal instrument.
So, you want to say a little bit about how you guys work?
Adam Boulanger: Yes. So, Tod and I entered into a discussion following the Tewksbury work and it was really about how Dan is an expressive person, and he's an intelligent and creative person. And it's in his face, it's in his breathing, it's in his eyes. How come he can't perform one of his pieces of music? That's our responsibility, and it doesn't make sense.
So we started developing a technology that will allow him with nuance, with precision, with control, and despite his physical disability, to be able to do that, to be able to perform his piece of music.
So, the process and the technology -- basically, first we needed an engineering solution. So, you know, we have a FireWire camera, it looked at an infrared pointer.
We went with the type of gesture metaphor that Dan was already used to with his speaking controller.
And this was actually the least interesting part of the work, you know, the design process. We needed an input; we needed continuous tracking; in the software, we look at the types of shapes he's making.
But, then was the really interesting aspect of the work, following the engineering part, where, basically, we're coding over Dan's shoulder at the hospital extensively to figure out, you know, how does Dan move?
What's useful to him as an expressive motion?
You know, what's his metaphor for performance?
What types of things does he find important to control and convey in a piece of music?
So all the parameter fitting, and really the technology was stretched at that point to fit just Dan.
And, you know, I think this is a perspective shift. It's not that our technologies -- they provide access, they allow us to create pieces of creative work.
But what about expression? What about that moment when an artist delivers that piece of work? You know, do our technologies allow us to express?
Do they provide structure for us to do that? And, you know, that's a personal relationship to expression that is lacking in the technological sphere. So, you know, with Dan, we needed a new design process, a new engineering process to sort of discover his movement and his path to expression that allow him to perform.
And so that's what we'll do today.
TM: So let's do it. So Dan do you want to tell everyone about what you're going to play now?
DE: This is "My Eagle Song."
TM: So Dan is going to play a piece of his, called "My Eagle Song".
In fact, this is the score for Dan's piece, completely composed by Dan in Hyperscore.
So he can use his infrared tracker to go directly into Hyperscore.
He's incredibly fast at it, too, faster than I am, in fact.
(Laughter) TM: He's really modest, too.
So he can go in Hyperscore. You start out by making melodies and rhythms.
He can place those exactly where he wants.
Each one gets a color. He goes back into the composition window, draws the lines, places everything the way he wants to. Looking at the Hyperscore, you can see it also, you can see where the sections are, something might continue for a while, change, get really crazy and then end up with a big bang at the end.
So that's the way he made his piece, and as Adam says, we then figured out the best way to have him perform his piece.
It's going to be looked at by this camera, analyze his movements, it's going to let Dan bring out all the different aspects of his music that he wants to.
And you're also going to notice a visual on the screen.
We asked one of our students to look at what the camera is measuring.
But instead of making it very literal, showing you exactly the camera tracing, we turned it into a graphic that shows you the basic movement, and shows the way it's being analyzed.
I think it gives an understanding of how we're picking out movement from what Dan's doing, but I think it will also show you, if you look at that movement, that when Dan makes music, his motions are very purposeful, very precise, very disciplined and they're also very beautiful.
So, in hearing this piece, as I mentioned before, the most important thing is the music's great, and it'll show you who Dan is.
So, are we ready Adam?
AB: Yeah.
TM: OK, now Dan will play his piece "My Eagle Song" for you.
(Applause) TM: Bravo.
(Applause)
In 1962 at Rice University, JFK told the country about a dream he had, a dream to put a person on the moon by the end of the decade.
The eponymous moonshot.
No one knew if it was possible to do but he made sure a plan was put in place to do it if it was possible.
That's how great dreams are.
Great dreams aren't just visions, they're visions coupled to strategies for making them real.
I have the incredible good fortune to work at a moonshot factory.
At X -- formerly called Google X -- you'll find an aerospace engineer working alongside a fashion designer and former military ops commanders brainstorming with laser experts.
These inventors, engineers and makers are dreaming up technologies that we hope can make the world a wonderful place.
We use the word "moonshots" to remind us to keep our visions big -- to keep dreaming.
And we use the word "factory" to remind ourselves that we want to have concrete visions -- concrete plans to make them real.
Here's our moonshot blueprint.
Number one: we want to find a huge problem in the world that affects many millions of people.
Number two: we want to find or propose a radical solution for solving that problem.
And then number three: there has to be some reason to believe that the technology for such a radical solution could actually be built.
But I have a secret for you.
The moonshot factory is a messy place.
But rather than avoid the mess, pretend it's not there, we've tried to make that our strength.
We spend most of our time breaking things and trying to prove that we're wrong.
That's it, that's the secret.
Run at all the hardest parts of the problem first.
Get excited and cheer, "Hey! How are we going to kill our project today?"
We've got this interesting balance going where we allow our unchecked optimism to fuel our visions.
But then we also harness enthusiastic skepticism to breathe life, breathe reality into those visions.
I want to show you a few of the projects that we've had to leave behind on the cutting room floor, and also a few of the gems that at least so far, have not only survived that process, but have been accelerated by it.
Last year we killed a project in automated vertical farming.
This is some of the lettuce that we grew.
One in nine people in the world suffers from undernourishment.
So this is a moonshot that needs to happen.
Vertical farming uses 10 times less water and a hundred times less land than conventional farming.
And because you can grow the food close to where it's consumed, you don't have to transport it large distances.
We made progress in a lot of the areas like automated harvesting and efficient lighting.
But unfortunately, we couldn't get staple crops like grains and rice to grow this way.
So we killed the project.
Here's another huge problem.
We pay enormous costs in resources and environmental damage to ship goods worldwide.
Economic development of landlocked countries is limited by lack of shipping infrastructure.
The radical solution?
A lighter-than-air, variable-buoyancy cargo ship.
This has the potential to lower, at least overall, the cost, time and carbon footprint of shipping without needing runways.
We came up with this clever set of technical breakthroughs that together might make it possible for us to lower the cost enough that we could actually make these ships -- inexpensively enough in volume.
But however cheap they would have been to make in volume it turned out that it was going to cost close to 200 million dollars to design and build the first one.
200 million dollars is just way too expensive.
Because X is structured with these tight feedback loops of making mistakes and learning and new designs, we can't spend 200 million dollars to get the first data point about whether we're on the right track or not.
If there's an Achilles' heel in one our projects, we want to know it now, up front, not way down the road.
So we killed this project, too.
Discovering a major flaw in a project doesn't always mean that it ends the project.
Sometimes it actually gets us onto a more productive path.
This is our fully self-driving vehicle prototype, which we built without a steering wheel or break pedal.
But that wasn't actually our goal when we started.
With 1.2 million people dying on the roads globally every year, building a car that drives itself was a natural moonshot to take.
Three and a half years ago, when we had these Lexus, retrofitted, self-driving cars in testing, they were doing so well, we gave them out to other Googlers to find out what they thought of the experience.
And what we discovered was that our plan to have the cars do almost all the driving and just hand over to the users in case of emergency was a really bad plan.
It wasn't safe because the users didn't do their job.
They didn't stay alert in case the car needed to hand control back to them.
This was a major crisis for the team.
It sent them back to the drawing board.
And they came up with a beautiful, new perspective.
Aim for a car where you're truly a passenger.
You tell the car where you want to go, you push a button and it takes you from point A to point B by itself.
We're really grateful that we had this insight as early on in the project as we did.
And it's shaped everything we've done since then.
And now our cars have self-driven more than 1.4 million miles, and they're out everyday on the streets of Mountain View, California and Austin, Texas.
The cars team shifted their perspective.
This is one of X's mantras.
Sometimes shifting your perspective is more powerful than being smart.
Take wind energy.
It's one of my favorite examples of perspective shifting.
There's no way that we're going to build a better standard wind turbine than the experts in that industry.
But we found a way to get up higher into the sky, and so get access to faster, more consistent winds, and so more energy without needing hundreds of tons of steel to get there.
Our Makani energy kite rises up from its perch by spinning up those propellers along its wing.
And it pulls out a tether as it rises, pulling energy up through the tether.
Once the tether's all the way out, it goes into crosswind circles in the sky.
And now those propellers that lifted it up have become flying turbines.
And that sends energy back down the tether.
We haven't yet found a way to kill this project.
And the longer it survives that pressure, the more excited we get that this could become a cheaper and more deployable form of wind energy for the world.
Probably the craziest sounding project we have is Project Loon.
We're trying to make balloon-powered Internet.
A network of balloons in the stratosphere that beam an internet connection down to rural and remote areas of the world.
This could bring online as many as four billion more people, who today have little or no internet connection.
But you can't just take a cell tower, strap it to a balloon and stick it in the sky.
The winds are too strong, it would be blown away.
And the balloons are too high up to tie it to the ground.
Here comes the crazy moment.
What if, instead, we let the balloons drift and we taught them how to sail the winds to go where the needed to go?
It turns out the stratosphere has winds that are going in quite different speeds and directions in thin strata.
So we hoped that using smart algorithms and wind data from around the world, we could maneuver the balloons a bit, getting them to go up and down just a tiny bit in the stratosphere to grab those winds going in those different directions and speeds.
The idea is to have enough balloons so as one balloon floats out of your area, there's another balloon ready to float into place, handing off the internet connection, just like your phone hands off between cell towers as you drive down the freeway.
We get how crazy that vision sounds -- there's the name of the project to remind us of that.
So since 2012, the Loon team has prioritized the work that seems the most difficult and so the most likely to kill their project.
The first thing that they did was try to get a Wi-Fi connection from a balloon in the stratosphere down to an antenna on the ground.
It worked.
And I promise you there were bets that it wasn't going to.
So we kept going.
Could we get the balloon to talk directly to handsets, so that we didn't need the antenna as an intermediary receiver?
Yeah.
Could we get the balloon bandwidth high enough so it was a real Internet connection?
So that people could have something more than just SMS?
The early tests weren't even a megabit per second, but now we can do up to 15 megabits per second.
Enough to watch a TED Talk.
Could we get the balloons to talk to each other through the sky so that we could reach our signal deeper into rural areas?
Check.
Could we get balloons the size of a house to stay up for more than 100 days, while costing less than five percent of what traditional, long-life balloons have cost to make?
Yes. In the end.
But I promise you, you name it, we had to try it to get there.
We made round, silvery balloons.
We made giant pillow-shaped balloons.
We made balloons the size of a blue whale.
We busted a lot of balloons.
(Laughter) Since one of the things that was most likely to kill the Loon project was whether we could guide the balloons through the sky, one of our most important experiments was putting a balloon inside a balloon.
So there are two compartments here, one with air and then one with helium.
The balloon pumps air in to make itself heavier, or lets air out to make it lighter.
And these weight changes allow it to rise or fall, and that simple movement of the balloon is its steering mechanism.
It floats up or down, hoping to grab winds going in the speed and direction that it wants.
But is that good enough for it to navigate through the world?
Barely at first, but better all the time.
This particular balloon, our latest balloon, can navigate a two-mile vertical stretch of sky and can sail itself to within 500 meters of where it wants to go from 20,000 kilometers away.
We have lots more to do in terms of fine-tuning the system and reducing costs.
But last year, a balloon built inexpensively went around the world 19 times over 187 days.
So we're going to keep going.
(Applause) Our balloons today are doing pretty much everything a complete system needs to do.
We're in discussions with telcos around the world, and we're going to fly over places like Indonesia for real service testing this year.
This probably all sounds too good to be true, and you're right.
Being audacious and working on big, risky things makes people inherently uncomfortable.
You cannot yell at people and force them to fail fast.
People resist. They worry.
"What will happen to me if I fail?
Will people laugh at me?
Will I be fired?"
I started with our secret.
I'm going to leave you with how we actually make it happen.
The only way to get people to work on big, risky things -- audacious ideas -- and have them run at all the hardest parts of the problem first, is if you make that the path of least resistance for them.
We work hard at X to make it safe to fail.
Teams kill their ideas as soon as the evidence is on the table because they're rewarded for it.
They get applause from their peers.
Hugs and high fives from their manager, me in particular.
They get promoted for it.
We have bonused every single person on teams that ended their projects, from teams as small as two to teams of more than 30.
We believe in dreams at the moonshot factory.
But enthusiastic skepticism is not the enemy of boundless optimism.
It's optimism's perfect partner.
It unlocks the potential in every idea.
We can create the future that's in our dreams.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Your favorite athlete closes in for a victorious win.
The crowd holds its breath, and, at the crucial moment, she misses the shot.
That competitor just experienced the phenomenon known as "choking," where despite months, even years, of practice, a person fails right when it matters most.
Choking is common in sports, where performance often occurs under intense pressure and depends on key moments.
And yet, performance anxiety also haunts public speakers, contestants in spelling bees, and even world-famous musicians.
Most people intuitively blame it on their nerves, but why does being nervous undermine expert performance?
There are two sets of theories, which both say that primarily, choking under pressure boils down to focus.
First, there are the distraction theories.
These suggest that performance suffers when the mind is preoccupied with worries, doubts, or fears, instead of focusing its attention on performing the task at hand.
When relevant and irrelevant thoughts compete for the same attention, something has to give.
The brain can only process so much information at once.
Tasks that challenge working memory, the mental “scratch pad” we use to temporarily store phone numbers and grocery lists, are especially vulnerable to pressure.
In a 2004 study, a group of university students were asked to perform math problems, some easy, others more complex and memory-intensive.
Half the students completed both problem types with nothing at stake, while the others completed them when calm and under pressure.
While everyone did well on the easy problems, those who were stressed performed worse on the more difficult, memory-intensive tasks.
Explicit monitoring theories make up the second group of explanations for choking under pressure.
They’re concerned with how pressure can cause people to overanalyze the task at hand.
Here, the logic goes that once a skill becomes automatic, thinking about its precise mechanics interferes with your ability to do it.
Tasks we do unconsciously seem to be most vulnerable to this kind of choking.
A study on competitive golfers compared their performance when instructed to simply focus on putting as accurately as possible, versus when they were primed to be acutely aware of the mechanics of their putting stroke.
Golfers usually perform this action subconsciously, so those who suddenly tuned in to the precise details of their own moves also became worse at making accurate shots.
Choking may not be inevitable for everyone though.
Research suggests that some are more susceptible than others, especially those who are self-conscious, anxious, and afraid of being judged negatively by others.
So, how can we avoid choking when it really counts?
First, it helps to practice under stressful conditions.
In a study on expert dart players, researchers found that those who hadn’t practiced under stress performed worse when anxious, compared to those who had become accustomed to pressure.
Secondly, many performers extol the virtues of a pre-performance routine, whether it’s taking a few deep breaths, repeating a cue word, or doing a rhythmic sequence of movements.
Studies on golfing, bowling, and water polo find that short rituals can lead to more consistent and accurate performance under pressure.
And thirdly, researchers have shown that having an external focus on the ultimate goal works better than an internal focus, where someone is tuned into the mechanics of what they’re doing.
A study of experienced golfers revealed that those who hit chip shots while focused on the flight of the ball performed significantly better than those who focused on the motion of their arms.
So, perhaps we can modify that age-old saying: practice, under pressure, with focus, and with that glorious end goal in sight, makes perfect.
Thousands of years from now, we'll look back at the first century of computing as a fascinating but very peculiar time -- the only time in history where humans were reduced to live in 2D space, interacting with technology as if we were machines; a singular, 100-year period in the vastness of time where humans communicated, were entertained and managed their lives from behind a screen.
Today, we spend most of our time tapping and looking at screens.
What happened to interacting with each other?
I don't know about you, but I feel limited inside this 2D world of monitors and pixels.
And it is this very limitation and my desire to connect with people that inspires me as a creator.
Put simply: I want to create a new reality, a reality where technology brings us infinitely closer to each other, a reality where people, not devices, are the center of everything.
I dream of a reality where technology senses what we see, touch and feel; a reality where technology no longer gets in our way, but instead embraces who we are.
I dream of technology on a human path.
We have all experienced technology that enables people to act more like people, products that enable natural interactions, voice controls or biometrics.
This is the next step in the evolution.
This is Microsoft HoloLens, the first fully untethered holographic computer.
Devices like this will bring 3D holographic content right into our world, enhancing the way we experience life beyond our ordinary range of perceptions.
Now, I'm not thinking about a distant future.
I'm talking about today.
We are already seeing car companies like Volvo designing cars differently with HoloLens; universities like Case Western redefining the way medical students learn; and my personal favorite, NASA is using HoloLens to let scientists explore planets holographically.
Now, this is important.
By bringing holograms into our world, I'm not just talking about a new device or a better computer.
I'm talking about freeing ourselves from the 2D confines of traditional computing.
Put it this way: temporally adjusted, we're like cave people in computer terms.
We've barely discovered charcoal and started drawing the first stick figures in our cave.
Now, this is the perspective I apply to my work every single day.
And now for the next few minutes, I invite all of you to apply the same perspective to the journey ahead of us.
Now, as I put this HoloLens on, let me explain the setup a little bit.
It's probably the most risky demo we have ever done on any stage with HoloLens, and I can't think of a better place to do it than here at TED.
Momentarily, I am going to be seeing holograms right on this stage, just as clearly as I can see all of you.
Now at the same time, we have also this special camera that just walked in onstage so that all of you can share in this experience with me up on all the monitors.
So let's start our journey.
And what better place to begin our journey, than in the computer cave of 2D.
Let's explore the world all around us with this new lens, and understand the computer world from a brand new perspective.
The computer universe is both marvelous and primitive.
It's a universe based on causality.
As developers, we dream the different causes and then we program the different effects.
Double click on an icon, that's a cause.
Open an application, that's an effect.
Now when we compare this to our physical universe, it is overly constraining, because our universe is not digital.
Our universe is analog.
Our universe doesn't think in terms of zero or one, true or false, or black or white.
We exist in a world governed by quantum physics, a universe of zero and one both at the same time, a reality based on infinite probabilities and shades of gray.
You can see how these two worlds collide.
So why are screens so pervasive in our analog life?
We see screens from the moment we wake up, to the moment we fall asleep.
Why?
I think it's because computers give us superpowers.
Within the digital universe, we have the power to displace space and the power to displace time.
It doesn't matter if you're using technology for entertainment, productivity or communication.
Think of it this way: let's all go home tonight and watch our favorite show on television.
This is theater -- time and space displaced.
As soon as I'm done with this TED Talk, I'm going to immediately call my lovely family in Seattle.
That's displacement of space.
Now, these are such great superpowers that we put up with the two-dimensional limitations of our current digital world.
But what if we didn't have to?
What if we could have these same digital powers in our world?
You can already see glimmers of this, but I believe our children's children will grow up in a world devoid of 2D technology.
It's remarkable to dream of this world, a world where technology truly understands us -- where we live, work and communicate -- with tools that enhance the human experience, not machines that limit our humanity.
So how do we get there?
For me, the answer required looking at the problem from a different perspective.
It required sensing the world from the perspective of a machine.
If you're a machine trying to sense our world, how would you actually break the problem down?
You'd probably try to classify things as a human, an environment or an object.
But how would that machine then interact with reality?
And I can think of three ways.
First, as a machine, I would observe or I would input reality.
Speech recognition and biometric authentication are great examples of a machine interacting with humans from an input perspective.
Secondly, as a machine, I could place digital information, or output information, into reality.
Holograms are examples of a machine interacting with an environment from an output perspective.
Finally, as a machine, I could exchange energy with the world via haptics.
Now, imagine being able to feel the temperature of a virtual object, or better yet, imagine pushing a hologram and having it push you back with equal force.
With this perspective, we are able to collapse reality into a simple matrix.
Now here's a secret: as an engineer, I get really excited anytime I can reduce something to the matrix.
From self-driving cars to smartphones to this holographic computer on my head, machines are becoming capable of understanding our world.
And they are starting to interact with us in significantly more personal ways.
Now, imagine having granular control over everything in the world.
Move the dial one way, and you get reality.
Move the dial the other way, and you get virtual reality.
Now, imagine dialing your entire environment between virtual and real worlds.
I love it down here.
Now, imagine if I could look at all of you and dial from real humans into elves.
When technology truly understands our world, it will again transform the ways we interact, the ways we work and the ways we play.
Less than half a century ago, two courageous men landed on the moon, using computers that were less powerful than the phones in your pockets.
Six hundred million humans watched them on grainy, black-and-white televisions.
And the world?
The world was mesmerized.
Now imagine how our children and their children will experience the continued exploration of space with technology that understands this world.
We already live in a world where real-time universal translators exist.
And I can squint, and I can already see holographic telepresence in our near future.
In fact, since we've been lucky with our demo so far, let's try doing something else even more crazy.
I invite you to experience, for the first time anywhere in the world, here on the TED stage, a real-life holographic teleportation, between me and my friend, Dr. Jeffrey Norris, from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Finger crossed. Hi, Jeff.
Jeff Norris: Hey, Alex.
Alex Kipman: Phew! That worked. How are you doing today, Jeff?
(Applause) JN: Doing great. I had an awesome week.
AK: So, can you tell us a little bit, Jeff, about where you are?
JN: Well, I'm actually in three places.
I'm standing in a room across the street, while I'm standing on this stage with you, while I'm standing on Mars, a hundred million miles away.
AK: Wow, a hundred million miles away. This is crazy!
Can you tell us a little bit more about where all this data from Mars is coming from?
JN: Absolutely.
This is a precise holographic replica of Mars, built from data captured by the Curiosity Mars Rover, that I can explore as easily as a place on Earth.
Humans are natural explorers.
We can instantly understand an environment, just by being present in it.
We've built tools like our Mars Rover to extend our vision and lengthen our reach.
But for decades, we've explored from a seat behind screens and keyboards.
Now, we're leaping over all of that, over the giant antennas and the relay satellites and the vastness between worlds to take our first steps on this landscape as if we were truly there.
Today, a group of scientists on our mission are seeing Mars as never before -- an alien world made a little more familiar, because they're finally exploring it as humans should.
But our dreams don't have to end with making it just like being there.
When we dial this real world to the virtual, we can do magical things.
We can see in invisible wavelengths or teleport to the top of a mountain.
Perhaps someday, we'll feel the minerals in a rock just by touching it.
We're taking the first steps.
But we want the whole world to join us in taking the next, because this is not a journey for a few, but for all of us.
AK: Thank you Jeff, this was amazing.
Thank you so much for joining us on the TED stage today.
(Applause) JN: Thank you Alex, bye bye.
AK: Bye, Jeff.
(Applause) I dream about this future every single day.
I take inspiration from our ancestors.
We used to live in tribes where we interacted, communicated and worked together.
We are all beginning to build technology that will enable us to return to the humanity that brought us where we are today -- technology that will let us stop living inside this 2D world of monitors and pixels, and let us start remembering what it feels like to live in our 3D world.
It's a phenomenal time to be human.
Thank you.
(Applause) Helen Walters: Thanks so much. I have some questions.
AK: OK.
HW: So there's been some talk in the press.
And I'll just ask you straight, then we have a straight answer.
There's been talk about the difference between the demos and the reality of the commercial product.
Talk about this field of view issue.
Is this type of experience what someone who buys the product will get?
AK: It's a great question, Or, said better, this is a question we've been receiving in the media for possibly the last year.
If you do your research, I haven't answered that question.
I've purposely ignored it, because ultimately, it's the wrong question to ask.
That's the equivalent of me showing holograms to someone for the first time, and you then saying, "What's the size of your television?"
The field of view for the product is almost irrelevant.
What we should be talking about is the density of lights, or radiance, that shows up.
Better said, what the angular resolution is of the things that you see.
So from that perspective, what you saw -- you know, the camera is wearing a HoloLens.
So even if I wanted to cheat, I can't.
HW: But the camera has a different lens on it than our eye. Right?
AK: The camera has a fish-eye lens on it.
It's seeing a much wider view than the human eye is.
So if you think about the points of light that show up radially from the vision of the camera, which is the thing that matters: how many points of light can I get in a given volume?
That's the same as I get on this HoloLens as I will on that one.
Now, this camera sees a much wider view of the world, right?
HW: Jesus Christ!
(Laughter) AK: He did show up! I told you he'd show up.
Come this way.
(Laughter) HW: Oh, shit.
AK: And there's holographic Jeff Norris.
HW: I knew something was happening, but I really wasn't sure what.
AK: So in short: to be super crisp, the camera that you see on the screen has a wider field of view than the human eye.
But the angular resolution of the holograms that you see, the points of light per unit of area, are actually the same.
HW: So you spent -- Jeff, I'll get to you in a minute -- so you spent a lot of time mapping the stage -- AK: That's right.
HW: So help me out here: if I buy a HoloLens and have it at home, I don't need to map my apartment, right?
AK: The HoloLens maps in real time at about five frames per second, with this technology that we call spatial mapping.
So in your home, as soon as you put it on, holograms will start showing up, and you'll start placing them and they'll start learning your home.
In a stage environment where we're trying to get something on my head to communicate with something over there with all of the wireless connectivity that usually brings all conferences down, we don't take the risk of trying to do this live.
So what we do is pre-map the stage at five frames per second with the same spatial-mapping technology that you'll use with the product at home, and then we store it, so that when there's shenanigans of wireless in an environment like this, between the camera's HoloLens and the one on my head, we don't have things disappear.
Because ultimately, the holograms are coming from this HoloLens, and that one is just viewing the HoloLens.
So if I lose connectivity, you would stop seeing beautiful things on the screen.
HW: And it was beautiful.
Um ... Jeff?
JN: Yes?
HW: Hi.
AK: I'll take a step back.
HW: So Jeff, you were on Mars, you were here, you were in a room across the street.
Tell me more about the fact that, with holograms, you have sight but you don't have touch, you don't have smell.
Is this scientifically useful now?
That's my question for a hologram.
JN: Thanks for the question.
Absolutely, I believe that these technologies are scientifically useful right now, and that's why we're using them in multiple parts of our work at NASA.
So we're using it to improve the ways that we explore Mars.
We're also using it for our astronauts on the space station.
We're even using it now to design the next generation of our spacecraft.
HW: Amazing. OK, Jeff, please go away. Thank you very much.
(Laughter) Alex, really, that was amazing. Thank you so much.
AK: Thank you.
HW: Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause)
It began with one question: If Africa was a bar, what would your country be drinking or doing?
I kicked it off with a guess about South Africa, which wasn't exactly according to the rules because South Africa's not my country.
But alluding to the country's continual attempts to build a postracial society after being ravaged for decades by apartheid, I tweeted, #ifafricawasabar South Africa would be drinking all kinds of alcohol and begging them to get along in its stomach.
And then I waited.
And then I had that funny feeling where I wondered if I crossed the line.
So, I sent out a few other tweets about my own country and a few other African countries I'm familiar with.
And then I waited again, but this time I read through almost every tweet I had ever tweeted to convince myself, no, to remind myself that I'm really funny and that if nobody gets it, that's fine.
But luckily, I didn't have to do that for very long.
Very soon, people were participating.
In fact, by the end of that week in July, the hashtag #ifafricawasabar would have garnered around 60,000 tweets, lit up the continent and made its way to publications all over the world.
People were using the hashtag to do many different things.
To poke fun at their stereotypes: [#IfAfricaWasABar Nigeria would be outside explaining that he will pay the entrance fee, all he needs is the bouncer's account details.] (Laughter) To criticize government spending: [#ifafricawasabar South Africa would be ordering bottles it can't pronounce running a tab it won't be able to pay] To make light of geopolitical tensions: [#IfAfricaWasABar South Sudan would be the new guy with serious anger management issues.] To remind us that even in Africa there are some countries we don't know exist: [#IfAfricaWasABar Lesotho would be that person who nobody really knows but is always in the pictures.] And also to make fun of the countries that don't think that they're in Africa: [#IfAfricaWasABar Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco be like "What the hell are we doing here?!!"] (Laughter) And to note the countries that had made a big turnaround: [#ifAfricawasabar Rwanda would be that girl that comes with no money and no transport but leaves drunk, happy and rich] But most importantly, people were using the hashtag to connect.
People were connecting over their Africanness.
So for one week in July, Twitter became a real African bar.
And I was really thrilled, mainly because I realized that Pan-Africanism could work, that we had before us, between us, at our fingertips a platform that just needed a small spark to light in us a hunger for each other.
My name is Siyanda Mohutsiwa, I'm 22 years old and I am Pan-Africanist by birth.
Now, I say I'm Pan-Africanist by birth because my parents are from two different African countries.
My father's from a country called Botswana in southern Africa.
It's only slightly bigger than Germany.
This year we celebrate our 50th year of stable democracy.
And it has some very progressive social policies.
My mother's country is the Kingdom of Swaziland.
It's a very, very small country, also in southern Africa.
It is Africa's last complete monarchy.
So it's been ruled by a king and a royal family in line with their tradition, for a very long time.
On paper, these countries seem very different.
And when I was a kid, I could see the difference.
It rained a lot in one country, it didn't rain quite as much in the other.
But outside of that, I didn't really realize why it mattered that my parents were from two different places.
But it would go on to have a very peculiar effect on me.
You see, I was born in one country and raised in the other.
When we moved to Botswana, I was a toddler who spoke fluent SiSwati and nothing else.
So I was being introduced to my new home, my new cultural identity, as a complete outsider, incapable of comprehending anything that was being said to me by the family and country whose traditions I was meant to move forward.
But very soon, I would shed SiSwati.
And when I would go back to Swaziland, I would be constantly confronted by how very non-Swazi I was becoming.
Add to that my entry into Africa's private school system, whose entire purpose is to beat the Africanness out of you, and I would have a very peculiar adolescence.
But I think that my interest in ideas of identity was born here, in the strange intersection of belonging to two places at once but not really belonging to either one very well and belonging to this vast space in between and around simultaneously.
I became obsessed with the idea of a shared African identity.
Since then, I have continued to read about politics and geography and identity and what all those things mean.
I've also held on to a deep curiosity about African philosophies.
When I began to read, I gravitated towards the works of black intellectuals like Steve Biko and Frantz Fanon, who tackled complex ideas like decolonization and black consciousness.
And when I thought, at 14, that I had digested these grand ideas, I moved on to the speeches of iconic African statesmen like Burkina Faso's Thomas Sankara and Congo's Patrice Lumumba.
I read every piece of African fiction that I could get my hands on.
So when Twitter came, I hopped on with the enthusiasm of a teenage girl whose friends are super, super bored of hearing about all this random stuff.
The year was 2011 and all over southern Africa and the whole continent, affordable data packages for smartphones and Internet surfing became much easier to get.
So my generation, we were sending messages to each other on this platform that just needed 140 characters and a little bit of creativity.
On long commutes to work, in lectures that some of us should have been paying attention to, on our lunch breaks, we would communicate as much as we could about the everyday realities of being young and African.
But of course, this luxury was not available to everybody.
So this meant that if you were a teenage girl in Botswana and you wanted to have fun on the Internet, one, you had to tweet in English.
Two, you had to follow more than just the three other people you knew online.
You had to follow South Africans, Zimbabweans, Ghanaians, Nigerians.
And suddenly, your whole world opened up.
And my whole world did open up.
I followed vibrant Africans who were travelling around the continent, taking pictures of themselves and posting them under the hashtag #myafrica.
Because at that time, if you were to search Africa on Twitter or on Google or any kind of social media, you would think that the entire continent was just pictures of animals and white guys drinking cocktails in hotel resorts.
(Laughter) But Africans were using this platform to take some kind of ownership of the tourism sectors.
It was Africans taking selfies on the beaches of Nigeria.
It was Africans in cocktail bars in Nairobi.
And these were the same Africans that I began to meet in my own travels around the continent.
We would discuss African literature, politics, economic policy.
But almost invariably, every single time, we would end up discussing Twitter.
And that's when I realized what this was.
We were standing in the middle of something amazing, because for the first time ever young Africans could discuss the future of our continent in real time, without the restriction of borders, finances and watchful governments.
Because the little known truth is many Africans know a lot less about other African countries than some Westerners might know about Africa as a whole.
This is by accident, but sometimes, it's by design.
For example, in apartheid South Africa, black South Africans were constantly being bombarded with this message that any country ruled by black people was destined for failure.
And this was done to convince them that they were much better off under crushing white rule than they were living in a black and free nation.
Add to that Africa's colonial, archaic education system, which has been unthinkingly carried over from the 1920s -- and at the age of 15, I could name all the various causes of the wars that had happened in Europe in the past 200 years, but I couldn't name the president of my neighboring country.
And to me, this doesn't make any sense because whether we like it or not, the fates of African people are deeply intertwined.
When disaster hits, when turmoil hits, we share the consequences.
When Burundians flee political turmoil, they go to us, to other African countries.
Africa has six of the world's largest refugee centers.
What was once a Burundian problem becomes an African problem.
So to me, there are no Sudanese problems or South African problems or Kenyan problems, only African problems because eventually, we share the turmoil.
So if we share the problems, why aren't we doing a better job of sharing the successes?
How can we do that?
Well, in the long term, we can shoot towards increasing inter-African trade, removing borders and putting pressure on leaders to fulfill regional agreements they've already signed.
But I think that the biggest way for Africa to share its successes is to foster something I like to call social Pan-Africanism.
Now, political Pan-Africanism already exists, so I'm not inventing anything totally new here.
But political Pan-Africanism is usually the African unity of the political elite.
And who does that benefit?
Well, African leaders, almost exclusively.
No, what I'm talking about is the Pan-Africanism of the ordinary African.
Young Africans like me, we are bursting with creative energy, with innovative ideas.
But with bad governance and shaky institutions, all of this potential could go to waste.
On a continent where more than a handful of leaders have been in power longer than the majority of the populations has been alive, we are in desperate need of something new, something that works.
And I think that thing is social Pan-Africanism.
My dream is that young Africans stop allowing borders and circumstance to suffocate our innovation.
My dream is that when a young African comes up with something brilliant, they don't say, "Well, this wouldn't work in my country," and then give up.
My dream is that young Africans begin to realize that the entire continent is our canvas, is our home.
Using the Internet, we can begin to think collaboratively, we can begin to innovate together.
In Africa, we say, "If you want to go fast, you go alone, but if you want to go far, you go together."
And I believe that social Pan-Africanism is how we can go far together.
And this is already happening.
Access to these online networks has given young Africans something we've always had to violently take: a voice.
We now have a platform.
Before now, if you wanted to hear from the youth in Africa, you waited for the 65-year-old minister of youth -- (Laughter) to wake up in the morning, take his heartburn medication and then tell you the plans he has for your generation in 20 years time.
Before now, if you wanted to be heard by your possibly tyrannical government, you were pushed to protest, suffer the consequences and have your fingers crossed that some Western paper somewhere might make someone care.
But now we have opportunities to back each other up in ways we never could before.
We support South African students who are marching against ridiculously high tertiary fees.
We support Zimbabwean women who are marching to parliament.
We support Angolan journalists who are being illegally detained.
For the first time ever, African pain and African aspiration has the ability to be witnessed by those who can empathize with it the most: other Africans.
I believe that with a social Pan-Africanist thinking and using the Internet as a tool, we can begin to rescue each other, and ultimately, to rescue ourselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It has been 128 years since the last country in the world abolished slavery and 53 years since Martin Luther King pronounced his "I Have A Dream" speech.
But we still live in a world where the color of our skin not only gives a first impression, but a lasting one that remains.
I was born in a family full of colors.
My father is the son of a maid from whom he inherited an intense dark chocolate tone.
He was adopted by those who I know as my grandparents.
The matriarch, my grandma, has a porcelain skin and cotton-like hair.
My grandpa was somewhere between a vanilla and strawberry yogurt tone, like my uncle and my cousin.
My mother is a cinnamon-skin daughter of a native Brazilian, with a pinch of hazel and honey, and a man [who is] a mix of coffee with milk, but with a lot of coffee.
She has two sisters.
One in a toasted-peanut skin and the other, also adopted, more on the beige side, like a pancake.
(Laughter) Growing up in this family, color was never important for me.
Outside home, however, things were different soon.
Color had many other meanings.
I remember my first drawing lessons in school as a bunch of contradictory feelings.
It was exciting and creative but I never understood the unique flesh-colored pencil.
I was made of flesh but I wasn't pink.
My skin was brown, and people said I was black.
I was seven years old with a mess of colors in my head.
Later, when I took my cousin to school, I was usually taken for the nanny.
By helping in the kitchen at a friend's party, people thought I was the maid.
I was even treated like a prostitute just because I was walking alone on the beach with European friends.
And many times, visiting my grandma or friends in upper class buildings, I was invited not to use the main elevator.
Because in the end, with this color and this hair, I cannot belong to some places.
In some way, I get to used to it and accept part of it.
However, something inside of me keeps revolving and struggling.
Years later I married a Spaniard.
But not any Spaniard.
I chose one with the skin color of a lobster when sunburnt.
(Laughter) Since then, a new question started to chase me.
What will be the color of your children?
As you can understand, this is my last concern.
But thinking about it, with my previous background, my story led me to make my personal exercise as a photographer.
And that is how Humanae was born.
Humanae is a pursuit to highlight our true colors, rather than the untrue white, red, black or yellow associated with race.
It's a kind of game to question our codes.
It's a work in progress from a personal story to a global history.
I portray the subjects in a white background.
Then I choose an 11-pixel square from the nose, paint the background, and look for the corresponding color in the industrial palette, Pantone.
I started with my family and friends, then more and more people joined the adventure, thanks to public calls coming through the social media.
I thought that the main space to show my work was the Internet because I want an open concept that invites everybody to push the share button in both the computer and their brain.
The snowball started to roll.
The project had a great welcome -- invitations, exhibitions, physical formats, galleries and museums ...
just happened.
And among them, my favorite: when Humanae occupies public spaces and appears in the street, it fosters a popular debate and creates a feeling of community.
I have portrayed more than 3,000 people in 13 different countries, 19 different cities around the world.
Just to mention some of them -- from someone included in the Forbes list, to refugees who crossed the Mediterranean by boat.
In Paris, from the UNESCO Headquarters to a shelter.
And students both in Switzerland and favelas in Rio de Janeiro.
All kinds of beliefs, gender identities or physical impairments, a newborn or terminally ill.
We all together build Humanae.
Those portraits make us rethink how we see each other.
When modern science is questioning the race concept, what does it mean for us to be black, white, yellow, red?
Is it the eye, the nose, the mouth, the hair?
Or does it have to do with our origin, nationality or bank account?
This personal exercise turned out to be a discovery.
Suddenly I realized that Humanae was useful for many people.
It represents a sort of mirror for those who cannot find themselves reflected in any label.
It was amazing that people started to share their thoughts about the work with me.
I have hundreds of that, I will share with you, too.
A mother of 11 years -- A mother of an 11-year-old girl wrote me, "Very good for me as a tool to work on her confidence, as this past weekend one of her girlfriends argued with her that she does not belong and should not be allowed to live in Norway.
So your work has a very special place in my heart and it's very important for me."
A woman shared her portrait on Facebook and wrote, "All my life, people from across the globe had difficulties to place me in a group, a stereotype, a box.
Perhaps we should stop.
Instead of framing, ask the individual, 'How would you label yourself?' Then I would say, 'Hi. I'm Massiel.
I'm a Dominican-Dutch, I grew up in a mixed family and I'm a bisexual woman.' " Besides these unexpected and touching reactions, Humanae finds a new life in a different variety of fields.
Just to show you some examples, illustrators and art students using it as a reference for their sketches and their studies.
It's a collection of faces.
Researchers in the fields of anthropology, physics and neuroscience use Humanae with different scientific approaches related to human ethnicity, optophysiology, face recognition or Alzheimer's.
One of the most important impacts of the project is that Humanae was chosen to be the cover of Foreign Affairs, one of the most relevant political publications.
And talking about foreign affairs, I found the perfect ambassadors for my project ...
teachers.
They are the ones that use Humanae as a tool for educational purposes.
Their passion encourages me to go back to drawing classes, but this time as a teacher myself.
My students, both adults and kids, paint their self-portraits, trying to discover their own unique color.
As a photographer, I realize that I can be a channel for others to communicate.
As an individual, as Angélica, every time I take a picture, I feel that I am sitting in front of a therapist.
All the frustration, fear and loneliness that I once felt ...
becomes love.
The last country -- the last country in the world who abolished slavery is the country where I was born, Brazil.
We still have to work hard to abolish discrimination.
That remains a common practice worldwide, and that will not disappear by itself.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Chris Anderson: This is such a strange thing.
Your software, Linux, is in millions of computers, it probably powers much of the Internet.
And I think that there are, like, a billion and a half active Android devices out there.
Your software is in every single one of them.
It's kind of amazing.
You must have some amazing software headquarters driving all this.
That's what I thought -- and I was shocked when I saw a picture of it.
I mean, this is -- this is the Linux world headquarters.
(Laughter) (Applause) Linus Torvalds: It really doesn't look like much.
And I have to say, the most interesting part in this picture, that people mostly react to, is the walking desk.
It is the most interesting part in my office and I'm not actually using it anymore.
And I think the two things are related.
The way I work is ...
I want to not have external stimulation.
You can kind of see, on the walls are this light green.
I'm told that at mental institutions they use that on the walls.
(Laughter) It's like a calming color, it's not something that really stimulates you.
What you can't see is the computer here, you only see the screen, but the main thing I worry about in my computer is -- it doesn't have to be big and powerful, although I like that -- it really has to be completely silent.
I know people who work for Google and they have their own small data center at home, and I don't do that.
My office is the most boring office you'll ever see.
And I sit there alone in the quiet.
If the cat comes up, it sits in my lap.
And I want to hear the cat purring, not the sound of the fans in the computer.
CA: So this is astonishing, because working this way, you're able to run this vast technology empire -- it is an empire -- so that's an amazing testament to the power of open source.
Tell us how you got to understand open source and how it lead to the development of Linux.
LT: I mean, I still work alone.
Really -- I work alone in my house, often in my bathrobe.
When a photographer shows up, I dress up, so I have clothes on.
(Laughter) And that's how I've always worked.
I mean, this was how I started Linux, too.
I did not start Linux as a collaborative project.
I started it as one in a series of many projects I had done at the time for myself, partly because I needed the end result, but even more because I just enjoyed programming.
So it was about the end of the journey, which, 25 years later, we still have not reached.
But it was really about the fact that I was looking for a project on my own and there was no open source, really, on my radar at all.
And what happened is ...
the project grows and becomes something you want to show off to people.
Really, this is more of a, "Wow, look at what I did!"
And trust me -- it was not that great back then.
I made it publicly available, and it wasn't even open source at that point.
At that point it was source that was open, but there was no intention behind using the kind of open-source methodology that we think of today to improve it.
It was more like, "Look, I've been working on this for half a year, I'd love to have comments."
And other people approached me.
At the University of Helsinki, I had a friend who was one of the open source -- it was called mainly "free software" back then -- and he actually introduced me to the notion that, hey, you can use these open-source licenses that had been around.
And I thought about it for a while.
I was actually worried about the whole commercial interests coming in.
I mean, that's one of the worries I think most people who start out have, is that they worry about somebody taking advantage of their work, right?
And I decided, "What the hell?"
And -- CA: And then at some point, someone contributed some code that you thought, "Wow, that really is interesting, I would not have thought of that.
This could actually improve this."
LT: It didn't even start by people contributing code, it was more that people started contributing ideas.
And just the fact that somebody else takes a look at your project -- and I'm sure it's true of other things, too, but it's definitely true in code -- is that somebody else takes an interest in your code, looks at it enough to actually give you feedback and give you ideas.
That was a huge thing for me.
I was 21 at the time, so I was young, but I had already programmed for half my life, basically.
And every project before that had been completely personal and it was a revelation when people just started commenting, started giving feedback on your code.
And even before they started giving code back, that was, I think, one of the big moments where I said, "I love other people!"
Don't get me wrong -- I'm actually not a people person.
(Laughter) I don't really love other people -- (Laughter) But I love computers, I love interacting with other people on email, because it kind of gives you that buffer.
But I do love other people who comment and get involved in my project.
And it made it so much more.
CA: So was there a moment when you saw what was being built and it suddenly started taking off, and you thought, "Wait a sec, this actually could be something huge, not just a personal project that I'm getting nice feedback on, but a kind of explosive development in the whole technology world"?
LT: Not really.
I mean, the big point for me, really, was not when it was becoming huge, it was when it was becoming little.
The big point for me was not being alone and having 10, maybe 100 people being involved -- that was a big point.
Then everything else was very gradual.
Going from 100 people to a million people is not a big deal -- to me.
Well, I mean, maybe it is if you're -- (Laughter) If you want to sell your result then it's a huge deal -- don't get me wrong.
But if you're interested in the technology and you're interested in the project, the big part was getting the community.
Then the community grew gradually.
And there's actually not a single point where I went like, "Wow, that just took off!" because it -- I mean -- it took a long time, relatively.
CA: So all the technologists that I talk to really credit you with massively changing their work.
And it's not just Linux, it's this thing called Git, which is this management system for software development.
Tell us briefly about that and your role in that.
LT: So one of the issues we had, and this took a while to start to appear, is when you ...
When you grow from having 10 people or 100 people working on a project to having 10,000 people, which -- I mean, right now we're in the situation where just on the kernel, we have 1,000 people involved in every single release and that's every two months, roughly two or three months.
Some of those people don't do a lot.
There's a lot of people who make small, small changes.
But to maintain this, the scale changes how you have to maintain it.
And we went through a lot of pain.
And there are whole projects that do only source-code maintenance.
CVS is the one that used to be the most commonly used, and I hated CVS with a passion and refused to touch it and tried something else that was radical and interesting and everybody else hated.
CA: (Laughs) LT: And we were in this bad spot, where we had thousands of people who wanted to participate, but in many ways, I was the kind of break point, where I could not scale to the point where I could work with thousands of people.
So Git is my second big project, which was only created for me to maintain my first big project.
And this is literally how I work.
I don't code for -- well, I do code for fun -- but I want to code for something meaningful so every single project I've ever done has been something I needed and -- CA: So really, both Linux and Git kind of arose almost as an unintended consequence of your desire not to have to work with too many people.
LT: Absolutely. Yes.
(Laughter) CA: That's amazing. LT: Yeah.
(Applause) And yet, you're the man who's transformed technology not just once but twice, and we have to try and understand why it is.
You've given us some clues, but ...
Here's a picture of you as a kid, with a Rubik's Cube.
You mentioned that you've been programming since you were like 10 or 11, half your life.
Were you this sort of computer genius, you know, übernerd, were you the star at school who could do everything?
What were you like as a kid?
LT: Yeah, I think I was the prototypical nerd.
I mean, I was ...
I was not a people person back then.
That's my younger brother.
I was clearly more interested in the Rubik's Cube than my younger brother.
(Laughter) My younger sister, who's not in the picture, when we had family meetings -- and it's not a huge family, but I have, like, a couple of cousins -- she would prep me beforehand.
Like, before I stepped into the room she would say, "OK. That's so-and-so ..."
Because I was not -- I was a geek.
I was into computers, I was into math, I was into physics.
I was good at that.
I don't think I was particularly exceptional.
Apparently, my sister said that my biggest exceptional quality was that I would not let go.
CA: OK, so let's go there, because that's interesting.
You would not let go.
So that's not about being a geek and being smart, that's about being ... stubborn?
LT: That's about being stubborn.
That's about, like, just starting something and not saying, "OK, I'm done, let's do something else -- Look: shiny!"
And I notice that in many other parts in my life, too.
I lived in Silicon Valley for seven years.
And I worked for the same company, in Silicon Valley, for the whole time.
That is unheard of.
That's not how Silicon Valley works.
The whole point of Silicon Valley is that people jump between jobs to kind of mix up the pot.
And that's not the kind of person I am.
CA: But during the actual development of Linux itself, that stubbornness sometimes brought you in conflict with other people.
Talk about that a bit.
Was that essential to sort of maintain the quality of what was being built?
How would you describe what happened?
LT: I don't know if it's essential.
Going back to the "I'm not a people person," -- sometimes I'm also ...
shall we say, "myopic" when it comes to other people's feelings, and that sometimes makes you say things that hurt other people.
And I'm not proud of that.
(Applause) But, at the same time, it's -- I get people who tell me that I should be nice.
And then when I try to explain to them that maybe you're nice, maybe you should be more aggressive, they see that as me being not nice.
(Laughter) What I'm trying to say is we are different.
I'm not a people person; it's not something I'm particularly proud of, but it's part of me.
And one of the things I really like about open source is it really allows different people to work together.
We don't have to like each other -- and sometimes we really don't like each other.
Really -- I mean, there are very, very heated arguments.
But you can, actually, you can find things that -- you don't even agree to disagree, it's just that you're interested in really different things.
And coming back to the point where I said earlier that I was afraid of commercial people taking advantage of your work, it turned out, and very quickly turned out, that those commercial people were lovely, lovely people.
And they did all the things that I was not at all interested in doing, and they had completely different goals.
And they used open source in ways that I just did not want to go.
But because it was open source they could do it, and it actually works really beautifully together.
And I actually think it works the same way.
You need to have the people-people, the communicators, the warm and friendly people who like -- (Laughter) really want to hug you and get you into the community.
But that's not everybody.
And that's not me.
I care about the technology.
There are people who care about the UI.
I can't do UI to save my life.
I mean, if I was stranded on an island and the only way to get off that island was the make a pretty UI, I'd die there.
(Laughter) So there's different kinds of people, and I'm not making excuses, I'm trying to explain.
CA: Now, when we talked last week, you talked about some other trait that you have, which I found really interesting.
It's this idea called taste.
And I've just got a couple of images here.
I think this is an example of not particularly good taste in code, and this one is better taste, which one can immediately see.
What is the difference between these two?
LT: So this is -- How many people here actually have coded?
CA: Oh my goodness.
LT: So I guarantee you, everybody who raised their hand, they have done what's called a singly-linked list.
And it's taught -- This, the first not very good taste approach, is basically how it's taught to be done when you start out coding.
And you don't have to understand the code.
The most interesting part to me is the last if statement.
Because what happens in a singly-linked list -- this is trying to remove an existing entry from a list -- and there's a difference between if it's the first entry or whether it's an entry in the middle.
Because if it's the first entry, you have to change the pointer to the first entry.
If it's in the middle, you have to change the pointer of a previous entry.
So they're two completely different cases.
CA: And that's better.
LT: And this is better.
It does not have the if statement.
And it doesn't really matter -- I don't want you understand why it doesn't have the if statement, but I want you to understand that sometimes you can see a problem in a different way and rewrite it so that a special case goes away and becomes the normal case.
And that's good code.
But this is simple code.
This is CS 101.
This is not important -- although, details are important.
To me, the sign of people I really want to work with is that they have good taste, which is how ...
I sent you this stupid example that is not relevant because it's too small.
Good taste is much bigger than this.
Good taste is about really seeing the big patterns and kind of instinctively knowing what's the right way to do things.
CA: OK, so we're putting the pieces together here now.
You have taste, in a way that's meaningful to software people.
You're -- (Laughter) LT: I think it was meaningful to some people here.
CA: You're a very smart computer coder, and you're hellish stubborn.
But there must be something else.
I mean, you've changed the future.
You must have the ability of these grand visions of the future.
You're a visionary, right?
LT: I've actually felt slightly uncomfortable at TED for the last two days, because there's a lot of vision going on, right?
And I am not a visionary.
I do not have a five-year plan.
I'm an engineer.
And I think it's really -- I mean -- I'm perfectly happy with all the people who are walking around and just staring at the clouds and looking at the stars and saying, "I want to go there."
But I'm looking at the ground, and I want to fix the pothole that's right in front of me before I fall in.
This is the kind of person I am.
(Cheers) (Applause) CA: So you spoke to me last week about these two guys.
Who are they and how do you relate to them?
LT: Well, so this is kind of cliché in technology, the whole Tesla versus Edison, where Tesla is seen as the visionary scientist and crazy idea man.
And people love Tesla.
I mean, there are people who name their companies after him.
(Laughter) The other person there is Edison, who is actually often vilified for being kind of pedestrian and is -- I mean, his most famous quote is, "Genius is one percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration."
And I'm in the Edison camp, even if people don't always like him.
Because if you actually compare the two, Tesla has kind of this mind grab these days, but who actually changed the world?
Edison may not have been a nice person, he did a lot of things -- he was maybe not so intellectual, not so visionary.
But I think I'm more of an Edison than a Tesla.
CA: So our theme at TED this week is dreams -- big, bold, audacious dreams.
You're really the antidote to that.
LT: I'm trying to dial it down a bit, yes.
CA: That's good.
(Laughter) We embrace you, we embrace you.
Companies like Google and many others have made, arguably, like, billions of dollars out of your software.
Does that piss you off?
LT: No.
No, it doesn't piss me off for several reasons.
And one of them is, I'm doing fine.
I'm really doing fine.
But the other reason is -- I mean, without doing the whole open source and really letting go thing, Linux would never have been what it is.
And it's brought experiences I don't really enjoy, public talking, but at the same time, this is an experience.
Trust me.
So there's a lot of things going on that make me a very happy man and thinking I did the right choices.
CA: Is the open source idea -- this is, I think we'll end here -- is the open source idea fully realized now in the world, or is there more that it could go, are there more things that it could do?
LT: So, I'm of two minds there.
I think one reason open source works so well in code is that at the end of the day, code tends to be somewhat black and white.
There's often a fairly good way to decide, this is done correctly and this is not done well.
Code either works or it doesn't, which means that there's less room for arguments.
And we have arguments despite this, right?
In many other areas -- I mean, people have talked about open politics and things like that -- and it's really hard sometimes to say that, yes, you can apply the same principles in some other areas just because the black and white turns into not just gray, but different colors.
So, obviously open source in science is making a comeback.
Science was there first.
But then science ended up being pretty closed, with very expensive journals and some of that going on.
And open source is making a comeback in science, with things like arXiv and open journals.
Wikipedia changed the world, too.
So there are other examples, I'm sure there are more to come.
CA: But you're not a visionary, and so it's not up to you to name them.
LT: No.
(Laughter) It's up to you guys to make them, right?
CA: Exactly.
Linus Torvalds, thank you for Linux, thank you for the Internet, thank you for all those Android phones.
Thank you for coming here to TED and revealing so much of yourself.
LT: Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here to talk to you today about a story that we have all been conditioned to believe is not possible.
It's a story about a living, breathing start-up flourishing in an unlikely environment: the United States government.
Now, this start-up is fundamentally beginning to disrupt the way government does business from the inside out.
But before I get there, let's start with the problem.
For me, the problem begins with a number: 137.
137 is the average number of days a veteran has to wait to have benefits processed by the VA.
137 days.
Now, in order to file that application in the first place, she has to navigate over 1,000 different websites and over 900 different call-in numbers, all owned and operated by the United States government.
Now, we live in times of incredible change.
The private sector is constantly changing and improving itself all the time.
For that matter, it's removing every single inconvenience in my life that I could possibly think of.
I could be sitting on my couch in my apartment, and from my phone, I can order a warm, gluten-free meal that can arrive at my door in less than 10 minutes.
But meanwhile, a working mother who depends on food stamps to support her family has to complete an arduous, complicated application which she might not even be able to do online.
And the inability of her to do that same work from her couch means that she might be having to take days or hours off of work that she can't spare.
And this growing dichotomy between the beneficiaries of the tech revolution and those it's left behind is one of the greatest challenges of our time -- (Applause) Because government's failure to deliver digital services that work is disproportionately impacting the very people who need it most.
It's impacting the students trying to go to college, the single mothers trying to get health care, the veterans coming home from battle.
They can't get what they need when they need it.
And for these Americans, government is more than just a presidential election every four years.
Government is a lifeline that provides services they need and depend on and deserve.
Which is, quite frankly, why government needs to get its shit together and catch up.
Just saying.
(Applause) Now, this wasn't always a problem I was passionate about.
When I joined President Obama's campaign in 2008, we brought the tech industry's best practices into politics.
We earned more money, we engaged more volunteers and we earned more votes than any political campaign in history.
We were a cutting-edge start-up that changed the game of politics forever.
So when the President asked a small group of us to bring that very same disruption directly into government, I knew it wasn't going to be easy work, but I was eager and showed up ready to get to work.
Now, on my first day in DC, my first day in government, I walked into the office and they handed me a laptop.
And the laptop was running Windows 98.
(Laughter) I mean, three entire presidential elections had come and gone since the government had updated the operating system on that computer.
Three elections!
Which is when we realized this problem was a whole lot bigger than we ever could have imagined.
Let me paint the picture for you.
The federal government is the largest institution in the world.
It spends over 86 billion dollars a year -- 86 billion -- on federal IT projects.
For context: that is more than the entire venture capital industry spends annually -- on everything.
Now, the problem here is that we the taxpayers are not getting what we pay for, because 94 percent of federal IT projects are over budget or behind schedule.
94 percent!
For those of you keeping score, yes, the number 94 is very close to 100.
(Laughter) There's another problem: 40 percent of those never end up seeing the light of day.
They are completely scrapped or abandoned.
Now, this is a very existentially painful moment for any organization, because it means as government continues to operate as it's programmed to do, failure is nearly inevitable.
And when the status quo is the riskiest option, that means there is simply no other choice than radical disruption.
So, what do we do about it?
How do we fix this?
Well, the irony of all of this is that we actually don't have to look any further than our backyard, because right here in America are the very ideas, the very people, who have swept our world into a radically different place than it was two decades ago.
So what would it look like if it was actually as easy to get student loans or veterans' benefits as it is to order cat food to my house?
What would it look like if there was an easy pathway for the very entrepreneurs and innovators who have disrupted our tech sector to come and disrupt their government?
Well, my friends, here's where we get to talk about some of the exciting new formulas we've discovered for creating change in government.
Enter the United States Digital Service.
The United States Digital Service is a new network of start-ups, a team of teams, organizing themselves across government to create radical change.
The mission of the United States Digital Service is to help government deliver world-class digital services for students, immigrants, children, the elderly -- everybody -- at dramatically lower costs.
We are essentially trying to build a more awesome government, for the people, by the people, today.
We don't care -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Who doesn't want a more awesome government, right?
We don't care about politics.
We care about making government work better, because it's the only one we've got.
(Applause) Now, you can think of our team -- well, it's pretty funny -- you can think of our team a little bit like the Peace Corps meets DARPA meets SEAL Team 6.
We're like the Peace Corps for nerds, but instead of traveling to crazy, interesting, far-off places, you spend a lot of time indoors, behind computers, helping restore the fabric of our democracy.
(Laughter) Now, this team -- our playbook for the United States Digital Service is pretty simple.
The first play is we recruit the very best talent our country has to offer, and recruit them for short tours of duty inside government.
These are the very people who have helped build the products and companies that have made our tech sector amongst the most innovative in the world.
Second, we pair these incredible people from the tech core with the dedicated civil servants already inside government on the ground creating change.
Third, we strategically deploy them in a targeted formation at the most mission-critical, life-changing, important services that government offers.
And finally, we give them massive air cover, from the leadership inside the agencies all the way up to the President himself, to transform these services for the better.
Now, this team is beginning to disrupt how government does business from the inside out.
If you study classic patterns of disruption, one very common pattern is rather simple.
It's to take something that has become routine and standard in one industry and apply it to another where it's a radical departure from the status quo.
Think about what Airbnb took that was normal from hospitality and revolutionized my apartment.
The United States Digital Service is doing exactly that.
We are taking what Silicon Valley and the private sector has learned through a ton of hard work about how to build planetary-scale digital services that delight users at lower cost, and we're applying that to government, where it is a radical departure from the status quo.
Now, the good news is: it's starting to work.
We know this because we can already see the results from some of our early projects, like the rescue effort of Healthcare.gov, when that went off the rails.
Fixing Healthcare.gov was the first place that we ran this play, and today we are taking that same play and scaling it across a large number of government's most important citizen-facing services.
Now, if I can take a moment and brag about the team for a second -- it is the highest concentration of badasses I could have ever dreamed of.
We have top talent from Google, Facebook, Amazon, Twitter and the likes, all on staff today, all choosing to join their government.
And what's incredible is, everybody is as eager and kind as they are intelligent.
And I might add, by the way, over half of us are women.
(Applause) The best way to understand this strategy is actually to walk through a couple of examples of how it's working out in the wild.
I'm going to give you two examples quickly.
The first one is about immigration.
This, my friends, is your typical immigration application.
Yes, you guessed it -- it's almost entirely paper-based.
In the best case, the application takes about six to eight months to process.
It is physically shipped thousands of miles -- thousands of miles! -- between no less than six processing centers.
Now, little story: about a decade ago, the government thought that if it brought this system online, it could save taxpayer dollars and provide a better service, which was a great idea.
Six years and 1.2 billion dollars later, no working product was delivered -- 1.2 billion with a "B."
Now at this point, the agency responsible, US Citizenship and Immigration Services, could have kept pouring money into the failing program.
Sadly, that's what often happens.
That's the status quo today.
But they didn't.
The dedicated civil servants inside the agency decided to stand up and call for change.
We deployed a small team of just six people, and what many people don't know is that's the same size as the rescue effort of Healthcare.gov -- just six people.
And that team jumped in, side-by-side, to support the agency in transitioning this project into more modern business practices, more modern development practices.
Now, in non-tech speak, what that basically means is taking big, multi-year projects and breaking them up into bite-sized chunks, so that way we can reduce the risk and actually start to see results every couple of weeks, instead of waiting in a black box for years.
So within less than three months of our team being on the ground, we were already able to push our first products to production.
The first one, this is the form I-90.
This is used to file for your replacement green card.
Now, for immigrant visa holders, a replacement green card is a big deal.
Your green card is your proof of identification, it's your work authorization, it's the proof that you can be here in this country.
So waiting six months while the government processes the replacement is not cool.
I'm excited to tell you that today, you can now, for the first time, file for a replacement green card entirely online without anyone touching a piece of paper.
It is faster, it is cheaper, and it's a better user experience for the applicant and the government employees alike.
(Applause) Another one, quickly.
Last fall, we just released a brand-new practice civics test.
So as part of becoming a US citizen, you have to pass a civics test.
For anyone who has taken this test, it can be quite the stressful process.
So our team released a very easy, simple-to-use tool in plain language to help people prepare, to help ease their nerves, to help them feel more confident in taking the next step in pursuing their American dream.
Because all of this work, all of this work on immigration, is about taking complicated processes and making them more human.
The other day, one of the dedicated civil servants on the ground said something incredibly profound.
She said that she's never been this hopeful or optimistic about a project in her entire time in government.
And she's been doing this for 30 years.
That is exactly the kind of hope and culture change we are trying to create.
For my second example, I want to bring it back to veterans for a second, and what we are doing to build them a VA that is worthy of their service and their sacrifice.
I'm proud to say that just a few months ago, we released a brand-new beta of a new website, Vets.gov.
Vets.gov is a simple, easy-to-use website that brings all of the online services a veteran needs into one place.
One website, not thousands.
The site is a work in progress, but it's significant progress, because it's designed with the users who matter most: the veterans themselves.
This might sound incredibly obvious, because it should be, but sadly, this isn't normal for government.
Far too often, product decisions are made by committees of stakeholders who do their best to represent the interests of the user, but they're not necessarily the users themselves.
So our team at the VA went out, we looked at the data, we talked to veterans themselves and we started simple and small, with the two most important services that matter most to them: education benefits and disability benefits.
I'm proud to say that they are live on the site today, and as the team continues to streamline more services, they will be ported over here, and the old sites, shut down.
(Applause) To me, this is what change looks like in 2016.
When you walk out of the Oval Office, the first time I was ever there, I noticed a quote the President had embroidered on the rug.
It's the classic JFK quote.
It says, "No problem of human destiny is beyond human beings."
It's true.
We have the tools to solve these problems.
We have the tools to come together as a society, as a country, and to fix this together.
Yes, it's hard.
It's particularly hard when we have to fight, when we have to refuse to succumb to the belief that things won't change.
But in my experience, it's often the hardest things that are the most worth doing, because if we don't do them, who will?
This is on us, all of us, together, because government is not an abstract institution or a concept.
Our government is us.
(Applause) Today, it is no longer a question of if change is possible.
The question is not, "Can we?"
The question is, "Will we?"
Will you?
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was seven years old, some well-meaning adult asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up.
Proudly, I said: "An artist."
"No, you don't," he said, "You can't make a living being an artist!"
My little seven-year-old Picasso dreams were crushed.
But I gathered myself, went off in search of a new dream, eventually settling on being a scientist, perhaps something like the next Albert Einstein.
(Laughter) I have always loved math and science, later, coding.
And so I decided to study computer programming in college.
In my junior year, my computer graphics professor showed us these wonderful short films.
It was the first computer animation any of us had ever seen.
I watched these films in wonder, transfixed, fireworks going off in my head, thinking, "That is what I want to do with my life."
The idea that all the math, science and code I had been learning could come together to create these worlds and characters and stories I connected with, was pure magic for me.
Just two years later, I started working at the place that made those films, Pixar Animation Studios.
It was here I learned how we actually execute those films.
To create our movies, we create a three-dimensional world inside the computer.
We start with a point that makes a line that makes a face that creates characters, or trees and rocks that eventually become a forest.
And because it's a three-dimensional world, we can move a camera around inside that world.
I was fascinated by all of it.
But then I got my first taste of lighting.
Lighting in practice is placing lights inside this three-dimensional world.
I actually have icons of lights I move around in there.
Here you can see I've added a light, I'm turning on the rough version of lighting in our software, turn on shadows and placing the light.
As I place a light, I think about what it might look like in real life, but balance that out with what we need artistically and for the story.
So it might look like this at first, but as we adjust this and move that in weeks of work, in rough form it might look like this, and in final form, like this.
There's this moment in lighting that made me fall utterly in love with it.
It's where we go from this to this.
It's the moment where all the pieces come together, and suddenly the world comes to life as if it's an actual place that exists.
This moment never gets old, especially for that little seven-year-old girl that wanted to be an artist.
As I learned to light, I learned about using light to help tell story, to set the time of day, to create the mood, to guide the audience's eye, how to make a character look appealing or stand out in a busy set.
Did you see WALL-E?
(Laughter) There he is.
As you can see, we can create any world that we want inside the computer.
We can make a world with monsters, with robots that fall in love, we can even make pigs fly.
(Laughter) While this is an incredible thing, this untethered artistic freedom, it can create chaos.
It can create unbelievable worlds, unbelievable movement, things that are jarring to the audience.
So to combat this, we tether ourselves with science.
We use science and the world we know as a backbone, to ground ourselves in something relatable and recognizable.
"Finding Nemo" is an excellent example of this.
A major portion of the movie takes place underwater.
But how do you make it look underwater?
In early research and development, we took a clip of underwater footage and recreated it in the computer.
Then we broke it back down to see which elements make up that underwater look.
One of the most critical elements was how the light travels through the water.
So we coded up a light that mimics this physics -- first, the visibility of the water, and then what happens with the color.
Objects close to the eye have their full, rich colors.
As light travels deeper into the water, we lose the red wavelengths, then the green wavelengths, leaving us with blue at the far depths.
In this clip you can see two other important elements.
The first is the surge and swell, or the invisible underwater current that pushes the bits of particulate around in the water.
The second is the caustics.
These are the ribbons of light, like you might see on the bottom of a pool, that are created when the sun bends through the crests of the ripples and waves on the ocean's surface.
Here we have the fog beams.
These give us color depth cues, but also tells which direction is up in shots where we don't see the water surface.
The other really cool thing you can see here is that we lit that particulate only with the caustics, so that as it goes in and out of those ribbons of light, it appears and disappears, lending a subtle, magical sparkle to the underwater.
You can see how we're using the science -- the physics of water, light and movement -- to tether that artistic freedom.
But we are not beholden to it.
We considered each of these elements and which ones had to be scientifically accurate and which ones we could push and pull to suit the story and the mood.
We realized early on that color was one we had some leeway with.
So here's a traditionally colored underwater scene.
But here, we can take Sydney Harbor and push it fairly green to suit the sad mood of what's happening.
In this scene, it's really important we see deep into the underwater, so we understand what the East Australian Current is, that the turtles are diving into and going on this roller coaster ride.
So we pushed the visibility of the water well past anything you would ever see in real life.
Because in the end, we are not trying to recreate the scientifically correct real world, we're trying to create a believable world, one the audience can immerse themselves in to experience the story.
We use science to create something wonderful.
We use story and artistic touch to get us to a place of wonder.
This guy, WALL-E, is a great example of that.
He finds beauty in the simplest things.
But when he came in to lighting, we knew we had a big problem.
We got so geeked-out on making WALL-E this convincing robot, that we made his binoculars practically optically perfect.
(Laughter) His binoculars are one of the most critical acting devices he has.
He doesn't have a face or even traditional dialogue, for that matter.
So the animators were heavily dependent on the binoculars to sell his acting and emotions.
We started lighting and we realized the triple lenses inside his binoculars were a mess of reflections.
He was starting to look glassy-eyed.
(Laughter) Now, glassy-eyed is a fundamentally awful thing when you are trying to convince an audience that a robot has a personality and he's capable of falling in love.
So we went to work on these optically perfect binoculars, trying to find a solution that would maintain his true robot materials but solve this reflection problem.
So we started with the lenses.
Here's the flat-front lens, we have a concave lens and a convex lens.
And here you see all three together, showing us all these reflections.
We tried turning them down, we tried blocking them, nothing was working.
You can see here, sometimes we needed something specific reflected in his eyes -- usually Eve.
So we couldn't just use some faked abstract image on the lenses.
So here we have Eve on the first lens, we put Eve on the second lens, it's not working.
We turn it down, it's still not working.
And then we have our eureka moment.
We add a light to WALL-E that accidentally leaks into his eyes.
You can see it light up these gray aperture blades.
Suddenly, those aperture blades are poking through that reflection the way nothing else has.
Now we recognize WALL-E as having an eye.
As humans we have the white of our eye, the colored iris and the black pupil.
Now WALL-E has the black of an eye, the gray aperture blades and the black pupil.
Suddenly, WALL-E feels like he has a soul, like there's a character with emotion inside.
Later in the movie towards the end, WALL-E loses his personality, essentially going dead.
This is the perfect time to bring back that glassy-eyed look.
In the next scene, WALL-E comes back to life.
We bring that light back to bring the aperture blades back, and he returns to that sweet, soulful robot we've come to love.
(Video) WALL-E: Eva?
Danielle Feinberg: There's a beauty in these unexpected moments -- when you find the key to unlocking a robot's soul, the moment when you discover what you want to do with your life.
The jellyfish in "Finding Nemo" was one of those moments for me.
There are scenes in every movie that struggle to come together.
This was one of those scenes.
The director had a vision for this scene based on some wonderful footage of jellyfish in the South Pacific.
As we went along, we were floundering.
The reviews with the director turned from the normal look-and-feel conversation into more and more questions about numbers and percentages.
Maybe because unlike normal, we were basing it on something in real life, or maybe just because we had lost our way.
But it had become about using our brain without our eyes, the science without the art.
That scientific tether was strangling the scene.
But even through all the frustrations, I still believed it could be beautiful.
So when it came in to lighting, I dug in.
As I worked to balance the blues and the pinks, the caustics dancing on the jellyfish bells, the undulating fog beams, something promising began to appear.
I came in one morning and checked the previous night's work.
And I got excited.
And then I showed it to the lighting director and she got excited.
Soon, I was showing to the director in a dark room full of 50 people.
In director review, you hope you might get some nice words, then you get some notes and fixes, generally.
And then, hopefully, you get a final, signaling to move on to the next stage.
I gave my intro, and I played the jellyfish scene.
And the director was silent for an uncomfortably long amount of time.
Just long enough for me to think, "Oh no, this is doomed."
And then he started clapping.
And then the production designer started clapping.
And then the whole room was clapping.
This is the moment that I live for in lighting.
The moment where it all comes together and we get a world that we can believe in.
We use math, science and code to create these amazing worlds.
We use storytelling and art to bring them to life.
It's this interweaving of art and science that elevates the world to a place of wonder, a place with soul, a place we can believe in, a place where the things you imagine can become real -- and a world where a girl suddenly realizes not only is she a scientist, but also an artist.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Cancer affects all of us -- especially the ones that come back over and over again, the highly invasive and drug-resistant ones, the ones that defy medical treatment, even when we throw our best drugs at them.
Engineering at the molecular level, working at the smallest of scales, can provide exciting new ways to fight the most aggressive forms of cancer.
Cancer is a very clever disease.
There are some forms of cancer, which, fortunately, we've learned how to address relatively well with known and established drugs and surgery.
But there are some forms of cancer that don't respond to these approaches, and the tumor survives or comes back, even after an onslaught of drugs.
We can think of these very aggressive forms of cancer as kind of supervillains in a comic book.
They're clever, they're adaptable, and they're very good at staying alive.
And, like most supervillains these days, their superpowers come from a genetic mutation.
The genes that are modified inside these tumor cells can enable and encode for new and unimagined modes of survival, allowing the cancer cell to live through even our best chemotherapy treatments.
One example is a trick in which a gene allows a cell, even as the drug approaches the cell, to push the drug out, before the drug can have any effect.
Imagine -- the cell effectively spits out the drug.
This is just one example of the many genetic tricks in the bag of our supervillain, cancer.
All due to mutant genes.
So, we have a supervillain with incredible superpowers.
And we need a new and powerful mode of attack.
Actually, we can turn off a gene.
The key is a set of molecules known as siRNA.
siRNA are short sequences of genetic code that guide a cell to block a certain gene.
Each siRNA molecule can turn off a specific gene inside the cell.
For many years since its discovery, scientists have been very excited about how we can apply these gene blockers in medicine.
But, there is a problem.
siRNA works well inside the cell.
But if it gets exposed to the enzymes that reside in our bloodstream or our tissues, it degrades within seconds.
It has to be packaged, protected through its journey through the body on its way to the final target inside the cancer cell.
So, here's our strategy.
First, we'll dose the cancer cell with siRNA, the gene blocker, and silence those survival genes, and then we'll whop it with a chemo drug.
But how do we carry that out?
Using molecular engineering, we can actually design a superweapon that can travel through the bloodstream.
It has to be tiny enough to get through the bloodstream, it's got to be small enough to penetrate the tumor tissue, and it's got to be tiny enough to be taken up inside the cancer cell.
To do this job well, it has to be about one one-hundredth the size of a human hair.
Let's take a closer look at how we can build this nanoparticle.
First, let's start with the nanoparticle core.
It's a tiny capsule that contains the chemotherapy drug.
This is the poison that will actually end the tumor cell's life.
Around this core, we'll wrap a very thin, nanometers-thin blanket of siRNA.
This is our gene blocker.
Because siRNA is strongly negatively charged, we can protect it with a nice, protective layer of positively charged polymer.
The two oppositely charged molecules stick together through charge attraction, and that provides us with a protective layer that prevents the siRNA from degrading in the bloodstream.
We're almost done.
(Laughter) But there is one more big obstacle we have to think about.
In fact, it may be the biggest obstacle of all.
How do we deploy this superweapon?
I mean, every good weapon needs to be targeted, we have to target this superweapon to the supervillain cells that reside in the tumor.
But our bodies have a natural immune-defense system: cells that reside in the bloodstream and pick out things that don't belong, so that it can destroy or eliminate them.
And guess what? Our nanoparticle is considered a foreign object.
We have to sneak our nanoparticle past the tumor defense system.
We have to get it past this mechanism of getting rid of the foreign object by disguising it.
So we add one more negatively charged layer around this nanoparticle, which serves two purposes.
First, this outer layer is one of the naturally charged, highly hydrated polysaccharides that resides in our body.
It creates a cloud of water molecules around the nanoparticle that gives us an invisibility cloaking effect.
This invisibility cloak allows the nanoparticle to travel through the bloodstream long and far enough to reach the tumor, without getting eliminated by the body.
Second, this layer contains molecules which bind specifically to our tumor cell.
Once bound, the cancer cell takes up the nanoparticle, and now we have our nanoparticle inside the cancer cell and ready to deploy.
Alright! I feel the same way. Let's go!
(Applause) The siRNA is deployed first.
It acts for hours, giving enough time to silence and block those survival genes.
We have now disabled those genetic superpowers.
What remains is a cancer cell with no special defenses.
Then, the chemotherapy drug comes out of the core and destroys the tumor cell cleanly and efficiently.
With sufficient gene blockers, we can address many different kinds of mutations, allowing the chance to sweep out tumors, without leaving behind any bad guys.
So, how does our strategy work?
We've tested these nanostructure particles in animals using a highly aggressive form of triple-negative breast cancer.
This triple-negative breast cancer exhibits the gene that spits out cancer drug as soon as it is delivered.
Usually, doxorubicin -- let's call it "dox" -- is the cancer drug that is the first line of treatment for breast cancer.
So, we first treated our animals with a dox core, dox only.
The tumor slowed their rate of growth, but they still grew rapidly, doubling in size over a period of two weeks.
Then, we tried our combination superweapon.
A nanolayer particle with siRNA against the chemo pump, plus, we have the dox in the core.
And look -- we found that not only did the tumors stop growing, they actually decreased in size and were eliminated in some cases.
The tumors were actually regressing.
(Applause) What's great about this approach is that it can be personalized.
We can add many different layers of siRNA to address different mutations and tumor defense mechanisms.
And we can put different drugs into the nanoparticle core.
As doctors learn how to test patients and understand certain tumor genetic types, they can help us determine which patients can benefit from this strategy and which gene blockers we can use.
Ovarian cancer strikes a special chord with me.
It is a very aggressive cancer, in part because it's discovered at very late stages, when it's highly advanced and there are a number of genetic mutations.
After the first round of chemotherapy, this cancer comes back for 75 percent of patients.
And it usually comes back in a drug-resistant form.
High-grade ovarian cancer is one of the biggest supervillains out there.
And we're now directing our superweapon toward its defeat.
As a researcher, I usually don't get to work with patients.
But I recently met a mother who is an ovarian cancer survivor, Mimi, and her daughter, Paige.
I was deeply inspired by the optimism and strength that both mother and daughter displayed and by their story of courage and support.
At this event, we spoke about the different technologies directed at cancer.
And Mimi was in tears as she explained how learning about these efforts gives her hope for future generations, including her own daughter.
This really touched me.
It's not just about building really elegant science.
It's about changing people's lives.
It's about understanding the power of engineering on the scale of molecules.
I know that as students like Paige move forward in their careers, they'll open new possibilities in addressing some of the big health problems in the world -- including ovarian cancer, neurological disorders, infectious disease -- just as chemical engineering has found a way to open doors for me, and has provided a way of engineering on the tiniest scale, that of molecules, to heal on the human scale.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence, and it is my job, my responsibility, as an astronomer to remind people that alien hypotheses should always be a last resort.
Now, I want to tell you a story about that.
It involves data from a NASA mission, ordinary people and one of the most extraordinary stars in our galaxy.
It began in 2009 with the launch of NASA's Kepler mission.
Kepler's main scientific objective was to find planets outside of our solar system.
It did this by staring at a single field in the sky, this one, with all the tiny boxes.
And in this one field, it monitored the brightness of over 150,000 stars continuously for four years, taking a data point every 30 minutes.
It was looking for what astronomers call a transit.
This is when the planet's orbit is aligned in our line of sight, just so that the planet crosses in front of a star.
And when this happens, it blocks out a tiny bit of starlight, which you can see as a dip in this curve.
And so the team at NASA had developed very sophisticated computers to search for transits in all the Kepler data.
At the same time of the first data release, astronomers at Yale were wondering an interesting thing: What if computers missed something?
And so we launched the citizen science project called Planet Hunters to have people look at the same data.
The human brain has an amazing ability for pattern recognition, sometimes even better than a computer.
However, there was a lot of skepticism around this.
My colleague, Debra Fischer, founder of the Planet Hunters project, said that people at the time were saying, "You're crazy. There's no way that a computer will miss a signal."
And so it was on, the classic human versus machine gamble.
And if we found one planet, we would be thrilled.
When I joined the team four years ago, we had already found a couple.
And today, with the help of over 300,000 science enthusiasts, we have found dozens, and we've also found one of the most mysterious stars in our galaxy.
So to understand this, let me show you what a normal transit in Kepler data looks like.
On this graph on the left-hand side you have the amount of light, and on the bottom is time.
The white line is light just from the star, what astronomers call a light curve.
Now, when a planet transits a star, it blocks out a little bit of this light, and the depth of this transit reflects the size of the object itself.
And so, for example, let's take Jupiter.
Planets don't get much bigger than Jupiter.
Jupiter will make a one percent drop in a star's brightness.
Earth, on the other hand, is 11 times smaller than Jupiter, and the signal is barely visible in the data.
So back to our mystery.
A few years ago, Planet Hunters were sifting through data looking for transits, and they spotted a mysterious signal coming from the star KIC 8462852.
The observations in May of 2009 were the first they spotted, and they started talking about this in the discussion forums.
They said and object like Jupiter would make a drop like this in the star's light, but they were also saying it was giant.
You see, transits normally only last for a few hours, and this one lasted for almost a week.
They were also saying that it looks asymmetric, meaning that instead of the clean, U-shaped dip that we saw with Jupiter, it had this strange slope that you can see on the left side.
This seemed to indicate that whatever was getting in the way and blocking the starlight was not circular like a planet.
There are few more dips that happened, but for a couple of years, it was pretty quiet.
And then in March of 2011, we see this.
The star's light drops by a whole 15 percent, and this is huge compared to a planet, which would only make a one percent drop.
We described this feature as both smooth and clean.
It also is asymmetric, having a gradual dimming that lasts almost a week, and then it snaps right back up to normal in just a matter of days.
And again, after this, not much happens until February of 2013.
Things start to get really crazy.
There is a huge complex of dips in the light curve that appear, and they last for like a hundred days, all the way up into the Kepler mission's end.
These dips have variable shapes.
Some are very sharp, and some are broad, and they also have variable durations.
Some last just for a day or two, and some for more than a week.
And there's also up and down trends within some of these dips, almost like several independent events were superimposed on top of each other.
And at this time, this star drops in its brightness over 20 percent.
This means that whatever is blocking its light has an area of over 1,000 times the area of our planet Earth.
This is truly remarkable.
And so the citizen scientists, when they saw this, they notified the science team that they found something weird enough that it might be worth following up.
And so when the science team looked at it, we're like, "Yeah, there's probably just something wrong with the data."
But we looked really, really, really hard, and the data were good.
And so what was happening had to be astrophysical, meaning that something in space was getting in the way and blocking starlight.
And so at this point, we set out to learn everything we could about the star to see if we could find any clues to what was going on.
And the citizen scientists who helped us in this discovery, they joined along for the ride watching science in action firsthand.
First, somebody said, you know, what if this star was very young and it still had the cloud of material it was born from surrounding it.
And then somebody else said, well, what if the star had already formed planets, and two of these planets had collided, similar to the Earth-Moon forming event.
Well, both of these theories could explain part of the data, but the difficulties were that the star showed no signs of being young, and there was no glow from any of the material that was heated up by the star's light, and you would expect this if the star was young or if there was a collision and a lot of dust was produced.
And so somebody else said, well, how about a huge swarm of comets that are passing by this star in a very elliptical orbit?
Well, it ends up that this is actually consistent with our observations.
But I agree, it does feel a little contrived.
You see, it would take hundreds of comets to reproduce what we're observing.
And these are only the comets that happen to pass between us and the star.
And so in reality, we're talking thousands to tens of thousands of comets.
But of all the bad ideas we had, this one was the best.
And so we went ahead and published our findings.
Now, let me tell you, this was one of the hardest papers I ever wrote.
Scientists are meant to publish results, and this situation was far from that.
And so we decided to give it a catchy title, and we called it: "Where's The Flux?"
I will let you work out the acronym.
(Laughter) So this isn't the end of the story.
Around the same time I was writing this paper, I met with a colleague of mine, Jason Wright, and he was also writing a paper on Kepler data.
And he was saying that with Kepler's extreme precision, it could actually detect alien megastructures around stars, but it didn't.
And then I showed him this weird data that our citizen scientists had found, and he said to me, "Aw crap, Tabby.
Now I have to rewrite my paper."
So yes, the natural explanations were weak, and we were curious now.
So we had to find a way to rule out aliens.
So together, we convinced a colleague of ours who works on SETI, the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, that this would be an extraordinary target to pursue.
We wrote a proposal to observe the star with the world's largest radio telescope at the Green Bank Observatory.
A couple months later, news of this proposal got leaked to the press and now there are thousands of articles, over 10,000 articles, on this star alone.
And if you search Google Images, this is what you'll find.
Now, you may be wondering, OK, Tabby, well, how do aliens actually explain this light curve?
OK, well, imagine a civilization that's much more advanced than our own.
In this hypothetical circumstance, this civilization would have exhausted the energy supply of their home planet, so where could they get more energy?
Well, they have a host star just like we have a sun, and so if they were able to capture more energy from this star, then that would solve their energy needs.
So they would go and build huge structures.
These giant megastructures, like ginormous solar panels, are called Dyson spheres.
This image above are lots of artists' impressions of Dyson spheres.
It's really hard to provide perspective on the vastness of these things, but you can think of it this way.
The Earth-Moon distance is a quarter of a million miles.
The simplest element on one of these structures is 100 times that size.
They're enormous.
And now imagine one of these structures in motion around a star.
You can see how it would produce anomalies in the data such as uneven, unnatural looking dips.
But it remains that even alien megastructures cannot defy the laws of physics.
You see, anything that uses a lot of energy is going to produce heat, and we don't observe this.
But it could be something as simple as they're just reradiating it away in another direction, just not at Earth.
Another idea that's one of my personal favorites is that we had just witnessed an interplanetary space battle and the catastrophic destruction of a planet.
Now, I admit that this would produce a lot of dust that we don't observe.
But if we're already invoking aliens in this explanation, then who is to say they didn't efficiently clean up all this mess for recycling purposes?
(Laughter) You can see how this quickly captures your imagination.
Well, there you have it.
We're in a situation that could unfold to be a natural phenomenon we don't understand or an alien technology we don't understand.
Personally, as a scientist, my money is on the natural explanation.
But don't get me wrong, I do think it would be awesome to find aliens.
Either way, there is something new and really interesting to discover.
So what happens next?
We need to continue to observe this star to learn more about what's happening.
But professional astronomers, like me, we have limited resources for this kind of thing, and Kepler is on to a different mission.
And I'm happy to say that once again, citizen scientists have come in and saved the day.
You see, this time, amateur astronomers with their backyard telescopes stepped up immediately and started observing this star nightly at their own facilities, and I am so excited to see what they find.
What's amazing to me is that this star would have never been found by computers because we just weren't looking for something like this.
And what's more exciting is that there's more data to come.
There are new missions that are coming up that are observing millions more stars all over the sky.
And just think: What will it mean when we find another star like this?
And what will it mean if we don't find another star like this?
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to imagine that you get a text from a friend, and it reads, "You will not believe what just happened.
I'm so mad right now."
So you do the dutiful thing as a friend, and you ask for details, and they tell you a story about what happened to them at the gym or at work or on their date last night.
You listen, and you try to understand why they're so mad.
Maybe you even secretly judge whether or not they should be so mad.
(Laughter) Maybe you even offer some suggestions.
Now, in that moment, you are doing essentially what I get to do every day because I'm an anger researcher, and as an anger researcher, I spend a good part of my professional life - who am I kidding, also my personal life - (Laughter) studying why people get mad.
I study the types of thoughts they have when they get mad and even what they do then, whether it's getting into fights or breaking things or even yelling at people in all caps on the Internet.
(Laughter) As you can imagine, when people hear I'm an anger researcher, they want to talk to me about their anger and share with me their anger stories.
It's not because they need a therapist, though that does sometimes happen, it's really because anger is universal.
It's something we all feel, and it's something they can relate to.
We've been feeling it since the first few months of life, when we didn't get what we wanted and our cries of protests, things like, "What do you mean, you won't pick up the rattle, dad?
I want it!"
(Laughter) We feel it throughout our teenage years, as my mom can certainly attest to with me.
Sorry, mom.
We feel it to the very end.
In fact, anger has been with us at some of the worst moments of our lives; it's a natural and expected part of our grief.
But it's also been with us at some of the best moments of our lives, with those special occasions like weddings and vacations often marred by these everyday frustrations - bad weather, travel delays - that feel horrible in the moment but then are ultimately forgotten when things go okay.
So I have many conversations with people about their anger, and through those conversations, I've learned that many people - and I bet many people here right now - you see anger as a problem.
You see the way it interferes in your life, the way it damages relationships, maybe even in a way that's scary.
And while I get all of that, I see anger a little differently, and today I want to tell you something important about your anger, and it's this: Anger is a powerful and healthy force in your life.
It's good that you feel it. You need to feel it.
But to understand all of that, we have to back up and talk about why we get mad in the first place.
A lot of this goes back to the work of an anger researcher named Dr. Jerry Deffenbacher, who wrote about this back in 1996 in a book chapter on how to deal with problematic anger.
For most of us - and I bet most of you - it feels as simple as this: I get mad when I'm provoked. Right? You hear it in the language people use.
They say things like, "It makes me so mad when people drive this slow."
Or "I got mad because she left the milk out again."
Or my favorite: "I don't have an anger problem; people just need to stop messing with me."
(Laughter) Now, in the spirit of better understanding those types of provocations, I ask a lot of people, including my friends and colleagues and even family, "What are the things that really get to you? What makes you mad?"
And by the way, one of the advantages of being an anger researcher is that I've spent more than a decade generating a comprehensive list of all the things that really irritate my colleagues. Right?
Just in case I need it.
(Laughter) But their answers are fascinating because they say things like, "When my sports team loses," "People who chew too loudly."
And it's surprisingly common, by the way.
(Laughter) "People who walk too slowly." That one's mine.
And of course, roundabouts. Right? Roundabouts.
(Laughter) I can tell you honestly, there is no rage like roundabout rage.
(Laughter) Sometimes their answers aren't minor at all.
Sometimes they talk about racism and sexism and bullying and environmental destruction, big global problems we all face.
But sometimes, their answers are very specific, maybe even oddly specific.
"That wet line you get across your shirt when you accidentally lean against the counter of a public bathroom."
(Laughter) Yeah, super gross, right?
Or, "Flash drives - there's only two ways to plug them in, so why does it always take me three tries?"
(Laughter) Whether it's minor or major, whether it's general or specific, we can look at these examples, and we can tease out some common themes.
We get angry in situations that are unpleasant, that feel unfair, where our goals are blocked, that could have been avoided, and that leave us feeling powerless.
This is a recipe for anger, but you can also tell that anger is probably not the only thing we're feeling in these situations - right?
Anger doesn't happen in a vacuum.
We can feel angry at the same time that we're scared or sad or feeling a host of other emotions.
But here's the thing.
These provocations - they aren't making us mad.
At least not on their own, and we know that because if they were, we'd all get angry over the same things, and we don't.
The reasons I get angry are different than the reasons you get angry, so there's got to be something else going on.
What is that something else?
Well, we know what we're doing and feeling at the moment of that provocation matters.
We call this the pre-anger state. Are you hungry, are you tired?
Are you anxious about something else, are you running late for something?
When you're feeling those things, those provocations feel that much worse.
But what matters the most is not the provocation, it's not the pre-anger state, it's this: it's how we interpret that provocation, it's how we make sense of it in our lives.
When something happens to us, we first decide: is this good or bad; is it fair or unfair; is it blameworthy; is it punishable?
That's primary appraisal, it's when you evaluate the event itself.
We decide what it means in the context of our lives, and then, once we've done that, we decide how bad it is.
That's secondary appraisal.
We say, "Is this the worst thing that's ever happened, or can I cope with this?"
To illustrate that, I want you to imagine you are driving somewhere.
Before I go any further, I should tell you if I were an evil genius, and I wanted to create a situation that was going to make you mad, that situation would look a lot like driving.
(Laughter) It's true. You are, by definition, on your way somewhere, so everything that happens - traffic, other drivers, road construction - it feels like it's blocking your goals.
There are all these written and unwritten rules of the road, and those rules are routinely violated right in front of you, usually without consequence.
And who's violating those rules?
Anonymous others, people you will never see again, making them a very easy target for your wrath.
(Laughter) So you're driving somewhere, thus teed up to be angry, and the person in front of you is driving well below the speed limit.
It's frustrating because you can't really see why they're driving so slow.
Right? That's primary appraisal.
You've looked at this and you said, "It's bad and it's blameworthy."
But maybe you also decide it's not that big a deal.
You're not in a hurry, doesn't matter. That's secondary appraisal.
You don't get angry.
But now imagine you're on your way to a job interview.
What that person is doing - it hasn't changed. Right?
So, primary appraisal doesn't change: still bad, still blameworthy.
But your ability to cope with it sure does because all of a sudden, you're going to be late to that job interview.
All of a sudden, you are not going to get your dream job, the one that was going to give you piles and piles of money - right?
(Laughter) Somebody else is going to get your dream job, and you're going to be broke.
You're going to be destitute.
You might as well stop now, turn around, move in with your parents.
(Laughter) Why? Because of this person in front of me.
Scratch that; this is not a person. This is a monster.
(Laughter) And this monster is here just to ruin your life.
(Laughter) Now, that thought process, it's called catastrophizing, the one where we make the worst of things.
It's one of the primary types of thoughts that we know is associated with chronic anger.
But there's a couple of others.
Misattributing causation.
Angry people tend to put blame where it doesn't belong, not just on people, but actually inanimate objects as well.
If you think that sounds ridiculous, think about the last time you lost your car keys, and you said, "Where did those car keys go?"
Because you know they ran off on their own.
(Laughter) They tend to overgeneralize. They use words like always, never, every.
"This always happens to me." "I never get what I want."
Or, "I hit every stoplight on the way here today."
Demandingness - they put their own needs ahead of the needs of others.
"I don't care why this person is driving so slow.
They need to speed up or move over so I can get to this job interview."
And finally, inflammatory labeling.
They call people fools, idiots, monsters, or a whole bunch of things I've been told not to say in this TED talk.
(Laughter) For a long time, psychologists have referred to these as cognitive distortions or even irrational beliefs, and yes, sometimes they are irrational.
Maybe even most of the time.
But sometimes, these thoughts are totally rational.
There is unfairness in the world.
There are cruel, selfish people, and it's not only okay to be angry when we're treated poorly, it's right to be angry when we're treated poorly.
If there's one thing I want you to remember from my talk today, it's this: Your anger exists in you as an emotion because it offered your ancestors, both human and non human, with an evolutionary advantage.
Just as your fear alerts you to danger, your anger alerts you to injustice.
It's one of the ways your brain communicates to you that you have had enough.
What's more, it energizes you to confront that injustice.
Think for a second about the last time you got mad.
Your heart rate increased, your breathing increased, you started to sweat.
That's your sympathetic nervous system, or fight-or-flight system, kicking in to offer you the energy you need to respond.
And that's just the stuff you noticed.
At the same time, your digestive system slowed down so you can conserve energy.
That's why your mouth went dry.
Your blood vessels dilated to get blood to your extremities.
That's why your face went red.
It's all part of this complex pattern of physiological experiences that exist today because they helped your ancestors deal with cruel and unforgiving forces of nature.
The problem is that the thing your ancestors did to deal with their anger, to physically fight, they're no longer reasonable or appropriate.
You can't and you shouldn't swing a club every time you're provoked.
(Laughter) But here's the good news.
You are capable of something your non-human ancestors weren't capable of, and that is the capacity to regulate your emotions.
Even when you want to lash out, you can stop yourself, and you can channel that anger into something more productive.
So often when we talk about anger, we talk about how to keep from getting angry.
We tell people to calm down or relax; we even tell people to let it go.
All of that assumes that anger is bad, and that it's wrong to feel it.
But instead, I like to think of anger as a motivator.
The same way your thirst motivates you to get a drink of water, the same way your hunger motivates you to get a bite to eat, your anger can motivate you to respond to injustice.
Because we don't have to think too hard to find things we should be mad about.
When we go back to the beginning, yes, some of those things are silly and not worth getting angry over, but racism, sexism, bullying, environmental destruction - those things are real, those things are terrible, and the only way to fix them is to get mad first, and then channel that anger into fighting back.
You don't have to fight back with aggression or hostility or violence.
There are infinite ways that you can express your anger.
You can protest; you can write letters to the editor; you can donate to and volunteer for causes.
You can create art; you can create literature; you can create poetry and music.
You can create a community that cares for one another and does not allow those atrocities to happen.
So the next time you feel yourself getting angry, instead of trying to turn it off, I hope you'll listen to what that anger is telling you, and then I hope you'll channel it into something positive and productive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
People returning to work after a career break: I call them relaunchers.
These are people who have taken career breaks for elder care, for childcare reasons, pursuing a personal interest or a personal health issue.
Closely related are career transitioners of all kinds: veterans, military spouses, retirees coming out of retirement or repatriating expats.
Returning to work after a career break is hard because of a disconnect between the employers and the relaunchers.
Employers can view hiring people with a gap on their resume as a high-risk proposition, and individuals on career break can have doubts about their abilities to relaunch their careers, especially if they've been out for a long time.
This disconnect is a problem that I'm trying to help solve.
Now, successful relaunchers are everywhere and in every field.
This is Sami Kafala.
He's a nuclear physicist in the UK who took a five-year career break to be home with his five children.
The Singapore press recently wrote about nurses returning to work after long career breaks.
And speaking of long career breaks, this is Mimi Kahn.
She's a social worker in Orange County, California, who returned to work in a social services organization after a 25-year career break.
That's the longest career break that I'm aware of.
Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor took a five-year career break early in her career.
And this is Tracy Shapiro, who took a 13-year career break.
Tracy answered a call for essays by the Today Show from people who were trying to return to work but having a difficult time of it.
Tracy wrote in that she was a mom of five who loved her time at home, but she had gone through a divorce and needed to return to work, plus she really wanted to bring work back into her life because she loved working.
Tracy was doing what so many of us do when we feel like we've put in a good day in the job search.
She was looking for a finance or accounting role, and she had just spent the last nine months very diligently researching companies online and applying for jobs with no results.
I met Tracy in June of 2011, when the Today Show asked me if I could work with her to see if I could help her turn things around.
The first thing I told Tracy was she had to get out of the house.
I told her she had to go public with her job search and tell everyone she knew about her interest in returning to work.
I also told her, "You are going to have a lot of conversations that don't go anywhere.
Expect that, and don't be discouraged by it.
There will be a handful that ultimately lead to a job opportunity."
I'll tell you what happened with Tracy in a little bit, but I want to share with you a discovery that I made when I was returning to work after my own career break of 11 years out of the full-time workforce.
And that is, that people's view of you is frozen in time.
What I mean by this is, when you start to get in touch with people and you get back in touch with those people from the past, the people with whom you worked or went to school, they are going to remember you as you were before your career break.
And that's even if your sense of self has diminished over time, as happens with so many of us the farther removed we are from our professional identities.
So for example, you might think of yourself as someone who looks like this.
This is me, crazy after a day of driving around in my minivan.
Or here I am in the kitchen.
But those people from the past, they don't know about any of this.
They only remember you as you were, and it's a great confidence boost to be back in touch with these people and hear their enthusiasm about your interest in returning to work.
There's one more thing I remember vividly from my own career break.
And that was that I hardly kept up with the business news.
My background is in finance, and I hardly kept up with any news when I was home caring for my four young children.
So I was afraid I'd go into an interview and start talking about a company that didn't exist anymore.
So I had to resubscribe to the Wall Street Journal and read it for a good six months cover to cover before I felt like I had a handle on what was going on in the business world again.
I believe relaunchers are a gem of the workforce, and here's why.
Think about our life stage: for those of us who took career breaks for childcare reasons, we have fewer or no maternity leaves.
We did that already.
We have fewer spousal or partner job relocations.
We're in a more settled time of life.
We have great work experience.
We have a more mature perspective.
We're not trying to find ourselves at an employer's expense.
Plus we have an energy, an enthusiasm about returning to work precisely because we've been away from it for a while.
On the flip side, I speak with employers, and here are two concerns that employers have about hiring relaunchers.
The first one is, employers are worried that relaunchers are technologically obsolete.
Now, I can tell you, having been technologically obsolete myself at one point, that it's a temporary condition.
I had done my financial analysis so long ago that I used Lotus 1-2-3.
I don't know if anyone can even remember back that far, but I had to relearn it on Excel.
It actually wasn't that hard. A lot of the commands are the same.
I found PowerPoint much more challenging, but now I use PowerPoint all the time.
I tell relaunchers that employers expect them to come to the table with a working knowledge of basic office management software.
And if they're not up to speed, then it's their responsibility to get there.
And they do.
The second area of concern that employers have about relaunchers is they're worried that relaunchers don't know what they want to do.
I tell relaunchers that they need to do the hard work to figure out whether their interests and skills have changed or have not changed while they have been on career break.
That's not the employer's job.
It's the relauncher's responsibility to demonstrate to the employer where they can add the most value.
Back in 2010 I started noticing something.
I had been tracking return to work programs since 2008, and in 2010, I started noticing the use of a short-term paid work opportunity, whether it was called an internship or not, but an internship-like experience, as a way for professionals to return to work.
I saw Goldman Sachs and Sara Lee start corporate reentry internship programs.
I saw a returning engineer, a nontraditional reentry candidate, apply for an entry-level internship program in the military, and then get a permanent job afterward.
I saw two universities integrate internships into mid-career executive education programs.
So I wrote a report about what I was seeing, and it became this article for Harvard Business Review called "The 40-Year-Old Intern."
I have to thank the editors there for that title, and also for this artwork where you can see the 40-year-old intern in the midst of all the college interns.
And then, courtesy of Fox Business News, they called the concept "The 50-Year-Old Intern."
(Laughter) So five of the biggest financial services companies have reentry internship programs for returning finance professionals.
And at this point, hundreds of people have participated.
These internships are paid, and the people who move on to permanent roles are commanding competitive salaries.
And now, seven of the biggest engineering companies are piloting reentry internship programs for returning engineers as part of an initiative with the Society of Women Engineers.
Now, why are companies embracing the reentry internship?
Because the internship allows the employer to base their hiring decision on an actual work sample instead of a series of interviews, and the employer does not have to make that permanent hiring decision until the internship period is over.
This testing out period removes the perceived risk that some managers attach to hiring relaunchers, and they are attracting excellent candidates who are turning into great hires.
Think about how far we have come.
Before this, most employers were not interested in engaging with relaunchers at all.
But now, not only are programs being developed specifically with relaunchers in mind, but you can't even apply for these programs unless you have a gap on your résumé.
This is the mark of real change, of true institutional shift, because if we can solve this problem for relaunchers, we can solve it for other career transitioners too.
In fact, an employer just told me that their veterans return to work program is based on their reentry internship program.
And there's no reason why there can't be a retiree internship program.
Different pool, same concept.
So let me tell you what happened with Tracy Shapiro.
Remember that she had to tell everyone she knew about her interest in returning to work.
Well, one critical conversation with another parent in her community led to a job offer for Tracy, and it was an accounting job in a finance department.
But it was a temp job.
The company told her there was a possibility it could turn into something more, but no guarantees.
This was in the fall of 2011.
Tracy loved this company, and she loved the people and the office was less than 10 minutes from her house.
So even though she had a second job offer at another company for a permanent full-time role, she decided to take her chances with this internship and hope for the best.
Well, she ended up blowing away all of their expectations, and the company not only made her a permanent offer at the beginning of 2012, but they made it even more interesting and challenging, because they knew what Tracy could handle.
Fast forward to 2015, Tracy's been promoted.
They've paid for her to get her MBA at night.
She's even hired another relauncher to work for her.
Tracy's temp job was a tryout, just like an internship, and it ended up being a win for both Tracy and her employer.
Now, my goal is to bring the reentry internship concept to more and more employers.
But in the meantime, if you are returning to work after a career break, don't hesitate to suggest an internship or an internship-like arrangement to an employer that does not have a formal reentry internship program.
Be their first success story, and you can be the example for more relaunchers to come.
Thank you.
(Applause)
One of the problems of writing, and working, and looking at the Internet is that it's very hard to separate fashion from deep change.
And so, to start helping that, I want to take us back to 1835.
In 1835, James Gordon Bennett founded the first mass-circulation newspaper in New York City.
And it cost about 500 dollars to start it, which was about the equivalent of 10,000 dollars of today.
By 15 years later, by 1850, doing the same thing -- starting what was experienced as a mass--circulation daily paper -- would come to cost two and a half million dollars.
10,000, two and a half million, 15 years.
That's the critical change that is being inverted by the Net.
And that's what I want to talk about today, and how that relates to the emergence of social production.
Starting with newspapers, what we saw was high cost as an initial requirement for making information, knowledge and culture, which led to a stark bifurcation between producers -- who had to be able to raise financial capital, just like any other industrial organization -- and passive consumers that could choose from a certain set of things that this industrial model could produce.
Now, the term "information society," "information economy," for a very long time has been used as the thing that comes after the industrial revolution. But in fact, for purposes of understanding what's happening today, that's wrong. Because for 150 years, we've had an information economy.
It's just been industrial, which means those who were producing had to have a way of raising money to pay those two and a half million dollars, and later, more for the telegraph, and the radio transmitter, and the television, and eventually the mainframe.
And that meant they were market based, or they were government owned, depending on what kind of system they were in. And this characterized and anchored the way information and knowledge were produced for the next 150 years.
Now, let me tell you a different story. Around June 2002, the world of supercomputers had a bombshell.
The Japanese had, for the first time, created the fastest supercomputer -- the NEC Earth Simulator -- taking the primary from the U.S., and about two years later -- this, by the way, is measuring the trillion floating-point operations per second that the computer's capable of running -- sigh of relief: IBM [Blue Gene] has just edged ahead of the NEC Earth Simulator.
All of this completely ignores the fact that throughout this period, there's another supercomputer running in the world -- SETI@home.
Four and a half million users around the world, contributing their leftover computer cycles, whenever their computer isn't working, by running a screen saver, and together sharing their resources to create a massive supercomputer that NASA harnesses to analyze the data coming from radio telescopes.
What this picture suggests to us is that we've got a radical change in the way information production and exchange is capitalized. Not that it's become less capital intensive -- that there's less money that's required -- but that the ownership of this capital, the way the capitalization happens, is radically distributed. Each of us, in these advanced economies, has one of these, or something rather like it -- a computer.
They're not radically different from routers inside the middle of the network.
And computation, storage and communications capacity are in the hands of practically every connected person -- and these are the basic physical capital means necessary for producing information, knowledge and culture, in the hands of something like 600 million to a billion people around the planet.
What this means is that for the first time since the industrial revolution, the most important means, the most important components of the core economic activities -- remember, we are in an information economy -- of the most advanced economies, and there more than anywhere else, are in the hands of the population at large. This is completely different than what we've seen since the industrial revolution. So we've got communications and computation capacity in the hands of the entire population, and we've got human creativity, human wisdom, human experience -- the other major experience, the other major input -- which unlike simple labor -- stand here turning this lever all day long -- is not something that's the same or fungible among people.
Any one of you who has taken someone else's job, or tried to give yours to someone else, no matter how detailed the manual, you cannot transmit what you know, what you will intuit under a certain set of circumstances.
In that we're unique, and each of us holds this critical input into production as we hold this machine.
What's the effect of this? So, the story that most people know is the story of free or open source software.
This is market share of Apache Web server -- one of the critical applications in Web-based communications.
In 1995, two groups of people said, "Wow, this is really important, the Web! We need a much better Web server!"
One was a motley collection of volunteers who just decided, you know, we really need this, we should write one, and what are we going to do with what -- well, we're gonna share it! And other people will be able to develop it.
The other was Microsoft.
Now, if I told you that 10 years later, the motley crew of people, who didn't control anything that they produced, acquired 20 percent of the market and was the red line, it would be amazing! Right?
Think of it in minivans. A group of automobile engineers on their weekends are competing with Toyota. Right?
But, in fact, of course, the story is it's the 70 percent, including the major e-commerce site -- 70 percent of a critical application on which Web-based communications and applications work is produced in this form, in direct competition with Microsoft. Not in a side issue -- in a central strategic decision to try to capture a component of the Net.
Software has done this in a way that's been very visible, because it's measurable. But the thing to see is that this actually happens throughout the Web.
So, NASA, at some point, did an experiment where they took images of Mars that they were mapping, and they said, instead of having three or four fully trained Ph.D.s doing this all the time, let's break it up into small components, put it up on the Web, and see if people, using a very simple interface, will actually spend five minutes here, 10 minutes there, clicking. After six months, 85,000 people used this to generate mapping at a faster rate than the images were coming in, which was, quote, "practically indistinguishable from the markings of a fully-trained Ph.D.," once you showed it to a number of people and computed the average.
Now, if you have a little girl, and she goes and writes to -- well, not so little, medium little -- tries to do research on Barbie.
And she'll come to Encarta, one of the main online encyclopedias.
This is what you'll find out about Barbie. This is it, there's nothing more to the definition, including, "manufacturers" -- plural -- "now more commonly produce ethnically diverse dolls, like this black Barbie." Which is vastly better than what you'll find in the encyclopedia.com, which is Barbie, Klaus. (Laughter) On the other hand, if they go to Wikipedia, they'll find a genuine article -- and I won't talk a lot about Wikipedia, because Jimmy Wales is here -- but roughly equivalent to what you would find in the Britannica, differently written, including the controversies over body image and commercialization, the claims about the way in which she's a good role model, etc.
Another portion is not only how content is produced, but how relevance is produced.
The claim to fame of Yahoo! was, we hire people to look -- originally, not anymore -- we hire people to look at websites and tell you -- if they're in the index, they're good. This, on the other hand, is what 60,000 passionate volunteers produce in the Open Directory Project, each one willing to spend an hour or two on something they really care about, to say, this is good. So, this is the Open Directory Project, with 60,000 volunteers, each one spending a little bit of time, as opposed to a few hundred fully paid employees. No one owns it, no one owns the output, it's free for anyone to use and it's the output of people acting out of social and psychological motivations to do something interesting.
This is not only outside of businesses. When you think of what is the critical innovation of Google, the critical innovation is outsourcing the one most important thing -- the decision about what's relevant -- to the community of the Web as a whole, doing whatever they want to do: so, page rank.
The critical innovation here is instead of our engineers, or our people saying which is the most relevant, we're going to go out and count what you, people out there on the Web, for whatever reason -- vanity, pleasure -- produced links, and tied to each other. We're going to count those, and count them up.
And again, here, you see Barbie.com, but also, very quickly, Adiosbarbie.com, the body image for every size. A contested cultural object, which you won't find anywhere soon on Overture, which is the classic market-based mechanism: whoever pays the most is highest on the list.
So, all of that is in the creation of content, of relevance, basic human expression.
But remember, the computers were also physical. Just physical materials -- our PCs -- we share them together. We also see this in wireless.
It used to be wireless was one person owned the license, they transmitted in an area, and it had to be decided whether they would be licensed or based on property.
What we're seeing now is that computers and radios are becoming so sophisticated that we're developing algorithms to let people own machines, like Wi-Fi devices, and overlay them with a sharing protocol that would allow a community like this to build its own wireless broadband network simply from the simple principle: When I'm listening, when I'm not using, I can help you transfer your messages; and when you're not using, you'll help me transfer yours.
And this is not an idealized version. These are working models that at least in some places in the United States are being implemented, at least for public security.
If in 1999 I told you, let's build a data storage and retrieval system.
It's got to store terabytes. It's got to be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It's got to be available from anywhere in the world.
It has to support over 100 million users at any given moment. It's got to be robust to attack, including closing the main index, injecting malicious files, armed seizure of some major nodes. You'd say that would take years.
It would take millions. But of course, what I'm describing is P2P file sharing.
Right? We always think of it as stealing music, but fundamentally, it's a distributed data storage and retrieval system, where people, for very obvious reasons, are willing to share their bandwidth and their storage to create something.
So, essentially what we're seeing is the emergence of a fourth transactional framework. It used to be that there were two primary dimensions along which you could divide things. They could be market based, or non-market based; they could be decentralized, or centralized.
The price system was a market-based and decentralized system.
If things worked better because you actually had somebody organizing them, you had firms, if you wanted to be in the market -- or you had governments or sometimes larger non-profits in the non-market.
It was too expensive to have decentralized social production, to have decentralized action in society. That was not about society itself.
That was, in fact, economic.
But what we're seeing now is the emergence of this fourth system of social sharing and exchange.
Not that it's the first time that we do nice things to each other, or for each other, as social beings. We do it all the time.
It's that it's the first time that it's having major economic impact.
What characterizes them is decentralized authority.
You don't have to ask permission, as you do in a property-based system.
May I do this? It's open for anyone to create and innovate and share, if they want to, by themselves or with others, because property is one mechanism of coordination.
But it's not the only one.
Instead, what we see are social frameworks for all of the critical things that we use property and contract in the market: information flows to decide what are interesting problems; who's available and good for something; motivation structures -- remember, money isn't always the best motivator.
If you leave a $50 check after dinner with friends, you don't increase the probability of being invited back.
And if dinner isn't entirely obvious, think of sex. (Laughter) It also requires certain new organizational approaches.
And in particular, what we've seen is task organization.
You have to hire people who know what they're doing.
You have to hire them to spend a lot of time.
Now, take the same problem, chunk it into little modules, and motivations become trivial.
Five minutes, instead of watching TV?
Five minutes I'll spend just because it's interesting. Just because it's fun.
Just because it gives me a certain sense of meaning, or, in places that are more involved, like Wikipedia, gives me a certain set of social relations.
So, a new social phenomenon is emerging.
It's creating, and it's most visible when we see it as a new form of competition.
Peer-to-peer networks assaulting the recording industry; free and open source software taking market share from Microsoft; Skype potentially threatening traditional telecoms; Wikipedia competing with online encyclopedias.
But it's also a new source of opportunities for businesses.
As you see a new set of social relations and behaviors emerging, you have new opportunities. Some of them are toolmakers.
Instead of building well-behaved appliances -- things that you know what they'll do in advance -- you begin to build more open tools. There's a new set of values, a new set of things people value.
You build platforms for self-expression and collaboration.
Like Wikipedia, like the Open Directory Project, you're beginning to build platforms, and you see that as a model.
And you see surfers, people who see this happening, and in some sense build it into a supply chain, which is a very curious one. Right?
You have a belief: stuff will flow out of connected human beings.
That'll give me something I can use, and I'm going to contract with someone.
I will deliver something based on what happens. It's very scary -- that's what Google does, essentially.
That's what IBM does in software services, and they've done reasonably well.
So, social production is a real fact, not a fad.
It is the critical long-term shift caused by the Internet.
Social relations and exchange become significantly more important than they ever were as an economic phenomenon. In some contexts, it's even more efficient because of the quality of the information, the ability to find the best person, the lower transaction costs. It's sustainable and growing fast.
But -- and this is the dark lining -- it is threatened by -- in the same way that it threatens -- the incumbent industrial systems.
So next time you open the paper, and you see an intellectual property decision, a telecoms decision, it's not about something small and technical.
It is about the future of the freedom to be as social beings with each other, and the way information, knowledge and culture will be produced.
Because it is in this context that we see a battle over how easy or hard it will be for the industrial information economy to simply go on as it goes, or for the new model of production to begin to develop alongside that industrial model, and change the way we begin to see the world and report what it is that we see.
Thank you.
Here are two reasons companies fail: they only do more of the same, or they only do what's new.
To me the real, real solution to quality growth is figuring out the balance between two activities: exploration and exploitation.
Both are necessary, but it can be too much of a good thing.
Consider Facit.
I'm actually old enough to remember them.
Facit was a fantastic company.
They were born deep in the Swedish forest, and they made the best mechanical calculators in the world.
Everybody used them.
And what did Facit do when the electronic calculator came along?
They continued doing exactly the same.
In six months, they went from maximum revenue ...
and they were gone.
Gone.
To me, the irony about the Facit story is hearing about the Facit engineers, who had bought cheap, small electronic calculators in Japan that they used to double-check their calculators.
(Laughter) Facit did too much exploitation.
But exploration can go wild, too.
A few years back, I worked closely alongside a European biotech company.
Let's call them OncoSearch.
The company was brilliant.
They had applications that promised to diagnose, even cure, certain forms of blood cancer.
Every day was about creating something new.
They were extremely innovative, and the mantra was, "When we only get it right," or even, "We want it perfect."
The sad thing is, before they became perfect -- even good enough -- they became obsolete.
OncoSearch did too much exploration.
I first heard about exploration and exploitation about 15 years ago, when I worked as a visiting scholar at Stanford University.
The founder of the idea is Jim March.
And to me the power of the idea is its practicality.
Exploration.
Exploration is about coming up with what's new.
It's about search, it's about discovery, it's about new products, it's about new innovations.
It's about changing our frontiers.
Our heroes are people who have done exploration: Madame Curie, Picasso, Neil Armstrong, Sir Edmund Hillary, etc.
I come from Norway; all our heroes are explorers, and they deserve to be.
We all know that exploration is risky.
We don't know the answers, we don't know if we're going to find them, and we know that the risks are high.
Exploitation is the opposite.
Exploitation is taking the knowledge we have and making good, better.
Exploitation is about making our trains run on time.
It's about making good products faster and cheaper.
Exploitation is not risky -- in the short term.
But if we only exploit, it's very risky in the long term.
And I think we all have memories of the famous pop groups who keep singing the same songs again and again, until they become obsolete or even pathetic.
That's the risk of exploitation.
So if we take a long-term perspective, we explore.
If we take a short-term perspective, we exploit.
Small children, they explore all day.
All day it's about exploration.
As we grow older, we explore less because we have more knowledge to exploit on.
The same goes for companies.
Companies become, by nature, less innovative as they become more competent.
And this is, of course, a big worry to CEOs.
And I hear very often questions phrased in different ways.
For example, "How can I both effectively run and reinvent my company?"
Or, "How can I make sure that our company changes before we become obsolete or are hit by a crisis?"
So, doing one well is difficult.
Doing both well as the same time is art -- pushing both exploration and exploitation.
So one thing we've found is only about two percent of companies are able to effectively explore and exploit at the same time, in parallel.
But when they do, the payoffs are huge.
So we have lots of great examples.
We have Nestlé creating Nespresso, we have Lego going into animated films, Toyota creating the hybrids, Unilever pushing into sustainability -- there are lots of examples, and the benefits are huge.
Why is balancing so difficult?
I think it's difficult because there are so many traps that keep us where we are.
So I'll talk about two, but there are many.
So let's talk about the perpetual search trap.
We discover something, but we don't have the patience or the persistence to get at it and make it work.
So instead of staying with it, we create something new.
But the same goes for that, then we're in the vicious circle of actually coming up with ideas but being frustrated.
OncoSearch was a good example.
A famous example is, of course, Xerox.
But we don't only see this in companies.
We see this in the public sector as well.
We all know that any kind of effective reform of education, research, health care, even defense, takes 10, 15, maybe 20 years to work.
But still, we change much more often.
We really don't give them the chance.
Another trap is the success trap.
Facit fell into the success trap.
They literally held the future in their hands, but they couldn't see it.
They were simply so good at making what they loved doing, that they wouldn't change.
We are like that, too.
When we know something well, it's difficult to change.
Bill Gates has said: "Success is a lousy teacher.
It seduces us into thinking we cannot fail."
That's the challenge with success.
So I think there are some lessons, and I think they apply to us.
And they apply to our companies.
The first lesson is: get ahead of the crisis.
And any company that's able to innovate is actually able to also buy an insurance in the future.
Netflix -- they could so easily have been content with earlier generations of distribution, but they always -- and I think they will always -- keep pushing for the next battle.
I see other companies that say, "I'll win the next innovation cycle, whatever it takes."
Second one: think in multiple time scales.
I'll share a chart with you, and I think it's a wonderful one.
Any company we look at, taking a one-year perspective and looking at the valuation of the company, innovation typically accounts for only about 30 percent.
So when we think one year, innovation isn't really that important.
Move ahead, take a 10-year perspective on the same company -- suddenly, innovation and ability to renew account for 70 percent.
But companies can't choose.
They need to fund the journey and lead the long term.
Third: invite talent.
I don't think it's possible for any of us to be able to balance exploration and exploitation by ourselves.
I think it's a team sport.
I think we need to allow challenging.
I think the mark of a great company is being open to be challenged, and the mark of a good corporate board is to constructively challenge.
I think that's also what good parenting is about.
Last one: be skeptical of success.
Maybe it's useful to think back at the old triumph marches in Rome, when the generals, after a big victory, were given their celebration.
Riding into Rome on the carriage, they always had a companion whispering in their ear, "Remember, you're only human."
So I hope I made the point: balancing exploration and exploitation has a huge payoff.
But it's difficult, and we need to be conscious.
I want to just point out two questions that I think are useful.
First question is, looking at your own company: In which areas do you see that the company is at the risk of falling into success traps, of just going on autopilot?
And what can you do to challenge?
Second question is: When did I explore something new last, and what kind of effect did it have on me?
Is that something I should do more of?
In my case, yes.
So let me leave you with this.
Whether you're an explorer by nature or whether you tend to exploit what you already know, don't forget: the beauty is in the balance.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So there are lands few and far between on Earth itself that are hospitable to humans by any measure, but survive we have.
Our primitive ancestors, when they found their homes and livelihood endangered, they dared to make their way into unfamiliar territories in search of better opportunities.
And as the descendants of these explorers, we have their nomadic blood coursing through our own veins.
But at the same time, distracted by our bread and circuses and embroiled in the wars that we have waged on each other, it seems that we have forgotten this desire to explore.
We, as a species, we're evolved uniquely for Earth, on Earth, and by Earth, and so content are we with our living conditions that we have grown complacent and just too busy to notice that its resources are finite, and that our Sun's life is also finite.
While Mars and all the movies made in its name have reinvigorated the ethos for space travel, few of us seem to truly realize that our species' fragile constitution is woefully unprepared for long duration journeys into space.
Let us take a trek to your local national forest for a quick reality check.
So just a quick show of hands here: how many of you think you would be able to survive in this lush wilderness for a few days?
Well, that's a lot of you.
How about a few weeks?
That's a decent amount.
How about a few months?
That's pretty good too.
Now, let us imagine that this local national forest experiences an eternal winter.
Same questions: how many of you think you would be able to survive for a few days?
That's quite a lot.
How about a few weeks?
So for a fun twist, let us imagine that the only source of water available is trapped as frozen blocks miles below the surface.
Soil nutrients are so minimal that no vegetation can be found, and of course hardly any atmosphere exists to speak of.
Such examples are only a few of the many challenges we would face on a planet like Mars.
So how do we steel ourselves for voyages whose destinations are so far removed from a tropical vacation?
Will we continuously ship supplies from Planet Earth?
Build space elevators, or impossible miles of transport belts that tether your planet of choice to our home planet?
And how do we grow things like food that grew up on Earth like us?
But I'm getting ahead of myself.
In our species' journey to find a new home under a new sun, we are more likely than not going to be spending much time in the journey itself, in space, on a ship, a hermetic flying can, possibly for many generations.
The longest continuous amount of time that any human has spent in space is in the vicinity of 12 to 14 months.
From astronauts' experiences in space, we know that spending time in a microgravity environment means bone loss, muscle atrophy, cardiovascular problems, among many other complications that range for the physiological to the psychological.
And what about macrogravity, or any other variation in gravitational pull of the planet that we find ourselves on?
In short, our cosmic voyages will be fraught with dangers both known and unknown.
So far we've been looking to this new piece of mechanical technology or that great next generation robot as part of a lineup to ensure our species safe passage in space.
Wonderful as they are, I believe the time has come for us to complement these bulky electronic giants with what nature has already invented: the microbe, a single-celled organism that is itself a self-generating, self-replenishing, living machine.
It requires fairly little to maintain, offers much flexibility in design and only asks to be carried in a single plastic tube.
The field of study that has enabled us to utilize the capabilities of the microbe is known as synthetic biology.
It comes from molecular biology, which has given us antibiotics, vaccines and better ways to observe the physiological nuances of the human body.
Using the tools of synthetic biology, we can now edit the genes of nearly any organism, microscopic or not, with incredible speed and fidelity.
Given the limitations of our man-made machines, synthetic biology will be a means for us to engineer not only our food, our fuel and our environment, but also ourselves to compensate for our physical inadequacies and to ensure our survival in space.
To give you an example of how we can use synthetic biology for space exploration, let us return to the Mars environment.
The Martian soil composition is similar to that of Hawaiian volcanic ash, with trace amounts of organic material.
Let's say, hypothetically, what if martian soil could actually support plant growth without using Earth-derived nutrients?
The first question we should probably ask is, how would we make our plants cold-tolerant?
Because, on average, the temperature on Mars is a very uninviting negative 60 degrees centigrade.
The next question we should ask is, how do we make our plants drought-tolerant?
Considering that most of the water that forms as frost evaporates more quickly than I can say the word "evaporate."
Well, it turns out we've already done things like this.
By borrowing genes for anti-freeze protein from fish and genes for drought tolerance from other plants like rice and then stitching them into the plants that need them, we now have plants that can tolerate most droughts and freezes.
They're known on Earth as GMOs, or genetically modified organisms, and we rely on them to feed all the mouths of human civilization.
Nature does stuff like this already, without our help.
We have simply found more precise ways to do it.
So why would we want to change the genetic makeup of plants for space?
Well, to not do so would mean needing to engineer endless acres of land on an entirely new planet by releasing trillions of gallons of atmospheric gasses and then constructing a giant glass dome to contain it all.
It's an unrealistic engineering enterprise that quickly becomes a high-cost cargo transport mission.
One of the best ways to ensure that we will have the food supplies and the air that we need is to bring with us organisms that have been engineered to adapt to new and harsh environments.
In essence, using engineered organisms to help us terraform a planet both in the short and long term.
These organisms can then also be engineered to make medicine or fuel.
So we can use synthetic biology to bring highly engineered plants with us, but what else can we do?
Well, I mentioned earlier that we, as a species, were evolved uniquely for planet Earth.
That fact has not changed much in the last five minutes that you were sitting here and I was standing there.
And so, if we were to dump any of us on Mars right this minute, even given ample food, water, air and a suit, we are likely to experience very unpleasant health problems from the amount of ionizing radiation that bombards the surface of planets like Mars that have little or nonexistent atmosphere.
Unless we plan to stay holed up underground for the duration of our stay on every new planet, we must find better ways of protecting ourselves without needing to resort to wearing a suit of armor that weighs something equal to your own body weight, or needing to hide behind a wall of lead.
So let us appeal to nature for inspiration.
Among the plethora of life here on Earth, there's a subset of organisms known as extremophiles, or lovers of extreme living conditions, if you'll remember from high school biology.
And among these organisms is a bacterium by the name of Deinococcus radiodurans.
It is known to be able to withstand cold, dehydration, vacuum, acid, and, most notably, radiation.
While its radiation tolerance mechanisms are known, we have yet to adapt the relevant genes to mammals.
To do so is not particularly easy.
There are many facets that go into its radiation tolerance, and it's not as simple as transferring one gene.
But given a little bit of human ingenuity and a little bit of time, I think to do so is not very hard either.
Even if we borrow just a fraction of its ability to tolerate radiation, it would be infinitely better than what we already have, which is just the melanin in our skin.
Using the tools of synthetic biology, we can harness Deinococcus radiodurans' ability to thrive under otherwise very lethal doses of radiation.
As difficult as it is to see, homo sapiens, that is humans, evolves every day, and still continues to evolve.
Thousands of years of human evolution has not only given us humans like Tibetans, who can thrive in low-oxygen conditions, but also Argentinians, who can ingest and metabolize arsenic, the chemical element that can kill the average human being.
Every day, the human body evolves by accidental mutations that equally accidentally allow certain humans to persevere in dismal situations.
But, and this is a big but, such evolution requires two things that we may not always have, or be able to afford, and they are death and time.
In our species' struggle to find our place in the universe, we may not always have the time necessary for the natural evolution of extra functions for survival on non-Earth planets.
We're living in what E.O. Wilson has termed the age of gene circumvention, during which we remedy our genetic defects like cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy with temporary external supplements.
But with every passing day, we approach the age of volitional evolution, a time during which we as a species will have the capacity to decide for ourselves our own genetic destiny.
Augmenting the human body with new abilities is no longer a question of how, but of when.
Using synthetic biology to change the genetic makeup of any living organisms, especially our own, is not without its moral and ethical quandaries.
Will engineering ourselves make us less human?
But then again, what is humanity but star stuff that happens to be conscious?
Where should human genius direct itself?
Surely it is a bit of a waste to sit back and marvel at it.
How do we use our knowledge to protect ourselves from the external dangers and then protect ourselves from ourselves?
I pose these questions not to engender the fear of science but to bring to light the many possibilities that science has afforded and continues to afford us.
We must coalesce as humans to discuss and embrace the solutions not only with caution but also with courage.
Mars is a destination, but it will not be our last.
Our true final frontier is the line we must cross in deciding what we can and should make of our species' improbable intelligence.
Space is cold, brutal and unforgiving.
Our path to the stars will be rife with trials that will bring us to question not only who we are but where we will be going.
The answers will lie in our choice to use or abandon the technology that we have gleaned from life itself, and it will define us for the remainder of our term in this universe.
Thank you.
(Applause)
OK, so, confession: I've always been weirdly obsessed with advertising.
I remember watching Saturday morning cartoons, paying more attention to the commercials than to the shows, trying to figure out how they were trying to get inside my head.
Ultimately, that led me to my dream job.
I became a partner at a big New York ad agency.
But then, all of that suddenly changed on February 23, 1997, when my little brother Matt was shot in the head in a shooting that happened on the observation deck of the Empire State Building.
Suddenly, my family was thrown into the middle of a nightmare, being told that my brother was going to die, actually being given the opportunity to say goodbye to him, then several emergency brain surgeries and now what's amounted, for Matt, to a lifetime spent courageously recovering from a traumatic brain injury.
He is definitely my hero.
But as much as (Applause) -- yeah, deserves it -- (Applause) But as much as this tragedy was a nightmare for my family, I often think about how much worse it could have been; in fact, how much worse it is for the 90 families every day who aren't as fortunate, who lose loved ones -- brothers, sisters, sons, daughters, parents.
They don't all make national headlines.
In fact, most of them don't.
They go largely unnoticed, in a nation that's kind of come to accept a disgraceful national epidemic as some kind of new normal.
So I quit my job in advertising to try and do something about this disgraceful national epidemic, because I came to realize that the challenges to preventing gun violence are actually the same ones that made me love advertising, which is to try to figure out how to engage people.
Only instead of doing it to sell products, doing it to save lives.
And that comes down to finding common ground, where what I want overlaps with what you want.
And you might be surprised to learn, when it comes to gun violence, just how much common ground there is.
Let's look, for example, at people who love to hunt, a sport enjoyed by millions across the US.
It's a proud tradition. Families.
In some places, the first day of hunting season is actually a school holiday.
What do hunters want?
Well, they want to hunt. They love their guns.
They believe deeply in the Second Amendment right to own those guns.
But that doesn't mean there isn't common ground.
In fact, there's a lot of it, starting with the basic idea of keeping guns out of dangerous hands.
This isn't about taking certain guns away from all people.
It's about keeping all guns away from certain people, and it's the people that, it turns out, we all agree shouldn't have guns: convicted violent criminals, domestic abusers, the dangerously mentally ill.
We can all appreciate how Brady background checks have been incredibly effective in keeping guns out of those dangerous hands.
In 20 years, Brady background checks at federally licensed firearm dealers have blocked 2.4 million gun sales to those people that we all agree shouldn't have guns.
(Applause) And whether you love guns or hate guns, you probably also appreciate that there shouldn't be thousands of gun sales every day at guns shows or online without those Brady background checks, just like there shouldn't be two lines to get on an airplane -- one with security and one with no security.
And -- (Applause) And the numbers show the overwhelming agreement among the American public: 90 percent of Americans support expanding Brady background checks to all gun sales -- including 90 percent of Republicans, more than 80 percent of gun owners, more than 70 percent of NRA members.
This is not a controversial idea.
In fact, only six percent of the American public disagrees.
That's about the percentage of the American public that believes the moon landing was a fake.
(Laughter) And it's also about the percentage that believes the government is putting mind-controlling technology in our TV broadcast signals.
That's the extent to which we agree about background checks.
But what about the 300 million guns already out there in homes across America?
Well first, it's important to realize that those guns are mostly in the hands and homes of decent, law-abiding people like you and me, who want what we all want -- including keeping our families safe.
In fact, that's why more and more people are choosing to own guns.
Ten years ago, 42 percent of the American public believed -- incorrectly -- that a gun makes your home safer.
Today, that number is 63 percent.
Why?
I kind of hate to say it, because it gets to the dark underbelly of advertising, which is if you tell a big enough lie enough times, eventually that lie becomes the truth.
And that's exactly what's happened here.
The corporate gun lobby has spent billions of dollars blocking the CDC from doing research into the public health epidemic of gun violence; blocking pediatricians from talking to parents about the dangers of guns in the home; blocking smart-gun technology and other technology that would prevent kids from firing parents' guns and would save lives.
They're desperate to hide the truth, because they view the truth as a threat to their bottom line.
And every day, people are dying as a result.
And a lot of those people are children.
Every day in the US, nine kids are just shot unintentionally.
900 children and teens take their own lives every year.
And here's the thing: they're almost all with a parent's gun.
Even two-thirds of school shootings happen with a gun taken from the home, including the terrible tragedy at Sandy Hook.
I meet so many of these parents; it's the most heartbreaking part of my job.
These are not bad people.
They're just living with the unimaginable consequences of a very bad decision, made based on very bad information that was put into their minds by very bad people, who know good and well the misery that they're causing, but just don't care.
And the result is a nightmare -- not only for families like mine, but for, really, at the end of the day, all of us.
But I'm not here to talk about the nightmare of gun violence.
I'm here to talk about our dream, and it's a dream we all share, which is the dream of a better, safer, future.
For my organization, for the Brady Campaign, that dream is reflected in the bold goal to cut the number of gun deaths in the US in half by 2025.
And I hope to leave all of you here tonight with a strong sense of exactly why that dream is so absolutely within reach.
Because folks, for every great movement around the world, there's a moment where you can look back and say, "That's when things really started to change."
And I'm here to say that for the movement to end gun violence in America, that moment is here.
(Applause) We are so clearly at a tipping point, because the American public has come together by the millions like never before, based on that common ground, to say, "Enough."
Enough of the mass shootings in malls and movie theaters and churches and schools.
Enough of the daily terror of gun violence in homes and streets that's claimed the lives of women and young black men in staggering proportions.
Enough of easy access to guns by the people that we all agree shouldn't have them.
And enough of a small group of craven politicians putting the interests of the corporate gun lobby ahead of the people they have been elected to represent.
Enough.
(Applause) And the really exciting thing is, it's not just the usual suspects like me that are saying it anymore.
It's so much bigger than that.
And if you want proof, let's start where most conversations in the US seem to start -- with Kim Kardashian.
(Laughter) And here's the thing: it's not really a joke.
I mean, think about when issues change.
It's when they go from being political and advocacy issues to being part of pop culture, voices coming from everywhere, celebrities using their platforms, musicians, athletes.
The NBA has come forward.
Conservative pundits that you never would have imagined have come forward.
There's real cultural change -- I even hear there's a TED Talk about it this year.
That's the extent to which this cultural change is happening.
And yes, Kim Kardashian has made an unsolicited passionate appeal to her 35 million Twitter followers for expanded background checks.
Let's look at the political elections that are heating up.
This used to be the classic third-rail issue for Democrats.
Couldn't run from it fast enough.
Now candidates are running on it.
Some are being forced to reverse very bad positions they defended very comfortably, until very recently.
For somebody like me, watching people wave around their negative NRA ratings -- it's almost surreal to watch.
We're still outfunded, yes, by the corporate gun lobby, and ultimately that needs to change.
But you know what?
We're smarter and we're scrappier, and we have the truth on our side.
And we're on offense.
You know, they say that the Internet democratizes information.
Social media and some of the organizing tools that plug into it have democratized activism.
It's allowed us to show what 90 percent support really looks like.
Sometimes I think of it -- you know, we're converging and attacking instantly by the millions, kind of like white blood cells.
It's enabled us to start to really close -- and this is the bottom line -- close that disgraceful disconnect between what the American public wants and what our elected leaders are doing about it.
Until recently, the narrative in Congress was that calls from the other side, from that six percent, outnumbered calls from our side 10 to one.
We're flipping that narrative on its head.
After that recent terrible tragedy in San Bernardino, we jammed Congressional switchboards.
We put 15,000 calls into Congress in 24 hours.
And you know what?
We got a vote on a bill that nobody thought was going to see the light of day anytime soon.
We're seeing real movement to repeal some of the most evil, ugly gun lobby legislation passed over the last dark decade.
The stranglehold of the gun lobby is clearly being broken.
We've seen President Obama's historic executive actions.
They don't go all the way, but they are going to save lives, because they expand Brady background checks to thousands of gun sales that didn't have them previously.
And we're marching across the country -- we're not just waiting for Congress to act; that would almost be the definition of insanity.
We're marching across the country, state by state, marriage-equality style.
And you know what? We're winning.
Congress is almost always the last to wake up and realize that it's on the wrong side of history.
And when they do, it's always because the American public shakes them.
And that's exactly what we're doing right now, as we're in this tipping point.
You know, recently I was flying cross-country to give a speech to a large group like this, although far less intimidating, and the woman sitting next to me happened to be binge-watching one of my all-time favorite TV shows, "Mad Men," a period TV show about advertising in the 1960s.
And as I was trying to think about how to end my remarks, I'd glance up at her screen every now and then, and it seemed that every time I did, I'd see somebody smoking in an office or around children or while pregnant or drinking and driving or driving without seat belts or sexually harassing a coworker.
And ultimately it dawned on me: what tremendous inspiration to those of us who have this dream to end gun violence.
I mean, think about how much the world has changed in a relatively short period of time, how all those behaviors that were once considered commonplace or normal -- some even glamorous or sexy -- have become stigmatized in just a generation or two, once they became conversations about our common ground.
That is the magnitude of the change we have the potential to create around gun violence.
And that's my dream, that maybe someday, some period TV show will depict the terrible nightmare of gun violence, and a future generation of children might only be able to imagine how terrible it must have been.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
As of 2018, there are around 2.5 billion smartphone users in the world.
If we broke open all their newest phones, which are just a fraction of the total that’ve been built, and split them into their component parts, that would produce around 85,000 kilograms of gold, 875,000 of silver, and 40 million kilograms of copper.
How did this precious cache get into our phones, and can we reclaim it?
Gold, silver, and copper are actually just a few of the 70 or so chemical elements that make up the average smartphone.
These can be divided into different groups, two of the most critical being rare earth elements and precious metals.
Rare earths are a selection of 17 elements that are actually common in Earth’s crust and are found in many areas across the world in low concentrations.
These elements have a huge range of magnetic, phosphorescent, and conductive properties that make them crucial to modern technologies.
In fact, of the 17 types of rare earth metals, phones and other electronics may contain up to 16.
In smartphones, these create the screen and color display, aid conductivity, and produce the signature vibrations, amongst other things.
And yet, crucial as they are, extracting these elements from the earth is linked to some disturbing environmental impacts.
Rare earth elements can often be found, but in many areas, it’s not economically feasible to extract them due to low concentrations.
Much of the time, extracting them requires a method called open pit mining that exposes vast areas of land.
This form of mining destroys huge swaths of natural habitats, and causes air and water pollution, threatening the health of nearby communities.
Another group of ingredients in smartphones comes with similar environmental risks: these are metals such as copper, silver, palladium, aluminum, platinum, tungsten, tin, lead, and gold.
We also mine magnesium, lithium, silica, and potassium to make phones, and all of it is associated with vast habitat destruction, as well as air and water pollution.
Mining comes with worrying social problems, too, like large-scale human and animal displacement to make way for industrial operations, and frequently, poor working conditions for laborers.
Lastly, phone production also requires petroleum, one of the main drivers of climate change.
That entwines our smartphones inextricably with this growing planetary conundrum.
And, what’s more, the ingredients we mine to make our phones aren’t infinite.
One day, they’ll simply run out, and we haven’t yet discovered effective replacements for some.
Despite this, the number of smartphones is on a steady increase; by 2019 it’s predicted that there’ll be close to 3 billion in use.
This means that reclaiming the bounty within our phones is swiftly becoming a necessity.
So, if you have an old phone, you might want to consider your options before throwing it away.
To minimize waste, you could donate it to a charity for reuse, take it to an e-waste recycling facility, or look for a company that refurbishes old models.
However, even recycling companies need our scrutiny.
Just as the production of smartphones comes with social and environmental problems, dismantling them does too.
E-waste is sometimes intentionally exported to countries where labor is cheap but working conditions are poor.
Vast workforces, often made up of women and children, may be underpaid, lack the training to safely disassemble phones, and be exposed to elements like lead and mercury, which can permanently damage their nervous systems.
Phone waste can also end up in huge dump sites, leaching toxic chemicals into the soil and water, mirroring the problems of the mines where the elements originated.
A phone is much more than it appears to be on the surface.
It’s an assemblage of elements from multiple countries, linked to impacts that are unfolding on a global scale.
So, until someone invents a completely sustainable smartphone, we’ll need to come to terms with how this technology affects widespread places and people.
There are 200 million clinical cases of falciparum malaria in Africa every year, resulting in half a million deaths.
I would like to talk to you about malaria vaccines.
The ones that we have made to date are simply not good enough.
Why?
We've been working at it for 100 plus years.
When we started, technology was limited.
We could see just a tiny fraction of what the parasite really looked like.
Today, we are awash with technology, advanced imaging and omics platforms -- genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics.
These tools have given us a clearer view of just how complex the parasite really is.
However, in spite of this, our approach to vaccine design has remained pretty rudimentary.
To make a good vaccine, we must go back to basics to understand how our bodies handle this complexity.
People who are frequently infected with malaria learn to deal with it.
They get the infection, but they don't get ill.
The recipe is encoded in antibodies.
My team went back to our complex parasite, probed it with samples from Africans who had overcome malaria to answer the question: "What does a successful antibody response look like?"
We found over 200 proteins, many of which are not on the radar for malaria vaccines.
My research community may be missing out important parts of the parasite.
Until recently, when one had identified a protein of interest, they tested whether it might be important for a vaccine by conducting a cohort study.
This typically involved about 300 participants in a village in Africa, whose samples were analyzed to see whether antibodies to the protein would predict who got malaria and who did not.
In the past 30 years, these studies have tested a small number of proteins in relatively few samples and usually in single locations.
The results have not been consistent.
My team essentially collapsed 30 years of this type of research into one exciting experiment, conducted over just three months.
Innovatively, we assembled 10,000 samples from 15 locations in seven African countries, spanning time, age and the variable intensity of malaria experienced in Africa.
We used omics intelligence to prioritize our parasite proteins, synthesize them in the lab and in short, recreated the malaria parasite on a chip.
We did this in Africa, and we're very proud of that.
(Applause) The chip is a small glass slide, but it gives us incredible power.
We simultaneously gathered data on over 100 antibody responses.
What are we looking for?
The recipe behind a successful antibody response, so that we can predict what might make a good malaria vaccine.
We're also trying to figure out exactly what antibodies do to the parasite.
How do they kill it?
Do they attack from multiple angles? Is there synergy?
How much antibody do you need?
Our studies suggest that having a bit of one antibody won't be enough.
It might take high concentrations of antibodies against multiple parasite proteins.
We're also learning that antibodies kill the parasite in multiple ways, and studying any one of these in isolation may not adequately reflect reality.
Just like we can now see the parasite in greater definition, my team and I are focused on understanding how our bodies overcome this complexity.
We believe that this could provide the breakthroughs that we need to make malaria history through vaccination.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Cheers) (Applause) Shoham Arad: OK, how close are we actually to a malaria vaccine?
Faith Osier: We're just at the beginning of a process to try and understand what we need to put in the vaccine before we actually start making it.
So, we're not really close to the vaccine, but we're getting there.
SA: And we're hopeful.
FO: And we're very hopeful.
SA: Tell me about SMART, tell me what does it stand for and why is it important to you?
FO: So SMART stands for South-South Malaria Antigen Research Partnership.
The South-South is referring to us in Africa, looking sideways to each other in collaboration, in contrast to always looking to America and looking to Europe, when there is quite some strength within Africa.
So in SMART, apart from the goal that we have, to develop a malaria vaccine, we are also training African scientists, because the burden of disease in Africa is high, and you need people who will continue to push the boundaries in science, in Africa.
SA: Yes, yes, correct.
(Applause) OK, one last question.
Tell me, I know you mentioned this a little bit, but how would things actually change if there were a malaria vaccine?
FO: We would save half a million lives every year.
Two hundred million cases.
It's estimated that malaria costs Africa 12 billion US dollars a year.
So this is economics.
Africa would simply thrive.
SA: OK. Thank you, Faith.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
So, there's an actor called Dustin Hoffman.
And years ago, he made this movie which some of you may have heard of, called "The Graduate."
And there's two key scenes in that movie.
The first one is the seduction scene.
I'm not going to talk about that tonight.
(Laughter) The second scene is where he's taken out by the old guy to the pool, and as a young college graduate, the old guy basically says one word, just one word.
And of course, all of you know what that word is.
It's "plastics."
(Laughter) And the only problem with that is, it was completely the wrong advice.
(Laughter) Let me tell you why it was so wrong.
The word should have been "silicon."
And the reason it should have been silicon is because the basic patents for semiconductors had already been made, had already been filed, and they were already building them.
So Silicon Valley was just being built in 1967, when this movie was released.
And the year after the movie was released, Intel was founded.
So had the graduate heard the right one word, maybe he would have ended up onstage -- oh, I don't know -- maybe with these two.
(Laughter) So as you're thinking of that, let's see what bit of advice we might want to give so that your next graduate doesn't become a Tupperware salesman.
(Laughter) So in 2015, what word of advice would you give people, when you took a college graduate out by the pool and you said one word, just one word?
I think the answer would be "lifecode."
So what is "lifecode?"
Lifecode is the various ways we have of programming life.
So instead of programming computers, we're using things to program viruses or retroviruses or proteins or DNA or RNA or plants or animals, or a whole series of creatures.
And as you're thinking about this incredible ability to make life do what you want it to do, what it's programmed to do, what you end up doing is taking what we've been doing for thousands of years, which is breeding, changing, mixing, matching all kinds of life-forms, and we accelerate it.
And this is not something new.
This humble mustard weed has been modified so that if you change it in one way, you get broccoli.
And if you change it in a second way, you get kale.
And if you change it in a third way, you get cauliflower.
So when you go to these all-natural, organic markets, you're really going to a place where people have been changing the lifecode of plants for a long time.
The difference today, to pick a completely politically neutral term -- [Intelligent design] (Laughter) We're beginning to practice intelligent design.
That means that instead of doing this at random and seeing what happens over generations, we're inserting specific genes, we're inserting specific proteins, and we're changing lifecode for very deliberate purposes.
And that allows us to accelerate how this stuff happens.
Let me just give you one example.
Some of you occasionally might think about sex.
And we kind of take it for granted how we've changed sex.
So we think it's perfectly normal and natural to change it.
What's happened with sex over time is -- normally, sex equals baby, eventually.
But in today's world, sex plus pill equals no baby.
(Laughter) And again, we think that's perfectly normal and natural, but that has not been the case for most of human history.
And it's not the case for animals.
What it is does is it gives us control, so sex becomes separate from conception.
And as you're thinking of the consequences of that, then we've been playing with stuff that's a little bit more advanced, like art.
Not in the sense of painting and sculpture, but in the sense of assisted reproductive technologies.
So what are assisted reproductive technologies?
Assisted reproductive technologies are things like in vitro fertilization.
And when you do in vitro fertilization, there's very good reasons to do it.
Sometimes you just can't conceive otherwise.
But when you do that, what you’re doing is separating sex, conception, baby.
So you haven't just taken control of when you have a baby, you've separated when the baby and where the baby is fertilized.
So you've separated the baby from the body from the act.
And as you're thinking of other things we've been doing, think about twins.
So you can freeze sperm, you can freeze eggs, you can freeze fertilized eggs.
And what does that mean?
Well, that's a good thing if you're a cancer patient.
You're about to go under chemotherapy or under radiation, so you save these things.
You don't irradiate them.
But if you can save them and you can freeze them, and you can have a surrogate mother, it means that you've decoupled sex from time.
It means you can have twins born -- oh, in 50 years?
(Laughter) In a hundred years?
Two hundred years?
And these are three really profound changes that are not, like, future stuff.
This is stuff we take for granted today.
So this lifecode stuff turns out to be a superpower.
It turns out to be this incredibly powerful way of changing viruses, of changing plants, of changing animals, perhaps even of evolving ourselves.
It's something that Steve Gullans and I have been thinking about for a while.
Let's have some risks.
Like every powerful technology, like electricity, like an automobile, like computers, this stuff potentially can be misused.
And that scares a lot of people.
And as you apply these technologies, you can even turn human beings into chimeras.
Remember the Greek myth where you mix animals?
Well, some of these treatments actually end up changing your blood type.
Or they'll put male cells in a female body or vice versa, which sounds absolutely horrible until you realize, the reason you're doing that is you're substituting bone marrow during cancer treatments.
So by taking somebody else's bone marrow, you may be changing some fundamental aspects of yourself, but you're also saving your life.
And as you're thinking about this stuff, here's something that happened 20 years ago.
This is Emma Ott.
She's a recent college admittee.
She's studying accounting.
She played two varsity sports. She graduated as a valedictorian.
And that's not particularly extraordinary, except that she's the first human being born to three parents.
Why?
Because she had a deadly mitochondrial disease that she might have inherited.
So when you swap out a third person's DNA and you put it in there, you save the lives of people.
But you also are doing germline engineering, which means her kids, if she has kids, will be saved and won't go through this.
And [their] kids will be saved, and their grandchildren will be saved, and this passes on.
That makes people nervous.
So 20 years ago, the various authorities said, why don't we study this for a while?
There are risks to doing stuff, and there are risks to not doing stuff, because there were a couple dozen people saved by this technology, and then we've been thinking about it for the next 20 years.
So as we think about it, as we take the time to say, "Hey, maybe we should have longer studies, maybe we should do this, maybe we should do that," there are consequences to acting, and there are consequences to not acting.
Like curing deadly diseases -- which, by the way, is completely unnatural.
It is normal and natural for humans to be felled by massive epidemics of polio, of smallpox, of tuberculosis.
When we put vaccines into people, we are putting unnatural things into their body because we think the benefit outweighs the risk.
Because we've built unnatural plants, unnatural animals, we can feed about seven billion people.
We can do things like create new life-forms.
And as you create new life-forms, again, that sounds terribly scary and terribly bothersome, until you realize that those life-forms live on your dining room table.
Those flowers you've got on your dining room table -- there's not a lot that's natural about them, because people have been breeding the flowers to make this color, to be this size, to last for a week.
You don't usually give your loved one wildflowers because they don't last a whole lot of time.
What all this does is it flips Darwin completely on his head.
See, for four billion years, what lived and died on this planet depended on two principles: on natural selection and random mutation.
And so what lived and died, what was structured, has now been flipped on its head.
And what we've done is created this completely parallel evolutionary system where we are practicing unnatural selection and non-random mutation.
So let me explain these things.
This is natural selection.
This is unnatural selection.
(Laughter) So what happens with this stuff is, we started breeding wolves thousands of years ago in central Asia to turn them into dogs.
And then we started turning them into big dogs and into little dogs.
But if you take one of the chihuahuas you see in the Hermès bags on Fifth Avenue and you let it loose on the African plain, you can watch natural selection happen.
(Laughter) Few things on Earth are less natural than a cornfield.
You will never, under any scenario, walk through a virgin forest and see the same plant growing in orderly rows at the same time, nothing else living there.
When you do a cornfield, you're selecting what lives and what dies.
And you're doing that through unnatural selection.
It's the same with a wheat field, it's the same with a rice field.
It's the same with a city, it's the same with a suburb.
In fact, half the surface of Earth has been unnaturally engineered so that what lives and what dies there is what we want, which is the reason why you don't have grizzly bears walking through downtown Manhattan.
How about this random mutation stuff?
Well, this is random mutation.
This is Antonio Alfonseca.
He's otherwise known as the Octopus, his nickname.
He was the Relief Pitcher of the Year in 2000.
And he had a random mutation that gave him six fingers on each hand, which turns out to be really useful if you're a pitcher.
(Laughter) How about non-random mutation?
A non-random mutation is beer.
It's wine. It's yogurt.
How many times have you walked through the forest and found all-natural cheese?
Or all-natural yogurt?
So we've been engineering this stuff.
Now, the interesting thing is, we get to know the stuff better.
We found one of the single most powerful gene-editing instruments, CRISPR, inside yogurt.
And as we start engineering cells, we're producing eight out of the top 10 pharmaceutical products, including the stuff that you use to treat arthritis, which is the number one best-selling drug, Humira.
So this lifecode stuff.
It really is a superpower.
It really is a way of programming stuff, and there's nothing that's going to change us more than this lifecode.
So as you're thinking of lifecode, let's think of five principles as to how we start guiding, and I'd love you to give me more.
So, principle number one: we have to take responsibility for this stuff.
The reason we have to take responsibility is because we're in charge.
These aren't random mutations.
This is what we are doing, what we are choosing.
It's not, "Stuff happened."
It didn't happen at random.
It didn't come down by a verdict of somebody else.
We engineer this stuff, and it's the Pottery Barn rule: you break it, you own it.
Principle number two: we have to recognize and celebrate diversity in this stuff.
There have been at least 33 versions of hominids that have walked around this Earth.
Most all of them went extinct except us.
But the normal and natural state of this Earth is we have various versions of humans walking around at the same time, which is why most of us have some Neanderthal in us.
Some of us have some Denisova in us.
And some in Washington have a lot more of it.
(Laughter) Principle number three: we have to respect other people's choices.
Some people will choose to never alter.
Some people will choose to alter all.
Some people will choose to alter plants but not animals.
Some people will choose to alter themselves.
Some people will choose to evolve themselves.
Diversity is not a bad thing, because even though we think of humans as very diverse, we came so close to extinction that all of us descend from a single African mother and the consequence of that is there's more genetic diversity in 55 African chimpanzees than there are in seven billion humans.
Principle number four: we should take about a quarter of the Earth and only let Darwin run the show there.
It doesn't have to be contiguous, doesn't have to all be tied together.
It should be part in the oceans, part on land.
But we should not run every evolutionary decision on this planet.
We want to have our evolutionary system running.
We want to have Darwin's evolutionary system running.
And it's just really important to have these two things running in parallel and not overwhelm evolution.
(Applause) Last thing I'll say.
This is the single most exciting adventure human beings have been on.
This is the single greatest superpower humans have ever had.
It would be a crime for you not to participate in this stuff because you're scared of it, because you're hiding from it.
You can participate in the ethics. You can participate in the politics.
You can participate in the business.
You can participate in just thinking about where medicine is going, where industry is going, where we're going to take the world.
It would be a crime for all of us not to be aware when somebody shows up at a swimming pool and says one word, just one word, if you don't listen if that word is "lifecode."
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Seven years ago, a student came to me and asked me to invest in his company.
He said, "I'm working with three friends, and we're going to try to disrupt an industry by selling stuff online."
And I said, "OK, you guys spent the whole summer on this, right?"
"No, we all took internships just in case it doesn't work out."
"All right, but you're going to go in full time once you graduate."
"Not exactly. We've all lined up backup jobs."
Six months go by, it's the day before the company launches, and there is still not a functioning website.
"You guys realize, the entire company is a website.
That's literally all it is."
So I obviously declined to invest.
And they ended up naming the company Warby Parker.
(Laughter) They sell glasses online.
They were recently recognized as the world's most innovative company and valued at over a billion dollars.
And now? My wife handles our investments.
Why was I so wrong?
To find out, I've been studying people that I come to call "originals."
Originals are nonconformists, people who not only have new ideas but take action to champion them.
They are people who stand out and speak up.
Originals drive creativity and change in the world.
They're the people you want to bet on.
And they look nothing like I expected.
I want to show you today three things I've learned about recognizing originals and becoming a little bit more like them.
So the first reason that I passed on Warby Parker was they were really slow getting off the ground.
Now, you are all intimately familiar with the mind of a procrastinator.
Well, I have a confession for you. I'm the opposite. I'm a precrastinator.
Yes, that's an actual term.
You know that panic you feel a few hours before a big deadline when you haven't done anything yet.
I just feel that a few months ahead of time.
(Laughter) So this started early: when I was a kid, I took Nintendo games very seriously.
I would wake up at 5am, start playing and not stop until I had mastered them.
Eventually it got so out of hand that a local newspaper came and did a story on the dark side of Nintendo, starring me.
(Laughter) (Applause) Since then, I have traded hair for teeth.
(Laughter) But this served me well in college, because I finished my senior thesis four months before the deadline.
And I was proud of that, until a few years ago.
I had a student named Jihae, who came to me and said, "I have my most creative ideas when I'm procrastinating."
And I was like, "That's cute, where are the four papers you owe me?"
(Laughter) No, she was one of our most creative students, and as an organizational psychologist, this is the kind of idea that I test.
So I challenged her to get some data.
She goes into a bunch of companies.
She has people fill out surveys about how often they procrastinate.
Then she gets their bosses to rate how creative and innovative they are.
And sure enough, the precrastinators like me, who rush in and do everything early are rated as less creative than people who procrastinate moderately.
So I want to know what happens to the chronic procrastinators.
She was like, "I don't know. They didn't fill out my survey."
(Laughter) No, here are our results.
You actually do see that the people who wait until the last minute are so busy goofing off that they don't have any new ideas.
And on the flip side, the people who race in are in such a frenzy of anxiety that they don't have original thoughts either.
There's a sweet spot where originals seem to live.
Why is this?
Maybe original people just have bad work habits.
Maybe procrastinating does not cause creativity.
To find out, we designed some experiments.
We asked people to generate new business ideas, and then we get independent readers to evaluate how creative and useful they are.
And some of them are asked to do the task right away.
Others we randomly assign to procrastinate by dangling Minesweeper in front of them for either five or 10 minutes.
And sure enough, the moderate procrastinators are 16 percent more creative than the other two groups.
Now, Minesweeper is awesome, but it's not the driver of the effect, because if you play the game first before you learn about the task, there's no creativity boost.
It's only when you're told that you're going to be working on this problem, and then you start procrastinating, but the task is still active in the back of your mind, that you start to incubate.
Procrastination gives you time to consider divergent ideas, to think in nonlinear ways, to make unexpected leaps.
So just as we were finishing these experiments, I was starting to write a book about originals, and I thought, "This is the perfect time to teach myself to procrastinate, while writing a chapter on procrastination."
So I metaprocrastinated, and like any self-respecting precrastinator, I woke up early the next morning and I made a to-do list with steps on how to procrastinate.
(Laughter) And then I worked diligently toward my goal of not making progress toward my goal.
I started writing the procrastination chapter, and one day -- I was halfway through -- I literally put it away in mid-sentence for months.
It was agony.
But when I came back to it, I had all sorts of new ideas.
As Aaron Sorkin put it, "You call it procrastinating. I call it thinking."
And along the way I discovered that a lot of great originals in history were procrastinators.
Take Leonardo da Vinci.
He toiled on and off for 16 years on the Mona Lisa.
He felt like a failure.
He wrote as much in his journal.
But some of the diversions he took in optics transformed the way that he modeled light and made him into a much better painter.
What about Martin Luther King, Jr.?
The night before the biggest speech of his life, the March on Washington, he was up past 3am, rewriting it.
He's sitting in the audience waiting for his turn to go onstage, and he is still scribbling notes and crossing out lines.
When he gets onstage, 11 minutes in, he leaves his prepared remarks to utter four words that changed the course of history: "I have a dream."
That was not in the script.
By delaying the task of finalizing the speech until the very last minute, he left himself open to the widest range of possible ideas.
And because the text wasn't set in stone, he had freedom to improvise.
Procrastinating is a vice when it comes to productivity, but it can be a virtue for creativity.
What you see with a lot of great originals is that they are quick to start but they're slow to finish.
And this is what I missed with Warby Parker.
When they were dragging their heels for six months, I looked at them and said, "You know, a lot of other companies are starting to sell glasses online."
They missed the first-mover advantage.
But what I didn't realize was they were spending all that time trying to figure out how to get people to be comfortable ordering glasses online.
And it turns out the first-mover advantage is mostly a myth.
Look at a classic study of over 50 product categories, comparing the first movers who created the market with the improvers who introduced something different and better.
What you see is that the first movers had a failure rate of 47 percent, compared with only 8 percent for the improvers.
Look at Facebook, waiting to build a social network until after Myspace and Friendster.
Look at Google, waiting for years after Altavista and Yahoo.
It's much easier to improve on somebody else's idea than it is to create something new from scratch.
So the lesson I learned is that to be original you don't have to be first.
You just have to be different and better.
But that wasn't the only reason I passed on Warby Parker.
They were also full of doubts.
They had backup plans lined up, and that made me doubt that they had the courage to be original, because I expected that originals would look something like this.
(Laughter) Now, on the surface, a lot of original people look confident, but behind the scenes, they feel the same fear and doubt that the rest of us do.
They just manage it differently.
Let me show you: this is a depiction of how the creative process works for most of us.
(Laughter) Now, in my research, I discovered there are two different kinds of doubt.
There's self-doubt and idea doubt.
Self-doubt is paralyzing.
It leads you to freeze.
But idea doubt is energizing.
It motivates you to test, to experiment, to refine, just like MLK did.
And so the key to being original is just a simple thing of avoiding the leap from step three to step four.
Instead of saying, "I'm crap," you say, "The first few drafts are always crap, and I'm just not there yet."
So how do you get there?
Well, there's a clue, it turns out, in the Internet browser that you use.
We can predict your job performance and your commitment just by knowing what web browser you use.
Now, some of you are not going to like the results of this study -- (Laughter) But there is good evidence that Firefox and Chrome users significantly outperform Internet Explorer and Safari users.
Yes.
(Applause) They also stay in their jobs 15 percent longer, by the way.
Why? It's not a technical advantage.
The four browser groups on average have similar typing speed and they also have similar levels of computer knowledge.
It's about how you got the browser.
Because if you use Internet Explorer or Safari, those came preinstalled on your computer, and you accepted the default option that was handed to you.
If you wanted Firefox or Chrome, you had to doubt the default and ask, is there a different option out there, and then be a little resourceful and download a new browser.
So people hear about this study and they're like, "Great, if I want to get better at my job, I just need to upgrade my browser?"
(Laughter) No, it's about being the kind of person who takes the initiative to doubt the default and look for a better option.
And if you do that well, you will open yourself up to the opposite of déjà vu.
There's a name for it. It's called vuja de.
(Laughter) Vuja de is when you look at something you've seen many times before and all of a sudden see it with fresh eyes.
It's a screenwriter who looks at a movie script that can't get the green light for more than half a century.
In every past version, the main character has been an evil queen.
But Jennifer Lee starts to question whether that makes sense.
She rewrites the first act, reinvents the villain as a tortured hero and Frozen becomes the most successful animated movie ever.
So there's a simple message from this story.
When you feel doubt, don't let it go.
(Laughter) What about fear?
Originals feel fear, too.
They're afraid of failing, but what sets them apart from the rest of us is that they're even more afraid of failing to try.
They know you can fail by starting a business that goes bankrupt or by failing to start a business at all.
They know that in the long run, our biggest regrets are not our actions but our inactions.
The things we wish we could redo, if you look at the science, are the chances not taken.
Elon Musk told me recently, he didn't expect Tesla to succeed.
He was sure the first few SpaceX launches would fail to make it to orbit, let alone get back, but it was too important not to try.
And for so many of us, when we have an important idea, we don't bother to try.
But I have some good news for you.
You are not going to get judged on your bad ideas.
A lot of people think they will.
If you look across industries and ask people about their biggest idea, their most important suggestion, 85 percent of them stayed silent instead of speaking up.
They were afraid of embarrassing themselves, of looking stupid.
But guess what? Originals have lots and lots of bad ideas, tons of them, in fact.
Take the guy who invented this.
Do you care that he came up with a talking doll so creepy that it scared not only kids but adults, too?
No. You celebrate Thomas Edison for pioneering the light bulb.
(Laughter) If you look across fields, the greatest originals are the ones who fail the most, because they're the ones who try the most.
Take classical composers, the best of the best.
Why do some of them get more pages in encyclopedias than others and also have their compositions rerecorded more times?
One of the best predictors is the sheer volume of compositions that they generate.
The more output you churn out, the more variety you get and the better your chances of stumbling on something truly original.
Even the three icons of classical music -- Bach, Beethoven, Mozart -- had to generate hundreds and hundreds of compositions to come up with a much smaller number of masterpieces.
Now, you may be wondering, how did this guy become great without doing a whole lot?
I don't know how Wagner pulled that off.
But for most of us, if we want to be more original, we have to generate more ideas.
The Warby Parker founders, when they were trying to name their company, they needed something sophisticated, unique, with no negative associations to build a retail brand, and they tested over 2,000 possibilities before they finally put together Warby and Parker.
So if you put all this together, what you see is that originals are not that different from the rest of us.
They feel fear and doubt. They procrastinate.
They have bad ideas.
And sometimes, it's not in spite of those qualities but because of them that they succeed.
So when you see those things, don't make the same mistake I did.
Don't write them off.
And when that's you, don't count yourself out either.
Know that being quick to start but slow to finish can boost your creativity, that you can motivate yourself by doubting your ideas and embracing the fear of failing to try, and that you need a lot of bad ideas in order to get a few good ones.
Look, being original is not easy, but I have no doubt about this: it's the best way to improve the world around us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to reimagine how life is organized on earth.
Think of the planet like a human body that we inhabit.
The skeleton is the transportation system of roads and railways, bridges and tunnels, air and seaports that enable our mobility across the continents.
The vascular system that powers the body are the oil and gas pipelines and electricity grids.
that distribute energy.
And the nervous system of communications is the Internet cables, satellites, cellular networks and data centers that allow us to share information.
This ever-expanding infrastructural matrix already consists of 64 million kilometers of roads, four million kilometers of railways, two million kilometers of pipelines and one million kilometers of Internet cables.
What about international borders?
We have less than 500,000 kilometers of borders.
Let's build a better map of the world.
And we can start by overcoming some ancient mythology.
There's a saying with which all students of history are familiar: "Geography is destiny."
Sounds so grave, doesn't it?
It's such a fatalistic adage.
It tells us that landlocked countries are condemned to be poor, that small countries cannot escape their larger neighbors, that vast distances are insurmountable.
But every journey I take around the world, I see an even greater force sweeping the planet: connectivity.
The global connectivity revolution, in all of its forms -- transportation, energy and communications -- has enabled such a quantum leap in the mobility of people, of goods, of resources, of knowledge, such that we can no longer even think of geography as distinct from it.
In fact, I view the two forces as fusing together into what I call "connectography."
Connectography represents a quantum leap in the mobility of people, resources and ideas, but it is an evolution, an evolution of the world from political geography, which is how we legally divide the world, to functional geography, which is how we actually use the world, from nations and borders, to infrastructure and supply chains.
Our global system is evolving from the vertically integrated empires of the 19th century, through the horizontally interdependent nations of the 20th century, into a global network civilization in the 21st century.
Connectivity, not sovereignty, has become the organizing principle of the human species.
(Applause) We are becoming this global network civilization because we are literally building it.
All of the world's defense budgets and military spending taken together total just under two trillion dollars per year.
Meanwhile, our global infrastructure spending is projected to rise to nine trillion dollars per year within the coming decade.
And, well, it should.
We have been living off an infrastructure stock meant for a world population of three billion, as our population has crossed seven billion to eight billion and eventually nine billion and more.
As a rule of thumb, we should spend about one trillion dollars on the basic infrastructure needs of every billion people in the world.
Not surprisingly, Asia is in the lead.
In 2015, China announced the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which together with a network of other organizations aims to construct a network of iron and silk roads, stretching from Shanghai to Lisbon.
And as all of this topographical engineering unfolds, we will likely spend more on infrastructure in the next 40 years, we will build more infrastructure in the next 40 years, than we have in the past 4,000 years.
Now let's stop and think about it for a minute.
Spending so much more on building the foundations of global society rather than on the tools to destroy it can have profound consequences.
Connectivity is how we optimize the distribution of people and resources around the world.
It is how mankind comes to be more than just the sum of its parts.
I believe that is what is happening.
Connectivity has a twin megatrend in the 21st century: planetary urbanization.
Cities are the infrastructures that most define us.
By 2030, more than two thirds of the world's population will live in cities.
And these are not mere little dots on the map, but they are vast archipelagos stretching hundreds of kilometers.
Here we are in Vancouver, at the head of the Cascadia Corridor that stretches south across the US border to Seattle.
The technology powerhouse of Silicon Valley begins north of San Francisco down to San Jose and across the bay to Oakland.
The sprawl of Los Angeles now passes San Diego across the Mexican border to Tijuana.
San Diego and Tijuana now share an airport terminal where you can exit into either country.
Eventually, a high-speed rail network may connect the entire Pacific spine.
America's northeastern megalopolis begins in Boston through New York and Philadelphia to Washington.
It contains more than 50 million people and also has plans for a high-speed rail network.
But Asia is where we really see the megacities coming together.
This continuous strip of light from Tokyo through Nagoya to Osaka contains more than 80 million people and most of Japan's economy.
It is the world's largest megacity.
For now.
But in China, megacity clusters are coming together with populations reaching 100 million people.
The Bohai Rim around Beijing, The Yangtze River Delta around Shanghai and the Pearl River Delta, stretching from Hong Kong north to Guangzhou.
And in the middle, the Chongqing-Chengdu megacity cluster, whose geographic footprint is almost the same size as the country of Austria.
And any number of these megacity clusters has a GDP approaching two trillion dollars -- that's almost the same as all of India today.
So imagine if our global diplomatic institutions, such as the G20, were to base their membership on economic size rather than national representation.
Some Chinese megacities may be in and have a seat at the table, while entire countries, like Argentina or Indonesia would be out.
Moving to India, whose population will soon exceed that of China, it too has a number of megacity clusters, such as the Delhi Capital Region and Mumbai.
In the Middle East, Greater Tehran is absorbing one third of Iran's population.
Most of Egypt's 80 million people live in the corridor between Cairo and Alexandria.
And in the gulf, a necklace of city-states is forming, from Bahrain and Qatar, through the United Arab Emirates to Muscat in Oman.
And then there's Lagos, Africa's largest city and Nigeria's commercial hub.
It has plans for a rail network that will make it the anchor of a vast Atlantic coastal corridor, stretching across Benin, Togo and Ghana, to Abidjan, the capital of the Ivory Coast.
But these countries are suburbs of Lagos.
In a megacity world, countries can be suburbs of cities.
By 2030, we will have as many as 50 such megacity clusters in the world.
So which map tells you more?
Our traditional map of 200 discrete nations that hang on most of our walls, or this map of the 50 megacity clusters?
And yet, even this is incomplete because you cannot understand any individual megacity without understanding its connections to the others.
People move to cities to be connected, and connectivity is why these cities thrive.
Any number of them, such as Sao Paulo or Istanbul or Moscow, has a GDP approaching or exceeding one third of one half of their entire national GDP.
But equally importantly, you cannot calculate any of their individual value without understanding the role of the flows of people, of finance, of technology that enable them to thrive.
Take the Gauteng province of South Africa, which contains Johannesburg and the capital Pretoria.
It too represents just over a third of South Africa's GDP.
But equally importantly, it is home to the offices of almost every single multinational corporation that invests directly into South Africa and indeed, into the entire African continent.
Cities want to be part of global value chains.
They want to be part of this global division of labor.
That is how cities think.
I've never met a mayor who said to me, "I want my city to be cut off."
They know that their cities belong as much to the global network civilization as to their home countries.
Now, for many people, urbanization causes great dismay.
They think cities are wrecking the planet.
But right now, there are more than 200 intercity learning networks thriving.
That is as many as the number of intergovernmental organizations that we have.
And all of these intercity networks are devoted to one purpose, mankind's number one priority in the 21st century: sustainable urbanization.
Is it working?
Let's take climate change.
We know that summit after summit in New York and Paris is not going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
But what we can see is that transferring technology and knowledge and policies between cities is how we've actually begun to reduce the carbon intensity of our economies.
Cities are learning from each other.
How to install zero-emissions buildings, how to deploy electric car-sharing systems.
In major Chinese cities, they're imposing quotas on the number of cars on the streets.
In many Western cities, young people don't even want to drive anymore.
Cities have been part of the problem, now they are part of the solution.
Inequality is the other great challenge to achieving sustainable urbanization.
When I travel through megacities from end to end -- it takes hours and days -- I experience the tragedy of extreme disparity within the same geography.
And yet, our global stock of financial assets has never been larger, approaching 300 trillion dollars.
That's almost four times the actual GDP of the world.
We have taken on such enormous debts since the financial crisis, but have we invested them in inclusive growth?
No, not yet.
Only when we build sufficient, affordable public housing, when we invest in robust transportation networks to allow people to connect to each other both physically and digitally, that's when our divided cities and societies will come to feel whole again.
(Applause) And that is why infrastructure has just been included in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, because it enables all the others.
Our political and economic leaders are learning that connectivity is not charity, it's opportunity.
And that's why our financial community needs to understand that connectivity is the most important asset class of the 21st century.
Now, cities can make the world more sustainable, they can make the world more equitable, I also believe that connectivity between cities can make the world more peaceful.
If we look at regions of the world with dense relations across borders, we see more trade, more investment and more stability.
We all know the story of Europe after World War II, where industrial integration kicked off a process that gave rise to today's peaceful European Union.
And you can see that Russia, by the way, is the least connected of major powers in the international system.
And that goes a long way towards explaining the tensions today.
Countries that have less stake in the system also have less to lose in disturbing it.
In North America, the lines that matter most on the map are not the US-Canada border or the US-Mexico border, but the dense network of roads and railways and pipelines and electricity grids and even water canals that are forming an integrated North American union.
North America does not need more walls, it needs more connections.
(Applause) But the real promise of connectivity is in the postcolonial world.
All of those regions where borders have historically been the most arbitrary and where generations of leaders have had hostile relations with each other.
But now a new group of leaders has come into power and is burying the hatchet.
Let's take Southeast Asia, where high-speed rail networks are planned to connect Bangkok to Singapore and trade corridors from Vietnam to Myanmar.
Now this region of 600 million people coordinates its agricultural resources and its industrial output.
It is evolving into what I call a Pax Asiana, a peace among Southeast Asian nations.
A similar phenomenon is underway in East Africa, where a half dozen countries are investing in railways and multimodal corridors so that landlocked countries can get their goods to market.
Now these countries coordinate their utilities and their investment policies.
They, too, are evolving into a Pax Africana.
One region we know could especially use this kind of thinking is the Middle East.
As Arab states tragically collapse, what is left behind but the ancient cities, such as Cairo, Beirut and Baghdad?
In fact, the nearly 400 million people of the Arab world are almost entirely urbanized.
As societies, as cities, they are either water rich or water poor, energy rich or energy poor.
And the only way to correct these mismatches is not through more wars and more borders, but through more connectivity of pipelines and water canals.
Sadly, this is not yet the map of the Middle East.
But it should be, a connected Pax Arabia, internally integrated and productively connected to its neighbors: Europe, Asia and Africa.
Now, it may not seem like connectivity is what we want right now towards the world's most turbulent region.
But we know from history that more connectivity is the only way to bring about stability in the long run.
Because we know that in region after region, connectivity is the new reality.
Cities and countries are learning to aggregate into more peaceful and prosperous wholes.
But the real test is going to be Asia.
Can connectivity overcome the patterns of rivalry among the great powers of the Far East?
After all, this is where World War III is supposed to break out.
Since the end of the Cold War, a quarter century ago, at least six major wars have been predicted for this region.
But none have broken out.
Take China and Taiwan.
In the 1990s, this was everyone's leading World War III scenario.
But since that time, the trade and investment volumes across the straits have become so intense that last November, leaders from both sides held a historic summit to discuss eventual peaceful reunification.
And even the election of a nationalist party in Taiwan that's pro-independence earlier this year does not undermine this fundamental dynamic.
China and Japan have an even longer history of rivalry and have been deploying their air forces and navies to show their strength in island disputes.
But in recent years, Japan has been making its largest foreign investments in China.
Japanese cars are selling in record numbers there.
And guess where the largest number of foreigners residing in Japan today comes from?
You guessed it: China.
China and India have fought a major war and have three outstanding border disputes, but today India is the second largest shareholder in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
They're building a trade corridor stretching from Northeast India through Myanmar and Bangladesh to Southern China.
Their trade volume has grown from 20 billion dollars a decade ago to 80 billion dollars today.
Nuclear-armed India and Pakistan have fought three wars and continue to dispute Kashmir, but they're also negotiating a most-favored-nation trade agreement and want to complete a pipeline stretching from Iran through Pakistan to India.
And let's talk about Iran.
Wasn't it just two years ago that war with Iran seemed inevitable?
Then why is every single major power rushing to do business there today?
Ladies and gentlemen, I cannot guarantee that World War III will not break out.
But we can definitely see why it hasn't happened yet.
Even though Asia is home to the world's fastest growing militaries, these same countries are also investing billions of dollars in each other's infrastructure and supply chains.
They are more interested in each other's functional geography than in their political geography.
And that is why their leaders think twice, step back from the brink, and decide to focus on economic ties over territorial tensions.
So often it seems like the world is falling apart, but building more connectivity is how we put Humpty Dumpty back together again, much better than before.
And by wrapping the world in such seamless physical and digital connectivity, we evolve towards a world in which people can rise above their geographic constraints.
We are the cells and vessels pulsing through these global connectivity networks.
Everyday, hundreds of millions of people go online and work with people they've never met.
More than one billion people cross borders every year, and that's expected to rise to three billion in the coming decade.
We don't just build connectivity, we embody it.
We are the global network civilization, and this is our map.
A map of the world in which geography is no longer destiny.
Instead, the future has a new and more hopeful motto: connectivity is destiny.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Strap yourselves in, we're going to Mars.
Not just a few astronauts -- thousands of people are going to colonize Mars.
And I am telling you that they're going to do this soon.
Some of you will end up working on projects on Mars, and I guarantee that some of your children will end up living there.
That probably sounds preposterous, so I'm going to share with you how and when that will happen.
But first I want to discuss the obvious question: Why the heck should we do this?
12 years ago, I gave a TED talk on 10 ways the world could end suddenly.
We are incredibly vulnerable to the whims of our own galaxy.
A single, large asteroid could take us out forever.
To survive we have to reach beyond the home planet.
Think what a tragedy it would be if all that humans have accomplished were suddenly obliterated.
And there's another reason we should go: exploration is in our DNA.
Two million years ago humans evolved in Africa and then slowly but surely spread out across the entire planet by reaching into the wilderness that was beyond their horizons.
This stuff is inside us.
And they prospered doing that.
Some of the greatest advances in civilization and technology came because we explored.
Yes, we could do a lot of good with the money it will take to establish a thriving colony on Mars.
And yes we should all be taking far better care of our own home planet.
And yes, I worry we could screw up Mars the way we've screwed up Earth.
But think for a moment, what we had when John F. Kennedy told us we would put a human on the moon.
He excited an entire generation to dream.
Think how inspired we will be to see a landing on Mars.
Perhaps then we will look back at Earth and see that that is one people instead of many and perhaps then we will look back at Earth, as we struggle to survive on Mars, and realize how precious the home planet is.
So let me tell you about the extraordinary adventure we're about to undertake.
But first, a few fascinating facts about where we're going.
This picture actually represents the true size of Mars compared to Earth.
Mars is not our sister planet.
It's far less than half the size of the Earth, and yet despite the fact that it's smaller, the surface area of Mars that you can stand on is equivalent to the surface area of the Earth that you can stand on, because the Earth is mostly covered by water.
The atmosphere on Mars is really thin -- 100 times thinner than on Earth -- and it's not breathable, it's 96 percent carbon dioxide.
It's really cold there.
The average temperature is minus 81 degrees, although there is quite a range of temperature.
A day on Mars is about as long as a day on Earth, plus about 39 minutes.
Seasons and years on Mars are twice as long as they are on Earth.
And for anybody who wants to strap on some wings and go flying one day, Mars has a lot less gravity than on Earth, and it's the kind of place where you can jump over your car instead of walk around it.
Now, as you can see, Mars isn't exactly Earth-like, but it's by far the most livable other place in our entire solar system.
Here's the problem.
Mars is a long way away, a thousand times farther away from us than our own moon.
The Moon is 250,000 miles away and it took Apollo astronauts three days to get there.
Mars is 250 million miles away and it will take us eight months to get there -- 240 days.
And that's only if we launch on a very specific day, at a very specific time, once every two years, when Mars and the Earth are aligned just so, so the distance that the rocket would have to travel will be the shortest.
240 days is a long time to spend trapped with your colleagues in a tin can.
And meanwhile, our track record of getting to Mars is lousy.
We and the Russians, the Europeans, the Japanese, the Chinese and the Indians, have actually sent 44 rockets there, and the vast majority of them have either missed or crashed.
Only about a third of the missions to Mars have been successful.
And we don't at the moment have a rocket big enough to get there anyway.
We once had that rocket, the Saturn V.
A couple of Saturn Vs would have gotten us there.
It was the most magnificent machine ever built by humans, and it was the rocket that took us to the Moon.
But the last Saturn V was used in 1973 to launch the Skylab space station, and we decided to do something called the shuttle instead of continuing on to Mars after we landed on the Moon.
The biggest rocket we have now is only half big enough to get us anything to Mars.
So getting to Mars is not going to be easy and that brings up a really interesting question ...
how soon will the first humans actually land here?
Now, some pundits think if we got there by 2050, that'd be a pretty good achievement.
These days, NASA seems to be saying that it can get humans to Mars by 2040.
Maybe they can.
I believe that they can get human beings into Mars orbit by 2035.
But frankly, I don't think they're going to bother in 2035 to send a rocket to Mars, because we will already be there.
We're going to land on Mars in 2027.
And the reason is this man is determined to make that happen.
His name is Elon Musk, he's the CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.
Now, he actually told me that we would land on Mars by 2025, but Elon Musk is more optimistic than I am -- and that's going a ways -- so I'm giving him a couple of years of slack.
Still ...
you've got to ask yourself, can this guy really do this by 2025 or 2027?
Well, let's put a decade with Elon Musk into a little perspective.
Where was this 10 years ago?
That's the Tesla electric automobile.
In 2005, a lot of people in the automobile industry were saying, we would not have a decent electric car for 50 years.
And where was that?
That is SpaceX's Falcon 9 rocket, lifting six tons of supplies to the International Space Station.
10 years ago, SpaceX had not launched anything, or fired a rocket to anywhere.
So I think it's a pretty good bet that the person who is revolutionizing the automobile industry in less than 10 years and the person who created an entire rocket company in less than 10 years will get us to Mars by 2027.
Now, you need to know this: governments and robots no longer control this game.
Private companies are leaping into space and they will be happy to take you to Mars.
And that raises a really big question.
Can we actually live there?
Now, NASA may not be able to get us there until 2040, or we may get there a long time before NASA, but NASA has taken a huge responsibility in figuring out how we can live on Mars.
Let's look at the problem this way.
Here's what you need to live on Earth: food, water, shelter and clothing.
And here's what you need to live on Mars: all of the above, plus oxygen.
So let's look at the most important thing on this list first.
Water is the basis of all life as we know it, and it's far too heavy for us to carry water from the Earth to Mars to live, so we have to find water if our life is going to succeed on Mars.
And if you look at Mars, it looks really dry, it looks like the entire planet is a desert.
But it turns out that it's not.
The soil alone on Mars contains up to 60 percent water.
And a number of orbiters that we still have flying around Mars have shown us -- and by the way, that's a real photograph -- that lots of craters on Mars have a sheet of water ice in them.
It's not a bad place to start a colony.
Now, here's a view of a little dig the Phoenix Lander did in 2008, showing that just below the surface of the soil is ice -- that white stuff is ice.
In the second picture, which is four days later than the first picture, you can see that some of it is evaporating.
Orbiters also tell us that there are huge amounts of underground water on Mars as well as glaciers.
In fact, if only the water ice at the poles on Mars melted, most of the planet would be under 30 feet of water.
So there's plenty of water there, but most of it's ice, most of it's underground, it takes a lot of energy to get it and a lot of human labor.
This is a device cooked up at the University of Washington back in 1998.
It's basically a low-tech dehumidifier.
And it turns out the Mars atmosphere is often 100 percent humid.
So this device can extract all the water that humans will need simply from the atmosphere on Mars.
Next we have to worry about what we will breathe.
Frankly, I was really shocked to find out that NASA has this problem worked out.
This is a scientist at MIT named Michael Hecht.
And he's developed this machine, Moxie.
I love this thing.
It's a reverse fuel cell, essentially, that sucks in the Martian atmosphere and pumps out oxygen.
And you have to remember that CO2 -- carbon dioxide, which is 96 percent of Mars' atmosphere -- CO2 is basically 78 percent oxygen.
Now, the next big rover that NASA sends to Mars in 2020 is going to have one of these devices aboard, and it will be able to produce enough oxygen to keep one person alive indefinitely.
But the secret to this -- and that's just for testing -- the secret to this is that this thing was designed from the get-go to be scalable by a factor of 100.
Next, what will we eat?
Well, we'll use hydroponics to grow food, but we're not going to be able to grow more than 15 to 20 percent of our food there, at least not until water is running on the surface of Mars and we actually have the probability and the capability of planting crops.
In the meantime, most of our food will arrive from Earth, and it will be dried.
And then we need some shelter.
At first we can use inflatable, pressurized buildings as well as the landers themselves.
But this really only works during the daytime.
There is too much solar radiation and too much radiation from cosmic rays.
So we really have to go underground.
Now, it turns out that the soil on Mars, by and large, is perfect for making bricks.
And NASA has figured this one out, too.
They're going to throw some polymer plastic into the bricks, shove them in a microwave oven, and then you will be able to build buildings with really thick walls.
Or we may choose to live underground in caves or in lava tubes, of which there are plenty.
And finally there's clothing.
On Earth we have miles of atmosphere piled up on us, which creates 15 pounds of pressure on our bodies at all times, and we're constantly pushing out against that.
On Mars there's hardly any atmospheric pressure.
So Dava Newman, a scientist at MIT, has created this sleek space suit.
It will keep us together, block radiation and keep us warm.
So let's think about this for a minute.
Food, shelter, clothing, water, oxygen ...
we can do this.
We really can.
But it's still a little complicated and a little difficult.
So that leads to the next big -- really big step -- in living the good life on Mars.
And that's terraforming the planet: making it more like Earth, reengineering an entire planet.
That sounds like a lot of hubris, but the truth is that the technology to do everything I'm about to tell you already exists.
First we've got to warm it up.
Mars is incredibly cold because it has a very thin atmosphere.
The answer lies here, at the south pole and at the north pole of Mars, both of which are covered with an incredible amount of frozen carbon dioxide -- dry ice.
If we heat it up, it sublimes directly into the atmosphere and thickens the atmosphere the same way it does on Earth.
And as we know, CO2 is an incredibly potent greenhouse gas.
Now, my favorite way of doing this is to erect a very, very large solar sail and focus it -- it essentially serves as a mirror -- and focus it on the south pole of Mars at first.
As the planet spins, it will heat up all that dry ice, sublime it, and it will go into the atmosphere.
It actually won't take long for the temperature on Mars to start rising, probably less than 20 years.
Right now, on a perfect day at the equator, in the middle of summer on Mars, temperatures can actually reach 70 degrees, but then they go down to minus 100 at night.
(Laughter) What we're shooting for is a runaway greenhouse effect: enough temperature rise to see a lot of that ice on Mars -- especially the ice in the ground -- melt.
Then we get some real magic.
As the atmosphere gets thicker, everything gets better.
We get more protection from radiation, more atmosphere makes us warmer, makes the planet warmer, so we get running water and that makes crops possible.
Then more water vapor goes into the air, forming yet another potent greenhouse gas.
It will rain and it will snow on Mars.
And a thicker atmosphere will create enough pressure so that we can throw away those space suits.
We only need about five pounds of pressure to survive.
Eventually, Mars will be made to feel a lot like British Columbia.
We'll still be left with the complicated problem of making the atmosphere breathable, and frankly that could take 1,000 years to accomplish.
But humans are amazingly smart and incredibly adaptable.
There is no telling what our future technology will be able to accomplish and no telling what we can do with our own bodies.
In biology right now, we are on the very verge of being able to control our own genetics, what the genes in our own bodies are doing, and certainly, eventually, our own evolution.
We could end up with a species of human being on Earth that is slightly different from the species of human beings on Mars.
But what would you do there? How would you live?
It's going to be the same as it is on Earth.
Somebody's going to start a restaurant, somebody's going to build an iron foundry.
Someone will make documentary movies of Mars and sell them on Earth.
Some idiot will start a reality TV show.
(Laughter) There will be software companies, there will be hotels, there will be bars.
This much is certain: it will be the most disruptive event in our lifetimes, and I think it will be the most inspiring.
Ask any 10-year-old girl if she wants to go to Mars.
Children who are now in elementary school are going to choose to live there.
Remember when we landed humans on the Moon?
When that happened, people looked at each other and said, "If we can do this, we can do anything."
What are they going to think when we actually form a colony on Mars?
Most importantly, it will make us a spacefaring species.
And that means humans will survive no matter what happens on Earth.
We will never be the last of our kind.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to introduce you to an amazing woman.
Her name is Davinia.
Davinia was born in Jamaica, emigrated to the US at the age of 18, and now lives just outside of Washington, DC.
She's not a high-powered political staffer, nor a lobbyist.
She'd probably tell you she's quite unremarkable, but she's having the most remarkable impact.
What's incredible about Davinia is that she's willing to spend time every single week focused on people who are not her: people not her in her neighborhood, her state, nor even in her country -- people she'd likely never meet.
Davinia's impact started a few years ago when she reached out to all of her friends on Facebook, and asked them to donate their pennies so she could fund girls' education.
She wasn't expecting a huge response, but 700,000 pennies later, she's now sent over 120 girls to school.
When we spoke last week, she told me she's become a little infamous at the local bank every time she rocks up with a shopping cart full of pennies.
Now -- Davinia is not alone.
Far from it.
She's part of a growing movement.
And there's a name for people like Davinia: global citizens.
A global citizen is someone who self-identifies first and foremost not as a member of a state, a tribe or a nation, but as a member of the human race, and someone who is prepared to act on that belief, to tackle our world's greatest challenges.
Our work is focused on finding, supporting and activating global citizens.
They exist in every country and among every demographic.
I want to make the case to you today that the world's future depends on global citizens.
I'm convinced that if we had more global citizens active in our world, then every single one of the major challenges we face -- from poverty, climate change, gender inequality -- these issues become solvable.
They are ultimately global issues, and they can ultimately only be solved by global citizens demanding global solutions from their leaders.
Now, some people's immediate reaction to this idea is that it's either a bit utopian or even threatening.
So I'd like to share with you a little of my story today, how I ended up here, how it connects with Davinia and, hopefully, with you.
Growing up in Melbourne, Australia, I was one of those seriously irritating little kids that never, ever stopped asking, "Why?"
You might have been one yourself.
I used to ask my mum the most annoying questions.
I'd ask her questions like, "Mum, why I can't I dress up and play with puppets all day?"
"Why do you want fries with that?"
"What is a shrimp, and why do we have to keep throwing them on the barbie?"
(Laughter) "And mum -- this haircut.
Why?"
(Laughter) The worst haircut, I think.
Still terrible.
As a "why" kid, I thought I could change the world, and it was impossible to convince me otherwise.
And when I was 12 and in my first year of high school, I started raising money for communities in the developing world.
We were a really enthusiastic group of kids, and we raised more money than any other school in Australia.
And so I was awarded the chance to go to the Philippines to learn more.
It was 1998.
We were taken into a slum in the outskirts of Manila.
It was there I became friends with Sonny Boy, who lived on what was literally a pile of steaming garbage.
"Smoky Mountain" was what they called it.
But don't let the romance of that name fool you, because it was nothing more than a rancid landfill that kids like Sonny Boy spent hours rummaging through every single day to find something, anything of value.
That night with Sonny Boy and his family changed my life forever, because when it came time to go to sleep, we simply laid down on this concrete slab the size of half my bedroom with myself, Sonny Boy, and the rest of his family, seven of us in this long line, with the smell of rubbish all around us and cockroaches crawling all around.
And I didn't sleep a wink, but I lay awake thinking to myself, "Why should anyone have to live like this when I have so much?
Why should Sonny Boy's ability to live out his dreams be determined by where he's born, or what Warren Buffett called 'the ovarian lottery?'" I just didn't get it, and I needed to understand why.
Now, I only later came to understand that the poverty I'd seen in the Philippines was the result of decisions made or not made, man-made, by a succession of colonial powers and corrupt governments who had anything but the interests of Sonny Boy at heart.
Sure, they didn't create Smoky Mountain, but they may as well have.
And if we're to try to help kids like Sonny Boy, it wouldn't work just to try to send him a few dollars or to try to clean up the garbage dump on which he lived, because the core of the problem lay elsewhere.
And as I worked on community development projects over the coming years trying to help build schools, train teachers, and tackle HIV and AIDS, I came to see that community development should be driven by communities themselves, and that although charity is necessary, it's not sufficient.
We need to confront these challenges on a global scale and in a systemic way.
And the best thing I could do is try to mobilize a large group of citizens back home to insist that our leaders engage in that systemic change.
That's why, a few years later, I joined with a group of college friends in bringing the Make Poverty History campaign to Australia.
We had this dream of staging this small concert around the time of the G20 with local Aussie artists, and it suddenly exploded one day when we got a phone call from Bono, the Edge and Pearl Jam, who all agreed to headline our concert.
I got a little bit excited that day, as you can see.
(Laughter) But to our amazement, the Australian government heard our collective voices, and they agreed to double investment into global health and development -- an additional 6.2 billion dollars.
It felt like -- (Applause) It felt like this incredible validation.
By rallying citizens together, we helped persuade our government to do the unthinkable, and act to fix a problem miles outside of our borders.
But here's the thing: it didn't last.
See, there was a change in government, and six years later, all that new money disappeared.
What did we learn?
We learned that one-off spikes are not enough.
We needed a sustainable movement, not one that is susceptible to the fluctuating moods of a politician or the hint of an economic downturn.
And it needed to happen everywhere; otherwise, every individual government would have this built-in excuse mechanism that they couldn't possibly carry the burden of global action alone.
And so this is what we embarked upon.
And as we embarked upon this challenge, we asked ourselves, how do we gain enough pressure and build a broad enough army to win these fights for the long term?
We could only think of one way.
We needed to somehow turn that short-term excitement of people involved with the Make Poverty History campaign into long-term passion.
It had to be part of their identity.
So in 2012, we cofounded an organization that had exactly that as its goal.
And there was only one name for it: Global Citizen.
But this is not about any one organization.
This is about citizens taking action.
And research data tells us that of the total population who even care about global issues, only 18 percent have done anything about it.
It's not that people don't want to act.
It's often that they don't know how to take action, or that they believe that their actions will have no effect.
So we had to somehow recruit and activate millions of citizens in dozens of countries to put pressure on their leaders to behave altruistically.
And as we did so, we discovered something really thrilling, that when you make global citizenship your mission, you suddenly find yourself with some extraordinary allies.
See, extreme poverty isn't the only issue that's fundamentally global.
So, too, is climate change, human rights, gender equality, even conflict.
We found ourselves shoulder to shoulder with people who are passionate about targeting all these interrelated issues.
But how did we actually go about recruiting and engaging those global citizens?
Well, we used the universal language: music.
We launched the Global Citizen Festival in the heart of New York City in Central Park, and we persuaded some of the world's biggest artists to participate.
We made sure that these festivals coincided with the UN General Assembly meeting, so that leaders who need to hear our voices couldn't possible ignore them.
But there was a twist: you couldn't buy a ticket.
You had to earn it.
You had to take action on behalf of a global cause, and only once you'd done that could you earn enough points to qualify.
Activism is the currency.
I had no interest in citizenship purely as some sort of feel-good thing.
For me, citizenship means you have to act, and that's what we required.
And amazingly, it worked.
Last year, more than 155,000 citizens in the New York area alone earned enough points to qualify.
Globally, we've now signed up citizens in over 150 countries around the world.
And last year, we signed up more than 100,000 new members each and every week of the whole year.
See, we don't need to create global citizens from nothing.
We're already everywhere.
We just need to be organized and motivated to start acting.
And this is where I believe we can learn a lot from Davinia, who started taking action as a global citizen back in 2012.
Here's what she did.
It wasn't rocket science.
She started writing letters, emailing politicians' offices.
She volunteered her time in her local community.
That's when she got active on social media and started to collect pennies -- a lot of pennies.
Now, maybe that doesn't sound like a lot to you.
How will that achieve anything?
Well, it achieved a lot because she wasn't alone.
Her actions, alongside 142,000 other global citizens', led the US government to double their investment into Global Partnership for Education.
And here's Dr. Raj Shah, the head of USAID, making that announcement.
See, when thousands of global citizens find inspiration from each other, it's amazing to see their collective power.
Global citizens like Davinia helped persuade the World Bank to boost their investment into water and sanitation.
Here's the Bank's president Jim Kim announcing 15 billion dollars onstage at Global Citizen, and Prime Minister Modi of India affirmed his commitment to put a toilet in every household and school across India by 2019.
Global citizens encouraged by the late-night host Stephen Colbert launched a Twitter invasion on Norway.
Erna Solberg, the country's Prime Minister, got the message, committing to double investment into girls' education.
Global citizens together with Rotarians called on the Canadian, UK, and Australian governments to boost their investment into polio eradication.
They got together and committed 665 million dollars.
But despite all of this momentum, we face some huge challenges.
See, you might be thinking to yourself, how can we possibly persuade world leaders to sustain a focus on global issues?
Indeed, the powerful American politician Tip O'Neill once said, "All politics is local."
That's what always got politicians elected: to seek, gain and hold onto power through the pursuit of local or at very best national interests.
I experienced this for the first time when I was 21 years old.
I took a meeting with a then-Australian Foreign Minister who shall remain nameless -- [Alexander Downer] (Laughter) And behind closed doors, I shared with him my passion to end extreme poverty.
I said, "Minister -- Australia has this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to help achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
We can do this."
And he paused, looked down on me with cold, dismissive eyes, and he said, "Hugh, no one gives a funk about foreign aid."
Except he didn't use the word "funk."
He went on.
He said we need to look after our own backyard first.
This is, I believe, outdated, even dangerous thinking.
Or as my late grandfather would say, complete BS.
Parochialism offers this false dichotomy because it pits the poor in one country against the poor in another.
It pretends we can isolate ourselves and our nations from one another.
The whole world is our backyard, and we ignore it at our peril.
See, look what happened when we ignored Rwanda, when we ignore Syria, when we ignore climate change.
Political leaders ought to give a "funk" because the impact of climate change and extreme poverty comes right to our shore.
Now, global citizens -- they understand this.
We live in a time that favors the global citizen, in an age where every single voice can be heard.
See, do you remember when the Millennium Development Goals were signed back in the year 2000?
The most we could do in those days was fire off a letter and wait for the next election.
There was no social media.
Today, billions of citizens have more tools, more access to information, more capacity to influence than ever before.
Both the problems and the tools to solve them are right before us.
The world has changed, and those of us who look beyond our borders are on the right side of history.
So where are we?
So we run this amazing festival, we've scored some big policy wins, and citizens are signing up all over the world.
But have we achieved our mission?
No.
We have such a long way to go.
But this is the opportunity that I see.
The concept of global citizenship, self-evident in its logic but until now impractical in many ways, has coincided with this particular moment in which we are privileged to live.
We, as global citizens, now have a unique opportunity to accelerate large-scale positive change around the world.
So in the months and years ahead, global citizens will hold world leaders accountable to ensure that the new Global Goals for Sustainable Development are tracked and implemented.
Global citizens will partner with the world's leading NGOs to end diseases like polio and malaria.
Global citizens will sign up in every corner of this globe, increasing the frequency, quality and impact of their actions.
These dreams are within reach.
Imagine an army of millions growing into tens of millions, connected, informed, engaged and unwilling to take no for an answer.
Over all these years, I've tried to reconnect with Sonny Boy.
Sadly, I've been unable to.
We met long before social media, and his address has now been relocated by the authorities, as often happens with slums.
I'd love to sit down with him, wherever he is, and share with him how much the time I spent on Smoky Mountain inspired me.
Thanks to him and so many others, I came to understand the importance of being part of a movement of people -- the kids willing to look up from their screens and out to the world, the global citizens.
Global citizens who stand together, who ask the question "Why?," who reject the naysayers, and embrace the amazing possibilities of the world we share.
I'm a global citizen.
Are you?
Thank you.
(Applause)
[On April 3, 2016 we saw the largest data leak in history.] [The Panama Papers exposed rich and powerful people] [hiding vast amounts of money in offshore accounts.] [What does this mean?] [We called Robert Palmer of Global Witness to explain.] This week, there have been a whole slew and deluge of stories coming out from the leak of 11 million documents from a Panamanian-based law firm called Mossack Fonseca.
The release of these papers from Panama lifts the veil on a tiny piece of the secretive offshore world.
We get an insight into how clients and banks and lawyers go to companies like Mossack Fonseca and say, "OK, we want an anonymous company, can you give us one?"
So you actually get to see the emails, you get to see the exchanges of messages, you get to see the mechanics of how this works, how this operates.
Now, this has already started to have pretty immediate repercussions.
The Prime Minister of Iceland has resigned.
We've also had news that an ally of the brutal Syrian dictator Bashar Al-Assad has also got offshore companies.
There's been allegations of a $2 billion money trail that leads back to President Vladimir Putin of Russia via his close childhood friend, who happens to be a top cellist.
And there will be a lot of rich individuals out there and others who will be nervous about the next set of stories and the next set of leaked documents.
Now, this sounds like the plot of a spy thriller or a John Grisham novel.
It seems very distant from you, me, ordinary people.
Why should we care about this?
But the truth is that if rich and powerful individuals are able to keep their money offshore and not pay the taxes that they should, it means that there is less money for vital public services like healthcare, education, roads.
And that affects all of us.
Now, for my organization Global Witness, this exposé has been phenomenal.
We have the world's media and political leaders talking about how individuals can use offshore secrecy to hide and disguise their assets -- something we have been talking about and exposing for a decade.
Now, I think a lot of people find this entire world baffling and confusing, and hard to understand how this sort of offshore world works.
I like to think of it a bit like a Russian doll.
So you can have one company stacked inside another company, stacked inside another company, making it almost impossible to really understand who is behind these structures.
It can be very difficult for law enforcement or tax authorities, journalists, civil society to really understand what's going on.
I also think it's interesting that there's been less coverage of this issue in the United States.
And that's perhaps because some prominent US people just haven't figured in this exposé, in this scandal.
Now, that's not because there are no rich Americans who are stashing their assets offshore.
It's just because of the way in which offshore works, Mossack Fonseca has fewer American clients.
I think if we saw leaks from the Cayman Islands or even from Delaware or Wyoming or Nevada, you would see many more cases and examples linking back to Americans.
In fact, in a number of US states you need less information, you need to provide less information to get a company than you do to get a library card.
That sort of secrecy in America has allowed employees of school districts to rip off schoolchildren.
It has allowed scammers to rip off vulnerable investors.
This is the sort of behavior that affects all of us.
Now, at Global Witness, we wanted to see what this actually looked like in practice.
How does this actually work?
So what we did is we sent in an undercover investigator to 13 Manhattan law firms.
Our investigator posed as an African minister who wanted to move suspect funds into the United States to buy a house, a yacht, a jet.
Now, what was truly shocking was that all but one of those lawyers provided our investigator with suggestions on how to move those suspect funds.
These were all preliminary meetings, and none of the lawyers took us on as a client and of course no money moved hands, but it really shows the problem with the system.
It's also important to not just think about this as individual cases.
This is not just about an individual lawyer who's spoken to our undercover investigator and provided suggestions.
It's not just about a particular senior politician who's been caught up in a scandal.
This is about how a system works, that entrenches corruption, tax evasion, poverty and instability.
And in order to tackle this, we need to change the game.
We need to change the rules of the game to make this sort of behavior harder.
This may seem like doom and gloom, like there's nothing we can do about it, like nothing has ever changed, like there will always be rich and powerful individuals.
But as a natural optimist, I do see that we are starting to get some change.
Over the last couple of years, we've seen a real push towards greater transparency when it comes to company ownership.
This issue was put on the political agenda by the UK Prime Minister David Cameron at a big G8 Summit that was held in Northern Ireland in 2013.
And since then, the European Union is going to be creating central registers at a national level of who really owns and controls companies across Europe.
One of the things that is sad is that, actually, the US is lagging behind.
There's bipartisan legislation that had been introduced in the House and the Senate, but it isn't making as much progress as we'd like to see.
So we'd really want to see the Panama leaks, this huge peek into the offshore world, be used as a way of opening up in the US and around the world.
For us at Global Witness, this is a moment for change.
We need ordinary people to get angry at the way in which people can hide their identity behind secret companies.
We need business leaders to stand up and say, "Secrecy like this is not good for business."
We need political leaders to recognize the problem, and to commit to changing the law to open up this sort of secrecy.
Together, we can end the secrecy that is currently allowing tax evasion, corruption, money laundering to flourish.
I have spent the past 38 years trying to be invisible.
I'm a copy editor.
I work at The New Yorker, and copyediting for The New Yorker is like playing shortstop for a Major League Baseball team: every little movement gets picked over by the critics -- God forbid you should commit an error.
Just to clarify: copy editors don't choose what goes into the magazine.
We work at the level of the sentence, maybe the paragraph, the words, the punctuation.
Our business is in the details.
We put the diaeresis, the double dot, over the "i" in "naïve."
We impose house style.
Every publication has a house style.
The New Yorker's is particularly distinctive.
We sometimes get teased for our style.
Imagine -- we still spell "teen-ager" with a hyphen, as if that word had just been coined.
But you see that hyphen in "teen-age" and that diaeresis over "coöperate," and you know you're reading The New Yorker.
Copyediting at The New Yorker is a mechanical process.
There is a related role called query proofreading, or page-OK'ing.
Whereas copyediting is mechanical, query proofreading is interpretive.
We make suggestions to the author through the editor to improve the emphasis of a sentence or point out unintentional repetitions and supply compelling alternatives.
Our purpose is to make the author look good.
Note that we give our proofs not directly to the author, but to the editor.
This often creates a good cop/bad cop dynamic in which the copy editor -- I'll use that as an umbrella term -- is invariably the bad cop.
If we do our job well, we're invisible, but as soon as we make a mistake, we copy editors become glaringly visible.
Here is the most recent mistake that was laid at my door.
[Last Tuesday, Sarah Palin, the pre-Trump embodiment of populist no-nothingism in the Republican Party, endorsed Trump.] "Where were The New Yorker's fabled copy editors?" a reader wrote.
"Didn't the writer mean 'know-nothingism'?"
Ouch.
There's no excuse for this mistake.
But I like it: "no-nothingism."
It might be American vernacular for "nihilism."
(Laughter) Here, another reader quotes a passage from the magazine: [Ruby was seventy-six, but she retained her authoritative bearing; only her unsteady gait belied her age.] He added: "Surely, someone at The New Yorker knows the meaning of 'belied,' and that it is the opposite of how it is used in this sentence.
Come on! Get it together."
Belie: to give a false impression.
It should have been "betrayed."
E.B. White once wrote of commas in The New Yorker: "They fall with the precision of knives outlining a body."
(Laughter) And it's true -- we get a lot of complaints about commas.
"Are there really two commas in 'Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard'?"
There may not be on the sign, but yes, that is New Yorker style for "Jr."
One wag wrote: ["Please, could you expel, or, at least, restrain, the comma-maniac, on your editorial staff?"] (Laughter) Ah, well.
In this case, those commas are well-placed, except that there should not be one between "maniac" and "on."
(Laughter) Also, if we must have commas around "at least," we might change it up by using dashes around that phrase: "... -- or, at least, restrain --" Perfect.
(Applause) Then there's this: "Love you, love your magazine, but can you please stop writing massive numbers as text?"
[two and a half million ...] No.
(Laughter) One last cri de coeur from a spelling stickler: ["Those long stringy things are vocal cords, not chords."] The outraged reader added, "I'm sure I'm not the first to write regarding this egregious proofreading error, but I'm equally sure I won't be the last.
Fie!"
(Laughter) I used to like getting mail.
There is a pact between writers and editors.
The editor never sells out the writer, never goes public about bad jokes that had to be cut or stories that went on too long.
A great editor saves a writer from her excesses.
Copy editors, too, have a code; we don't advertise our oversights.
I feel disloyal divulging them here, so let's have look at what we do right.
Somehow, I've gotten a reputation for sternness.
But I work with writers who know how to have their way with me.
I've known Ian Frazier, or "Sandy," since the early 80s.
And he's one of my favorites, even though he sometimes writes a sentence that gives a copy editor pause.
Here is one from a story about Staten Island after Hurricane Sandy: [A dock that had been broken in the middle and lost its other half sloped down toward the water, its support pipes and wires leaning forward like when you open a box of linguine and it slides out.] (Laughter) This would never have got past the grammarian in the days of yore.
But what could I do?
Technically, the "like" should be an "as," but it sounds ridiculous, as if the author were about to embark on an extended Homeric simile -- "as when you open a box of linguine."
(Laughter) I decided that the hurricane conferred poetic justice on Sandy and let the sentence stand.
(Laughter) Generally, if I think something is wrong, I query it three times.
I told Sandy that not long ago in a moment of indiscretion and he said, "Only three?"
So, he has learned to hold out.
Recently, he wrote a story for "Talk of the Town," that's the section at the front of the magazine with short pieces on subjects ranging from Ricky Jay's exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum to the introduction of doggie bags in France.
Sandy's story was about the return to the Bronx of Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor.
There were three things in it that I had to challenge.
First, a grammar query.
The justice was wearing black and Sandy wrote, [Her face and hands stood out like in an old, mostly dark painting.] Now, unlike with the hurricane, with this "like," the author didn't have the excuse of describing hurricane damage.
"Like" in this sense is a preposition, and a preposition takes an object, which is a noun.
This "like" had to be an "as."
"As in an old, mostly dark painting."
Second, a spelling issue.
The author was quoting someone who was assisting the justice: ["It will be just a minute.
We are getting the justice mic'ed,"] Mic'ed?
The music industry spells it "mic" because that's how it's spelled on the equipment.
I'd never seen it used as a verb with this spelling, and I was distraught to think that "mic'ed" would get into the magazine on my watch.
(Laughter) New Yorker style for "microphone" in its abbreviated form is "mike."
Finally, there was a sticky grammar and usage issue in which the pronoun has to have the same grammatical number as its antecedent.
[everyone in the vicinity held their breath] "Their" is plural and "everyone," its antecedent, is singular.
You would never say, "Everyone were there."
Everyone was there. Everyone is here.
But people say things like, "Everyone held their breath" all the time.
To give it legitimacy, copy editors call it "the singular 'their,'" as if calling it singular makes it no longer plural.
(Laughter) It is my job when I see it in print to do my best to eliminate it.
I couldn't make it, "Everyone held her breath," or "Everyone held his breath," or "Everyone held his or her breath."
Whatever I suggested had to blend in.
I asked, through the editor, if the author would consider changing it to "All in the vicinity held their breath," because "all" is plural.
Nope.
I tried again: "All those present held their breath?"
I thought this sounded vaguely judicial.
But the editor pointed out that we could not have "present" and "presence" in the same sentence.
When the final proof came back, the author had accepted "as" for "like," and "miked" for "mic'ed."
But on "Everyone held their breath," he stood his ground.
Two out of three isn't bad.
In the same issue, in that piece on doggie bags in France, there was the gratuitous use of the f-word by a Frenchman.
I wonder, when the mail comes in, which will have offended the readers more.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
How does the news shape the way we see the world?
Here's the world based on the way it looks -- based on landmass.
And here's how news shapes what Americans see.
This map -- (Applause) -- this map shows the number of seconds that American network and cable news organizations dedicated to news stories, by country, in February of 2007 -- just one year ago.
Now, this was a month when North Korea agreed to dismantle its nuclear facilities.
There was massive flooding in Indonesia.
And in Paris, the IPCC released its study confirming man's impact on global warming.
The U.S. accounted for 79 percent of total news coverage.
And when we take out the U.S. and look at the remaining 21 percent, we see a lot of Iraq -- that's that big green thing there -- and little else.
The combined coverage of Russia, China and India, for example, reached just one percent.
When we analyzed all the news stories and removed just one story, here's how the world looked.
What was that story? The death of Anna Nicole Smith.
This story eclipsed every country except Iraq, and received 10 times the coverage of the IPCC report.
And the cycle continues; as we all know, Britney has loomed pretty large lately.
So, why don't we hear more about the world?
One reason is that news networks have reduced the number of their foreign bureaus by half.
Aside from one-person ABC mini-bureaus in Nairobi, New Delhi and Mumbai, there are no network news bureaus in all of Africa, India or South America -- places that are home to more than two billion people.
The reality is that covering Britney is cheaper.
And this lack of global coverage is all the more disturbing when we see where people go for news.
Local TV news looms large, and unfortunately only dedicates 12 percent of its coverage to international news.
And what about the web?
The most popular news sites don't do much better.
Last year, Pew and the Colombia J-School analyzed the 14,000 stories that appeared on Google News' front page.
And they, in fact, covered the same 24 news events.
Similarly, a study in e-content showed that much of global news from U.S. news creators is recycled stories from the AP wire services and Reuters, and don't put things into a context that people can understand their connection to it.
So, if you put it all together, this could help explain why today's college graduates, as well as less educated Americans, know less about the world than their counterparts did 20 years ago.
And if you think it's simply because we are not interested, you would be wrong.
In recent years, Americans who say they closely follow global news most of the time grew to over 50 percent.
The real question: is this distorted worldview what we want for Americans in our increasingly interconnected world?
I know we can do better.
And can we afford not to? Thank you.
I have one more reason for optimism: climate change.
Maybe you don't believe it, but here is the fact.
On December 12, 2015, in Paris, under the United Nations, 195 governments got together and unanimously -- if you've worked with governments, you know how difficult that is -- unanimously decided to intentionally change the course of the global economy in order to protect the most vulnerable and improve the life of all of us.
Now, that is a remarkable achievement.
(Applause) But it is even more remarkable if you consider where we had been just a few years ago.
2009, Copenhagen.
Who remembers Copenhagen?
Well, after years of working toward a climate agreement, the same governments convened in Copenhagen and failed miserably.
Why did it fail miserably?
For many different reasons, but primarily because of the deeply entrenched divide between the global North and the global South.
So now, six months after this failure, I was called in to assume the responsibility of the global climate change negotiations.
You can imagine, the perfect moment to start this new job.
The global mood on climate change was in the trash can.
No one believed that a global agreement could ever be possible.
In fact, neither did I.
If you promise not to tell anyone outside of this wonderful TED audience, I'm going to divulge a secret that has been gratefully buried by history.
On my first press conference, a journalist asked, "Um, Ms. Figueres, do you think that a global agreement is ever going to be possible?"
And without engaging brain, I heard me utter, "Not in my lifetime."
Well, you can imagine the faces of my press team who were horrified at this crazy Costa Rican woman who was their new boss.
And I was horrified, too.
Now, I wasn't horrified at me, because I'm kind of used to myself.
I was actually horrified at the consequences of what I had just said, at the consequences for the world in which all our children are going to have to live.
It was frankly a horrible moment for me, and I thought, well, no, hang on, hang on.
Impossible is not a fact, it's an attitude.
It's only an attitude.
And I decided right then and there that I was going to change my attitude and I was going to help the world change its attitude on climate change.
So I don't know -- No, just this? Thanks.
I don't know -- what you would do if you were told your job is to save the planet.
Put that on the job description.
And you have full responsibility, but you have absolutely no authority, because governments are sovereign in every decision that they take.
Well, I would really love to know what you would do on the first Monday morning, but here's what I did: I panicked.
(Laughter) And then I panicked again, because I realized I have no idea how we're going to solve this problem.
And then I realized I have no idea how we're going to solve this problem, but I do know one thing: we have got to change the tone of this conversation.
Because there is no way you can deliver victory without optimism.
And here, I use optimism as a very simple word, but let's understand it in its broader sense.
Let's understand it as courage, hope, trust, solidarity, the fundamental belief that we humans can come together and can help each other to better the fate of mankind.
Well, you can imagine that I thought that without that, there was no way we were going to get out of the paralysis of Copenhagen.
And for six years, I have stubbornly, relentlessly injected optimism into the system, no matter what the questions from the press -- and I have gotten better at those -- and no matter what the evidence to the contrary.
And believe you me, there has been a lot of contrary evidence.
But relentless optimism into the system.
And pretty soon, we began to see changes happening in many areas, precipitated by thousands of people, including many of you here today, and I thank you.
And this TED community will not be surprised if I tell you the first area in which we saw remarkable change was ...
technology.
We began to see that clean technologies, in particular renewable energy technologies, began to drop price and increase in capacity, to the point where today we are already building concentrated solar power plants that have the capacity to power entire cities, to say nothing of the fact of what we are doing on mobility and intelligent buildings.
And with this shift in technologies, we were able to begin to understand that there was a shift in the economic equation, because we were able to recognize that yes, there are huge costs to climate change, and yes, there are compounded risks.
But there also are economic advantages and intrinsic benefits, because the dissemination of the clean technologies is going to bring us cleaner air, better health, better transportation, more livable cities, more energy security, more energy access to the developing world.
In sum, a better world than what we have now.
And with that understanding, you should have witnessed, in fact, part of you were, the spread of ingenuity and excitement that went through, first through nonnational governments, the private sector, captains of industry, insurance companies, investors, city leaders, faith communities, because they all began to understand, this actually can be in their interest.
This can actually improve their bottom line.
And it wasn't just the usual suspects.
I have to tell you I had the CEO of a major, major oil and gas company come to me at the beginning of last year and say -- privately, of course -- he did not know how he was going to change his company, but he is going to change it, because he's interested in long-term viability.
Well, now we have a shift in the economic equation, and with that, with broader support from everyone, it did not take very long before we saw that national governments woke up to the fact that this is in their national interest.
And when we asked countries to begin to identify how they could contribute to global efforts but based on their national interest, 189 countries out of 195, 189 countries sent their comprehensive climate change plans, based on their national interest, concurrent with their priorities, consistent with their national sustainable development plans.
Well, once you protect the core interests of nations, then you can understand that nations were ready to begin to converge onto a common path, onto a common direction of travel that is going to take us probably several decades, but over those several decades is going to take us into the new economy, into a decarbonized, highly resilient economy, And the national contributions that are currently on the table on behalf of national governments are insufficient to get us to a stabilized climate, but they are only the first step, and they will improve over time.
And the measurement, reporting and verification of all of those efforts is legally binding.
And the checkpoints that we're going to have every five years to assess collective progress towards our goal are legally binding, and the path itself toward a decarbonized and more resilient economy is legally binding.
And here's the more important part: What did we have before?
A very small handful of countries who had undertaken very reduced, short-term emission reduction commitments that were completely insufficient and furthermore, largely perceived as a burden.
Now what do we have?
Now we have all countries of the world contributing with different intensities from different approaches in different sectors, but all of them contributing to a common goal and along a path with environmental integrity.
Well, once you have all of this in place and you have shifted this understanding, then you see that governments were able to go to Paris and adopt the Paris agreement.
(Applause) So, as I look back over the past six years, first I remember the day the Paris agreement was adopted.
I cannot tell you the euphoria in the room.
5,000 people jumping out of their seats, crying, clapping, screaming, yelling, torn between euphoria and still disbelief at what they had just seen, because so many people had worked for years towards this, and this was finally their reality.
And it wasn't just those who had participated directly.
A few weeks ago, I was with a colleague who was trying to decide on a Tahitian pearl that he wanted to give to his wonderful wife Natasha.
And once he had finally decided what he was going to buy, the jeweler said to him, "You know, you're very lucky that you're buying this now, because these pearls could go extinct very soon because of climate change."
"But," the jeweler said, "have you heard, the governments have just come to a decision, and Tahiti could have a chance."
Well, what a fantastic confirmation that perhaps, perhaps here is hope, here is a possible chance.
I'm the first one to recognize that we have a lot of work still to do.
We've only just started our work on climate change.
And in fact, we need to make sure that we redouble our efforts over the next five years that are the urgent five years.
But I do believe that we have come over the past six years from the impossible to the now unstoppable.
And how did we do that? By injecting transformational optimism that allowed us to go from confrontation to collaboration, that allowed us to understand that national and local interests are not necessarily at odds with global needs, and that if we understand that, we can bring them together and we can merge them harmoniously.
And as I look forward to other global issues that will require our attention this century -- food security, water security, home security, forced migration -- I see that we certainly do not know how we are going to solve those problems yet.
But we can take a page out of what we have done on climate change and we can understand that we have got to reinterpret the zero-sum mentality.
Because we were trained to believe that there always are winners and losers, and that your loss is my gain.
Well, now that we're in a world in which we have reached planetary boundaries and that we are not just so interconnected, but increasingly interdependent on each other, your loss is no longer my gain.
We're either all losers or we all can be winners.
But we are going to have to decide between zero and sum.
We're going to have to decide between zero benefit for all or living life as the sum of all of us.
We've done it once. We can do it again.
Thanks.
(Applause)
(Music) Amanda Palmer (singing): Ground Control to Major Tom, Ground Control to Major Tom, Take your protein pills and put your helmet on.
Al Gore: Ten, Nine, Eight, Seven, Six ...
AP: Ground Control to Major Tom, AG: Five, Four, Three, Two, One ... AP: Commencing countdown, engines on.
Check ignition and may God's love be with you.
AG: Liftoff.
AP: This is Ground Control to Major Tom, You've really made the grade And the papers want to know whose shirts you wear.
Now it's time to leave the capsule if you dare.
"This is Major Tom to Ground Control, I'm stepping through the door And I'm floating in a most peculiar way And the stars look very different today.
For here am I floating round my tin can.
Far above the world, Planet Earth is blue and there's nothing I can do."
(Music) "Though I'm past 100,000 miles, I'm feeling very still, and I think my spaceship knows which way to go.
Tell my wife I love her very much she knows."
Ground Control to Major Tom, your circuit's dead, there's something wrong.
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you ...
"Here am I floating round my tin can, far above the Moon.
Planet Earth is blue and there's nothing I can do.
(Music) ["I'm not a prophet or a stone-age man, just a mortal with the potential of a superman ...
... I'm living on." David Bowie, 1947-2016] (Applause)
I'm turning 44 next month, and I have the sense that 44 is going to be a very good year, a year of fulfillment, realization.
I have that sense, not because of anything particular in store for me, but because I read it would be a good year in a 1968 book by Norman Mailer.
"He felt his own age, forty-four ..."
wrote Mailer in "The Armies of the Night," "... felt as if he were a solid embodiment of bone, muscle, heart, mind, and sentiment to be a man, as if he had arrived."
Yes, I know Mailer wasn't writing about me.
But I also know that he was; for all of us -- you, me, the subject of his book, age more or less in step, proceed from birth along the same great sequence: through the wonders and confinements of childhood; the emancipations and frustrations of adolescence; the empowerments and millstones of adulthood; the recognitions and resignations of old age.
There are patterns to life, and they are shared.
As Thomas Mann wrote: "It will happen to me as to them."
We don't simply live these patterns.
We record them, too.
We write them down in books, where they become narratives that we can then read and recognize.
Books tell us who we've been, who we are, who we will be, too.
So they have for millennia.
As James Salter wrote, "Life passes into pages if it passes into anything."
And so six years ago, a thought leapt to mind: if life passed into pages, there were, somewhere, passages written about every age.
If I could find them, I could assemble them into a narrative.
I could assemble them into a life, a long life, a hundred-year life, the entirety of that same great sequence through which the luckiest among us pass.
I was then 37 years old, "an age of discretion," wrote William Trevor.
I was prone to meditating on time and age.
An illness in the family and later an injury to me had long made clear that growing old could not be assumed.
And besides, growing old only postponed the inevitable, time seeing through what circumstance did not.
It was all a bit disheartening.
A list, though, would last.
To chronicle a life year by vulnerable year would be to clasp and to ground what was fleeting, would be to provide myself and others a glimpse into the future, whether we made it there or not.
And when I then began to compile my list, I was quickly obsessed, searching pages and pages for ages and ages.
Here we were at every annual step through our first hundred years.
"Twenty-seven ... a time of sudden revelations," "sixty-two, ... of subtle diminishments."
I was mindful, of course, that such insights were relative.
For starters, we now live longer, and so age more slowly.
Christopher Isherwood used the phrase "the yellow leaf" to describe a man at 53, only one century after Lord Byron used it to describe himself at 36.
(Laughter) I was mindful, too, that life can swing wildly and unpredictably from one year to the next, and that people may experience the same age differently.
But even so, as the list coalesced, so, too, on the page, clear as the reflection in the mirror, did the life that I had been living: finding at 20 that "... one is less and less sure of who one is;" emerging at 30 from the "... wasteland of preparation into active life;" learning at 40 "... to close softly the doors to rooms [I would] not be coming back to."
There I was.
Of course, there we all are.
Milton Glaser, the great graphic designer whose beautiful visualizations you see here, and who today is 85 -- all those years "... a ripening and an apotheosis," wrote Nabokov -- noted to me that, like art and like color, literature helps us to remember what we've experienced.
And indeed, when I shared the list with my grandfather, he nodded in recognition.
He was then 95 and soon to die, which, wrote Roberto Bolaño, "... is the same as never dying."
And looking back, he said to me that, yes, Proust was right that at 22, we are sure we will not die, just as a thanatologist named Edwin Shneidman was right that at 90, we are sure we will.
It had happened to him, as to them.
Now the list is done: a hundred years.
And looking back over it, I know that I am not done.
I still have my life to live, still have many more pages to pass into.
And mindful of Mailer, I await 44.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Periods.
Blood.
Menstruation.
Gross.
Secret.
Hidden.
Why?
A natural biological process that every girl and woman goes through every month for about half of her life.
A phenomenon that is so significant that the survival and propagation of our species depends on it.
Yet we consider it a taboo.
We feel awkward and shameful talking about it.
When I got my first periods, I was told to keep it a secret from others -- even from my father and brother.
Later when this chapter appeared in our textbooks, our biology teacher skipped the subject.
(Laughter) You know what I learned from it?
I learned that it is really shameful to talk about it.
I learned to be ashamed of my body.
I learned to stay unaware of periods in order to stay decent.
Research in various parts of India shows that three out of every 10 girls are not aware of menstruation at the time of their first periods.
And in some parts of Rajasthan this number is as high as nine out of 10 girls being unaware of it.
You'd be surprised to know that most of the girls that I have spoken to, who did not know about periods at the time of their first menstruation thought that they have got blood cancer and they're going to die soon.
Menstrual hygiene is a very important risk factor for reproductive tract infections.
But in India, only 12 percent of girls and women have access to hygienic ways of managing their periods.
If you do the math, 88 percent of girls and women use unhygienic ways to manage their periods.
I was one of them.
I grew up in a small town called Garhwa, in Jharkhand, where even buying a sanitary napkin is considered shameful.
So when I started getting my periods, I began with using rags.
After every use I would wash and reuse them.
But to store them, I would hide and keep it in a dark, damp place so that nobody finds out that I'm menstruating.
Due to repeated washing the rags would become coarse, and I would often get rashes and infections using them.
I wore these already for five years until I moved out of that town.
Another issue that periods brought in my life those of the social restrictions that are imposed upon our girls and women when they're on their periods.
I think you all must be aware of it, but I'll still list it for the few who don't.
I was not allowed to touch or eat pickles.
I was not allowed to sit on the sofa or some other family member's bed.
I had to wash my bed sheet after every period, even if it was not stained.
I was considered impure and forbidden from worshipping or touching any object of religious importance.
You'll find signposts outside temples denying the entry of menstruating girls and women.
Ironically, most of the time it is the older woman who imposes such restrictions on younger girls in a family.
After all, they have grown up accepting such restrictions as norms.
And in the absence of any intervention, it is the myth and misconception that propagate from generation to generation.
During my years of work in this field, I have even come across stories where girls have to eat and wash their dishes separately.
They're not allowed to take baths during periods, and in some households they are even secluded from other family members.
About 85 percent of girls and women in India would follow one or more restrictive customs on their periods every month.
Can you imagine what this does to the self-esteem and self-confidence of a young girl?
The psychological trauma that this inflicts, affecting her personality, her academic performance and every single aspect of growing up during her early formative years?
I religiously followed all these restrictive customs for 13 years, until a discussion with my partner, Tuhin, changed my perception about menstruation forever.
In 2009, Tuhin and I were pursuing our postgraduation in design.
We fell in love with each other and I was at ease discussing periods with him.
Tuhin knew little about periods.
(Laughter) He was astonished to know that girls get painful cramps and we bleed every month.
(Laughter) Yeah.
He was completely shocked to know about the restrictions that are imposed upon menstruating girls and women by their own families and their society.
In order to help me with my cramps, he would go on the Internet and learn more about menstruation.
When he shared his findings with me, I realized how little I knew about menstruation myself.
And many of my beliefs actually turned out to be myths.
That's when we wondered: if we, being so well educated, were so ill-informed about menstruation, there would be millions of girls out there who would be ill-informed, too.
To study -- to understand the problem better, I undertook a year-long research to study the lack of awareness about menstruation and the root cause behind it.
While it is generally believed that menstrual unawareness and misconception is a rural phenomenon, during my research, I found that it is as much an urban phenomenon as well.
And it exists with the educated urban class, also.
While talking to many parents and teachers, I found that many of them actually wanted to educate girls about periods before they have started getting their menstrual cycle.
And -- but they lacked the proper means themselves.
And since it is a taboo, they feel inhibition and shameful in talking about it.
Girls nowadays get their periods in classes six and seven, but our educational curriculum teaches girls about periods only in standard eight and nine.
And since it is a taboo, teachers still skip the subject altogether.
So school does not teach girls about periods, parents don't talk about it.
Where do the girls go?
Two decades ago and now -- nothing has changed.
I shared these finding with Tuhin and we wondered: What if we could create something that would help girls understand about menstruation on their own -- something that would help parents and teachers talk about periods comfortably to young girls?
During my research, I was collecting a lot of stories.
These were stories of experiences of girls during their periods.
These stories would make girls curious and interested in talking about menstruation in their close circle.
That's what we wanted.
We wanted something that would make the girls curious and drive them to learn about it.
We wanted to use these stories to teach girls about periods.
So we decided to create a comic book, where the cartoon characters would enact these stories and educate girls about menstruation in a fun and engaging way.
To represent girls in their different phases of puberty, we have three characters.
Pinki, who has not gotten her period yet, Jiya who gets her period during the narrative of the book and Mira who has already been getting her period.
There is a fourth character, Priya Didi.
Through her, girls come to know about the various aspects of growing up and menstrual hygiene management.
While making the book, we took great care that none of the illustrations were objectionable in any way and that it is culturally sensitive.
During our prototype testing, we found that the girls loved the book.
They were keen on reading it and knowing more and more about periods on their own.
Parents and teachers were comfortable in talking about periods to young girls using the book, and sometimes even boys were interested in reading it.
(Laughter) (Applause) The comic book helped in creating an environment where menstruation ceased to be a taboo.
Many of the volunteers took this prototype themselves to educate girls and take menstrual awareness workshops in five different states in India.
And one of the volunteers took this prototype to educate young monks and took it to this monastery in Ladakh.
We made the final version of the book, called "Menstrupedia Comic" and launched in September last year.
And so far, more than 4,000 girls have been educated by using the book in India and -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) And 10 different countries.
We are constantly translating the book into different languages and collaborating with local organizations to make this book available in different countries.
15 schools in different parts of India have made this book a part of their school curriculum to teach girls about menstruation.
(Applause) I am amazed to see how volunteers, individuals, parents, teachers, school principals, have come together and taken this menstrual awareness drive to their own communities, have made sure that the girls learn about periods at the right age and helped in breaking this taboo.
I dream of a future where menstruation is not a curse, not a disease, but a welcoming change in a girl's life.
And I would -- (Applause) And I would like to end this with a small request to all the parents here.
Dear parents, if you would be ashamed of periods, your daughters would be, too.
So please be period positive.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
How do you find a dinosaur?
Sounds impossible, doesn't it?
It's not.
And the answer relies on a formula that all paleontologists use.
And I'm going to tell you the secret.
First, find rocks of the right age.
Second, those rocks must be sedimentary rocks.
And third, layers of those rocks must be naturally exposed.
That's it.
Find those three things and get yourself on the ground, chances are good that you will find fossils.
Now let me break down this formula.
Organisms exist only during certain geological intervals.
So you have to find rocks of the right age, depending on what your interests are.
If you want to find trilobites, you have to find the really, really old rocks of the Paleozoic -- rocks between a half a billion and a quarter-billion years old.
Now, if you want to find dinosaurs, don't look in the Paleozoic, you won't find them.
They hadn't evolved yet.
You have to find the younger rocks of the Mesozoic, and in the case of dinosaurs, between 235 and 66 million years ago.
Now, it's fairly easy to find rocks of the right age at this point, because the Earth is, to a coarse degree, geologically mapped.
This is hard-won information.
The annals of Earth history are written in rocks, one chapter upon the next, such that the oldest pages are on bottom and the youngest on top.
Now, were it quite that easy, geologists would rejoice.
It's not.
The library of Earth is an old one.
It has no librarian to impose order.
Operating over vast swaths of time, myriad geological processes offer every possible insult to the rocks of ages.
Most pages are destroyed soon after being written.
Some pages are overwritten, creating difficult-to-decipher palimpsests of long-gone landscapes.
Pages that do find sanctuary under the advancing sands of time are never truly safe.
Unlike the Moon -- our dead, rocky companion -- the Earth is alive, pulsing with creative and destructive forces that power its geological metabolism.
Lunar rocks brought back by the Apollo astronauts all date back to about the age of the Solar System.
Moon rocks are forever.
Earth rocks, on the other hand, face the perils of a living lithosphere.
All will suffer ruination, through some combination of mutilation, compression, folding, tearing, scorching and baking.
Thus, the volumes of Earth history are incomplete and disheveled.
The library is vast and magnificent -- but decrepit.
And it was this tattered complexity in the rock record that obscured its meaning until relatively recently.
Nature provided no card catalog for geologists -- this would have to be invented.
Five thousand years after the Sumerians learned to record their thoughts on clay tablets, the Earth's volumes remained inscrutable to humans.
We were geologically illiterate, unaware of the antiquity of our own planet and ignorant of our connection to deep time.
It wasn't until the turn of the 19th century that our blinders were removed, first, with the publication of James Hutton's "Theory of the Earth," in which he told us that the Earth reveals no vestige of a beginning and no prospect of an end; and then, with the printing of William Smith's map of Britain, the first country-scale geological map, giving us for the first time predictive insight into where certain types of rocks might occur.
After that, you could say things like, "If we go over there, we should be in the Jurassic," or, "If we go up over that hill, we should find the Cretaceous."
So now, if you want to find trilobites, get yourself a good geological map and go to the rocks of the Paleozoic.
If you want to find dinosaurs like I do, find the rocks of Mesozoic and go there.
Now of course, you can only make a fossil in a sedimentary rock, a rock made by sand and mud.
You can't have a fossil in an igneous rock formed by magma, like a granite, or in a metamorphic rock that's been heated and squeezed.
And you have to get yourself in a desert.
It's not that dinosaurs particularly lived in deserts; they lived on every land mass and in every imaginable environment.
It's that you need to go to a place that's a desert today, a place that doesn't have too many plants covering up the rocks, and a place where erosion is always exposing new bones at the surface.
So find those three things: rocks of the right age, that are sedimentary rocks, in a desert, and get yourself on the ground, and you literally walk until you see a bone sticking out of the rock.
Here's a picture that I took in Southern Patagonia.
Every pebble that you see on the ground there is a piece of dinosaur bone.
So when you're in that right situation, it's not a question of whether you'll find fossils or not; you're going to find fossils.
The question is: Will you find something that is scientifically significant?
And to help with that, I'm going to add a fourth part to our formula, which is this: get as far away from other paleontologists as possible.
(Laughter) It's not that I don't like other paleontologists.
When you go to a place that's relatively unexplored, you have a much better chance of not only finding fossils but of finding something that's new to science.
So that's my formula for finding dinosaurs, and I've applied it all around the world.
In the austral summer of 2004, I went to the bottom of South America, to the bottom of Patagonia, Argentina, to prospect for dinosaurs: a place that had terrestrial sedimentary rocks of the right age, in a desert, a place that had been barely visited by paleontologists.
And we found this.
This is a femur, a thigh bone, of a giant, plant-eating dinosaur.
That bone is 2.2 meters across.
That's over seven feet long.
Now, unfortunately, that bone was isolated.
We dug and dug and dug, and there wasn't another bone around.
But it made us hungry to go back the next year for more.
And on the first day of that next field season, I found this: another two-meter femur, only this time not isolated, this time associated with 145 other bones of a giant plant eater.
And after three more hard, really brutal field seasons, the quarry came to look like this.
And there you see the tail of that great beast wrapping around me.
The giant that lay in this grave, the new species of dinosaur, we would eventually call "Dreadnoughtus schrani."
Dreadnoughtus was 85 feet from snout to tail.
It stood two-and-a-half stories at the shoulder, and all fleshed out in life, it weighed 65 tons.
People ask me sometimes, "Was Dreadnoughtus bigger than a T. rex?"
That's the mass of eight or nine T. rex.
Now, one of the really cool things about being a paleontologist is when you find a new species, you get to name it.
And I've always thought it a shame that these giant, plant-eating dinosaurs are too often portrayed as passive, lumbering platters of meat on the landscape.
(Laughter) They're not.
Big herbivores can be surly, and they can be territorial -- you do not want to mess with a hippo or a rhino or a water buffalo.
The bison in Yellowstone injure far more people than do the grizzly bears.
So can you imagine a big bull, 65-ton Dreadnoughtus in the breeding season, defending a territory?
That animal would have been incredibly dangerous, a menace to all around, and itself would have had nothing to fear.
And thus the name, "Dreadnoughtus," or, "fears nothing."
Now, to grow so large, an animal like Dreadnoughtus would've had to have been a model of efficiency.
That long neck and long tail help it radiate heat into the environment, passively controlling its temperature.
And that long neck also serves as a super-efficient feeding mechanism.
Dreadnoughtus could stand in one place and with that neck clear out a huge envelope of vegetation, taking in tens of thousands of calories while expending very few.
And these animals evolved a bulldog-like wide-gait stance, giving them immense stability, because when you're 65 tons, when you're literally as big as a house, the penalty for falling over is death.
Yeah, these animals are big and tough, but they won't take a blow like that.
Dreadnoughtus falls over, ribs break and pierce lungs.
Organs burst.
If you're a big 65-ton Dreadnoughtus, you don't get to fall down in life -- even once.
Now, after this particular Dreadnoughtus carcass was buried and de-fleshed by a multitude of bacteria, worms and insects, its bones underwent a brief metamorphosis, exchanging molecules with the groundwater and becoming more and more like the entombing rock.
As layer upon layer of sediment accumulated, pressure from all sides weighed in like a stony glove whose firm and enduring grip held each bone in a stabilizing embrace.
And then came the long ...
nothing.
Epoch after epoch of sameness, nonevents without number.
All the while, the skeleton lay everlasting and unchanging in perfect equilibrium within its rocky grave.
Meanwhile, Earth history unfolded above.
The dinosaurs would reign for another 12 million years before their hegemony was snuffed out in a fiery apocalypse.
The continents drifted. The mammals rose.
The Ice Age came.
And then, in East Africa, an unpromising species of ape evolved the odd trick of sentient thought.
These brainy primates were not particularly fast or strong.
But they excelled at covering ground, and in a remarkable diaspora surpassing even the dinosaurs' record of territorial conquest, they dispersed across the planet, ravishing every ecosystem they encountered, along the way, inventing culture and metalworking and painting and dance and music and science and rocket ships that would eventually take 12 particularly excellent apes to the surface of the Moon.
With seven billion peripatetic Homo sapiens on the planet, it was perhaps inevitable that one of them would eventually trod on the grave of the magnificent titan buried beneath the badlands of Southern Patagonia.
I was that ape.
And standing there, alone in the desert, it was not lost on me that the chance of any one individual entering the fossil record is vanishingly small.
But the Earth is very, very old.
And over vast tracts of time, the improbable becomes the probable.
That's the magic of the geological record.
Thus, multitudinous creatures living and dying on an old planet leave behind immense numbers of fossils, each one a small miracle, but collectively, inevitable.
Sixty-six million years ago, an asteroid hits the Earth and wipes out the dinosaurs.
This easily might not have been.
But we only get one history, and it's the one that we have.
But this particular reality was not inevitable.
The tiniest perturbation of that asteroid far from Earth would have caused it to miss our planet by a wide margin.
The pivotal, calamitous day during which the dinosaurs were wiped out, setting the stage for the modern world as we know it didn't have to be.
It could've just been another day -- a Thursday, perhaps -- among the 63 billion days already enjoyed by the dinosaurs.
But over geological time, improbable, nearly impossible events do occur.
Along the path from our wormy, Cambrian ancestors to primates dressed in suits, innumerable forks in the road led us to this very particular reality.
The bones of Dreadnoughtus lay underground for 77 million years.
Who could have imagined that a single species of shrew-like mammal living in the cracks of the dinosaur world would evolve into sentient beings capable of characterizing and understanding the very dinosaurs they must have dreaded?
I once stood at the head of the Missouri River and bestraddled it.
There, it's nothing more than a gurgle of water that issues forth from beneath a rock in a boulder in a pasture, high in the Bitterroot Mountains.
The stream next to it runs a few hundred yards and ends in a small pond.
Those two streams -- they look identical.
But one is an anonymous trickle of water, and the other is the Missouri River.
Now go down to the mouth of the Missouri, near St. Louis, and it's pretty obvious that that river is a big deal.
But go up into the Bitterroots and look at the Missouri, and human prospection does not allow us to see it as anything special.
Now go back to the Cretaceous Period and look at our tiny, fuzzball ancestors.
You would never guess that they would amount to anything special, and they probably wouldn't have, were it not for that pesky asteroid.
Now, make a thousand more worlds and a thousand more solar systems and let them run.
You will never get the same result.
No doubt, those worlds would be both amazing and amazingly improbable, but they would not be our world and they would not have our history.
There are an infinite number of histories that we could've had.
We only get one, and wow, did we ever get a good one.
Dinosaurs like Dreadnoughtus were real.
Sea monsters like the mosasaur were real.
Dragonflies with the wingspan of an eagle and pill bugs the length of a car really existed.
Why study the ancient past?
Because it gives us perspective and humility.
The dinosaurs died in the world's fifth mass extinction, snuffed out in a cosmic accident through no fault of their own.
They didn't see it coming, and they didn't have a choice.
We, on the other hand, do have a choice.
And the nature of the fossil record tells us that our place on this planet is both precarious and potentially fleeting.
Right now, our species is propagating an environmental disaster of geological proportions that is so broad and so severe, it can rightly be called the sixth extinction.
Only unlike the dinosaurs, we can see it coming.
And unlike the dinosaurs, we can do something about it.
That choice is ours.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Some people think that there's a TED Talk formula: "Give a talk on a round, red rug."
"Share a childhood story."
"Divulge a personal secret."
"End with an inspiring call to action."
No.
That's not how to think of a TED Talk.
In fact, if you overuse those devices, you're just going to come across as clichéd or emotionally manipulative.
But there is one thing that all great TED Talks have in common, and I would like to share that thing with you, because over the past 12 years, I've had a ringside seat, listening to many hundreds of amazing TED speakers, like these.
I've helped them prepare their talks for prime time, and learned directly from them their secrets of what makes for a great talk.
And even though these speakers and their topics all seem completely different, they actually do have one key common ingredient.
And it's this: Your number one task as a speaker is to transfer into your listeners' minds an extraordinary gift -- a strange and beautiful object that we call an idea.
Let me show you what I mean.
Here's Haley.
She is about to give a TED Talk and frankly, she's terrified.
(Video) Presenter: Haley Van Dyck!
(Applause) Over the course of 18 minutes, 1,200 people, many of whom have never seen each other before, are finding that their brains are starting to sync with Haley's brain and with each other.
They're literally beginning to exhibit the same brain-wave patterns.
And I don't just mean they're feeling the same emotions.
There's something even more startling happening.
Let's take a look inside Haley's brain for a moment.
There are billions of interconnected neurons in an impossible tangle.
But look here, right here -- a few million of them are linked to each other in a way which represents a single idea.
And incredibly, this exact pattern is being recreated in real time inside the minds of everyone listening.
That's right; in just a few minutes, a pattern involving millions of neurons is being teleported into 1,200 minds, just by people listening to a voice and watching a face.
But wait -- what is an idea anyway?
Well, you can think of it as a pattern of information that helps you understand and navigate the world.
Ideas come in all shapes and sizes, from the complex and analytical to the simple and aesthetic.
Here are just a few examples shared from the TED stage.
Sir Ken Robinson -- creativity is key to our kids' future.
(Video) Sir Ken Robinson: My contention is that creativity now is as important in education as literacy, and we should treat it with the same status.
Chris Anderson: Elora Hardy -- building from bamboo is beautiful.
(Video) Elora Hardy: It is growing all around us, it's strong, it's elegant, it's earthquake-resistant.
CA: Chimamanda Adichie -- people are more than a single identity.
(Video) Chimamanda Adichie: The single story creates stereotypes, and the problem with stereotypes is not that they are untrue, but that they are incomplete.
CA: Your mind is teeming with ideas, and not just randomly.
They're carefully linked together.
Collectively they form an amazingly complex structure that is your personal worldview.
It's your brain's operating system.
It's how you navigate the world.
And it is built up out of millions of individual ideas.
So, for example, if one little component of your worldview is the idea that kittens are adorable, then when you see this, you'll react like this.
But if another component of your worldview is the idea that leopards are dangerous, then when you see this, you'll react a little bit differently.
So, it's pretty obvious why the ideas that make up your worldview are crucial.
You need them to be as reliable as possible -- a guide, to the scary but wonderful real world out there.
Now, different people's worldviews can be dramatically different.
For example, how does your worldview react when you see this image: (Video) Dalia Mogahed: What do you think when you look at me?
"A woman of faith," "an expert," maybe even "a sister"?
Or "oppressed," "brainwashed," "a terrorist"?
CA: Whatever your answer, there are millions of people out there who would react very differently.
So that's why ideas really matter.
If communicated properly, they're capable of changing, forever, how someone thinks about the world, and shaping their actions both now and well into the future.
Ideas are the most powerful force shaping human culture.
So if you accept that your number one task as a speaker is to build an idea inside the minds of your audience, here are four guidelines for how you should go about that task: One, limit your talk to just one major idea.
Ideas are complex things; you need to slash back your content so that you can focus on the single idea you're most passionate about, and give yourself a chance to explain that one thing properly.
You have to give context, share examples, make it vivid.
So pick one idea, and make it the through-line running through your entire talk, so that everything you say links back to it in some way.
Two, give your listeners a reason to care.
Before you can start building things inside the minds of your audience, you have to get their permission to welcome you in.
And the main tool to achieve that?
Curiosity.
Stir your audience's curiosity.
Use intriguing, provocative questions to identify why something doesn't make sense and needs explaining.
If you can reveal a disconnection in someone's worldview, they'll feel the need to bridge that knowledge gap.
And once you've sparked that desire, it will be so much easier to start building your idea.
Three, build your idea, piece by piece, out of concepts that your audience already understands.
You use the power of language to weave together concepts that already exist in your listeners' minds -- but not your language, their language.
You start where they are.
The speakers often forget that many of the terms and concepts they live with are completely unfamiliar to their audiences.
Now, metaphors can play a crucial role in showing how the pieces fit together, because they reveal the desired shape of the pattern, based on an idea that the listener already understands.
For example, when Jennifer Kahn wanted to explain the incredible new biotechnology called CRISPR, she said, "It's as if, for the first time, you had a word processor to edit DNA.
CRISPR allows you to cut and paste genetic information really easily."
Now, a vivid explanation like that delivers a satisfying aha moment as it snaps into place in our minds.
It's important, therefore, to test your talk on trusted friends, and find out which parts they get confused by.
Four, here's the final tip: Make your idea worth sharing.
By that I mean, ask yourself the question: "Who does this idea benefit?"
And I need you to be honest with the answer.
If the idea only serves you or your organization, then, I'm sorry to say, it's probably not worth sharing.
The audience will see right through you.
But if you believe that the idea has the potential to brighten up someone else's day or change someone else's perspective for the better or inspire someone to do something differently, then you have the core ingredient to a truly great talk, one that can be a gift to them and to all of us.
How much do you need to know about a person before you'd feel comfortable making a loan?
Suppose you wanted to lend 1,000 dollars to the person sitting two rows behind you.
What would you need to know about that person before you'd feel comfortable?
My mom came to the US from India in her late thirties.
She's a doctor in Brooklyn, and she often lets friends and neighbors come to see her for health services, whether they can pay right away or not.
I remember running into her patients with her at the grocery store or on the sidewalk, and sometimes they would come and pay her right on the spot for previous appointments.
She would thank them, and ask them about their families and their health.
She gave them credit because she trusted them.
Most of us are like my mom.
We would give credit to someone we know or that we live next to.
But most of us are probably not going to lend to a stranger unless we know a little something about them.
Banks, credit card companies and other financial institutions don't know us on a personal level, but they do have a way of trusting us, and that's through our credit scores.
Our credit scores have been created through an aggregation and analysis of our public consumer credit data.
And because of them, we have pretty much easy access to all of the goods and services that we need, from getting electricity to buying a home, or taking a risk and starting a business.
But ...
there are 2.5 billion people around the world that don't have a credit score.
That's a third of the world's population.
They don't have a score because there are no formal public records on them -- no bank accounts, no credit histories and no social security numbers.
And because they don't have a score, they don't have access to the credit or financial products that can improve their lives.
They are not trusted.
So we wanted to find a way to build trust and to open up financial access for these 2.5 billion.
So we created a mobile application that builds credit scores for them using mobile data.
There are currently over one billion smartphones in emerging markets.
And people are using them the same way that we do.
They're texting their friends, they're looking up directions, they're browsing the Internet and they're even making financial transactions.
Over time, this data is getting captured on our phones, and it provides a really rich picture of a person's life.
Our customers give us access to this data and we capture it through our mobile application.
It helps us understand the creditworthiness of people like Jenipher, a small-business owner in Nairobi, Kenya.
Jenipher is 65 years old, and for decades has been running a food stall in the central business district.
She has three sons who she put through vocational school, and she's also the leader of her local chama, or savings group.
Jenipher's food stall does well.
She makes just enough every day to cover her expenses.
But she's not financially secure.
Any emergency could force her into debt.
And she has no discretionary income to improve her family's way of living, for emergencies, or for investing into growing her business.
If Jenipher wants credit, her options are limited.
She could get a microloan, but she'd have to form a group that could help vouch for her credibility.
And even then, the loan sizes would be way too small to really have an impact on her business, averaging around 150 dollars.
Loan sharks are always an option, but with interest rates that are well above 300 percent, they're financially risky.
And because Jenipher doesn't have collateral or a credit history, she can't walk into a bank and ask for a business loan.
But one day, Jenipher's son convinced her to download our application and apply for a loan.
Jenipher answered a few questions on her phone and she gave us access to a few key data points on her device.
And here's what we saw.
So, bad news first.
Jenipher had a low savings balance and no previous loan history.
These are factors that would have thrown up a red flag to a traditional bank.
But there were other points in her history that showed us a much richer picture of her potential.
So for one, we saw that she made regular phone calls to her family in Uganda.
Well, it turns out that the data shows a four percent increase in repayment among people who consistently communicate with a few close contacts.
We could also see that though she traveled around a lot throughout the day, she actually had pretty regular travel patterns, and she was either at home or at her food stall.
And the data shows a six percent increase in repayment among customers who are consistent with where they spend most of their time.
We could also see that she communicated a lot with many different people throughout the day and that she had a strong support network.
Our data shows that people who communicate with more than 58 different contacts tend to be more likely to be good borrowers.
In Jenipher's case, she communicated with 89 different individuals, which showed a nine percent increase in her repayment.
These are just some of the thousands of different data points that we look at to understand a person's creditworthiness.
And after analyzing all of these different data points, we took the first risk and gave Jenipher a loan.
This is data that would not be found on a paper trail or in any formal financial record.
But it proves trust.
By looking beyond income, we can see that people in emerging markets that may seem risky and unpredictable on the surface are actually willing and have the capacity to repay.
Our credit scores have helped us deliver over 200,000 loans in Kenya in just the past year.
And our repayment rates are above 90 percent -- which, by the way, is in line with traditional bank repayment rates.
With something as simple as a credit score, we're giving people the power to build their own futures.
Our customers have used their loans for family expenses, emergencies, travel and for investing back into growing their businesses.
They're now building better economies and communities where more people can succeed.
Over the past two years of using our product, Jenipher has increased her savings by 60 percent.
She's also started two additional food stalls and is now making plans for her own restaurant.
She's applying for a small-business loan from a commercial bank, because she now has the credit history to prove she deserves it.
I saw Jenipher in Nairobi just last week, and she told me how excited she was to get started.
She said, "Only my son believed I could do this. I didn't think this was for me."
She's lived her whole life believing that there was a part of the world that was closed off to her.
Our job now is to open the world to Jenipher and the billions like her that deserve to be trusted.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Cello music) (Music ends) On the flight here, I was reminded about my mom.
I'm a self-taught cellist, I've never had a lesson.
I studied double bass, but I just picked up the cello and started playing because I love doing it.
But my mom was an inspiration to me.
I did not realize she was an inspiration, because she got her music degree through a mail-order course, the US School of Music.
While raising two kids, she received a lesson a week in the mail, and practiced.
And at the end of a couple of years, she put on a recital.
And I'll be 50 this month, and it took me that long to realize that she was that big of an inspiration.
I'm just going to keep -- yeah, thanks, mom.
(Applause) She's also one of the most extraordinary people I know, beyond being a wonderful musician.
I want to play a little bit for mom and your moms as well, actually.
(Cello music) (Music ends) You know, when you normally hear a cello, you think of this.
(Plays Bach Cello Suite No.1) We're not going to do that today.
(Laughter and applause) (Drums) (Cello) Hey!
(Looped samples of onstage sounds) (Cello music and looped samples) (Music ends) (Applause and cheers)
So I'm an artist, but a little bit of a peculiar one.
I don't paint.
I can't draw.
My shop teacher in high school wrote that I was a menace on my report card.
You probably don't really want to see my photographs.
But there is one thing I know how to do: I know how to program a computer.
I can code.
And people will tell me that 100 years ago, folks like me didn't exist, that it was impossible, that art made with data is a new thing, it's a product of our age, it's something that's really important to think of as something that's very "now."
And that's true.
But there is an art form that's been around for a very long time that's really about using information, abstract information, to make emotionally resonant pieces.
And it's called music.
We've been making music for tens of thousands of years, right?
And if you think about what music is -- notes and chords and keys and harmonies and melodies -- these things are algorithms.
These things are systems that are designed to unfold over time, to make us feel.
I came to the arts through music.
I was trained as a composer, and about 15 years ago, I started making pieces that were designed to look at the intersection between sound and image, to use an image to unveil a musical structure or to use a sound to show you something interesting about something that's usually pictorial.
So what you're seeing on the screen is literally being drawn by the musical structure of the musicians onstage, and there's no accident that it looks like a plant, because the underlying algorithmic biology of the plant is what informed the musical structure in the first place.
So once you know how to do this, once you know how to code with media, you can do some pretty cool stuff.
This is a project I did for the Sundance Film Festival.
Really simple idea: you take every Academy Award Best Picture, you speed it up to one minute each and string them all together.
And so in 75 minutes, I can show you the history of Hollywood cinema.
And what it really shows you is the history of editing in Hollywood cinema.
So on the left, we've got Casablanca; on the right, we've got Chicago.
And you can see that Casablanca is a little easier to read.
That's because the average length of a cinematic shot in the 1940s was 26 seconds, and now it's around six seconds.
This is a project that was inspired by some work that was funded by the US Federal Government in the early 2000s, to look at video footage and find a specific actor in any video.
And so I repurposed this code to train a system on one person in our culture who would never need to be surveilled in that manner, which is Britney Spears.
I downloaded 2,000 paparazzi photos of Britney Spears and trained my computer to find her face and her face alone.
I can run any footage of her through it and will center her eyes in the frame, and this sort of is a little double commentary about surveillance in our society.
We are very fraught with anxiety about being watched, but then we obsess over celebrity.
What you're seeing on the screen here is a collaboration I did with an artist named Lián Amaris.
What she did is very simple to explain and describe, but very hard to do.
She took 72 minutes of activity, getting ready for a night out on the town, and stretched it over three days and performed it on a traffic island in slow motion in New York City.
I was there, too, with a film crew.
We filmed the whole thing, and then we reversed the process, speeding it up to 72 minutes again, so it looks like she's moving normally and the whole world is flying by.
At a certain point, I figured out that what I was doing was making portraits.
When you think about portraiture, you tend to think about stuff like this.
The guy on the left is named Gilbert Stuart.
He's sort of the first real portraitist of the United States.
And on the right is his portrait of George Washington from 1796.
This is the so-called Lansdowne portrait.
And if you look at this painting, there's a lot of symbolism, right?
We've got a rainbow out the window. We've got a sword.
We've got a quill on the desk.
All of these things are meant to evoke George Washington as the father of the nation.
This is my portrait of George Washington.
And this is an eye chart, only instead of letters, they're words.
And what the words are is the 66 words in George Washington's State of the Union addresses that he uses more than any other president.
So "gentlemen" has its own symbolism and its own rhetoric.
And it's really kind of significant that that's the word he used the most.
This is the eye chart for George W. Bush, who was president when I made this piece.
And how you get there, from "gentlemen" to "terror" in 43 easy steps, tells us a lot about American history, and gives you a different insight than you would have looking at a series of paintings.
These pieces provide a history lesson of the United States through the political rhetoric of its leaders.
Ronald Reagan spent a lot of time talking about deficits.
Bill Clinton spent a lot of time talking about the century in which he would no longer be president, but maybe his wife would be.
Lyndon Johnson was the first President to give his State of the Union addresses on prime-time television; he began every paragraph with the word "tonight."
And Richard Nixon, or more accurately, his speechwriter, a guy named William Safire, spent a lot of time thinking about language and making sure that his boss portrayed a rhetoric of honesty.
This project is shown as a series of monolithic sculptures.
It's an outdoor series of light boxes.
And it's important to note that they're to scale, so if you stand 20 feet back and you can read between those two black lines, you have 20/20 vision.
(Laughter) This is a portrait. And there's a lot of these.
There's a lot of ways to do this with data.
I started looking for a way to think about how I can do a more democratic form of portraiture, something that's more about my country and how it works.
Every 10 years, we make a census in the United States.
We literally count people, find out who lives where, what kind of jobs we've got, the language we speak at home.
And this is important stuff -- really important stuff.
But it doesn't really tell us who we are.
It doesn't tell us about our dreams and our aspirations.
And so in 2010, I decided to make my own census.
And I started looking for a corpus of data that had a lot of descriptions written by ordinary Americans.
And it turns out that there is such a corpus of data that's just sitting there for the taking.
It's called online dating.
So in 2010, I joined 21 different online dating services, as a gay man, a straight man, a gay woman and a straight woman, in every zip code in America and downloaded about 19 million people's dating profiles -- about 20 percent of the adult population of the United States.
I have obsessive-compulsive disorder.
This is going to become really freaking obvious. Just go with me.
(Laughter) So what I did was I sorted all this stuff by zip code.
And I looked at word analysis.
These are some dating profiles from 2010 with the word "lonely" highlighted.
If you look at these things topographically, if you imagine dark colors to light colors are more use of the word, you can see that Appalachia is a pretty lonely place.
You can also see that Nebraska ain't that funny.
This is the kinky map, so what this is showing you is that the women in Alaska need to get together with the men in southern New Mexico, and have a good time.
And I have this at a pretty granular level, so I can tell you that the men in the eastern half of Long Island are way more interested in being spanked than men in the western half of Long Island.
This will be your one takeaway from this whole conference.
You're going to remember that fact for, like, 30 years.
(Laughter) When you bring this down to a cartographic level, you can make maps and do the same trick I was doing with the eye charts.
You can replace the name of every city in the United States with the word people use more in that city than anywhere else.
If you've ever dated anyone from Seattle, this makes perfect sense.
You've got "pretty." You've got "heartbreak."
You've got "gig." You've got "cigarette."
They play in a band and they smoke.
And right above that you can see "email."
That's Redmond, Washington, which is the headquarters of the Microsoft Corporation.
Some of these you can guess -- so, Los Angeles is "acting" and San Francisco is "gay."
Some are a little bit more heartbreaking.
In Baton Rouge, they talk about being curvy; downstream in New Orleans, they still talk about the flood.
Folks in the American capital will say they're interesting.
People in Baltimore, Maryland, will say they're afraid.
This is New Jersey.
I grew up somewhere between "annoying" and "cynical."
(Laughter) (Applause) And New York City's number one word is "now," as in, "Now I'm working as a waiter, but actually I'm an actor."
(Laughter) Or, "Now I'm a professor of engineering at NYU, but actually I'm an artist."
If you go upstate, you see "dinosaur."
That's Syracuse.
The best place to eat in Syracuse, New York, is a Hell's Angels barbecue joint called Dinosaur Barbecue.
That's where you would take somebody on a date.
I live somewhere between "unconditional" and "midsummer," in Midtown Manhattan.
And this is gentrified North Brooklyn, so you've got "DJ" and "glamorous" and "hipsters" and "urbane."
So that's maybe a more democratic portrait.
And the idea was, what if we made red-state and blue-state maps based on what we want to do on a Friday night?
This is a self-portrait.
This is based on my email, about 500,000 emails sent over 20 years.
You can think of this as a quantified selfie.
So what I'm doing is running a physics equation based on my personal data.
You have to imagine everybody I've ever corresponded with.
It started out in the middle and it exploded with a big bang.
And everybody has gravity to one another, gravity based on how much they've been emailing, who they've been emailing with.
And it also does sentimental analysis, so if I say "I love you," you're heavier to me.
And you attract to my email addresses in the middle, which act like mainline stars.
And all the names are handwritten.
Sometimes you do this data and this work with real-time data to illuminate a specific problem in a specific city.
This is a Walther PPK 9mm semiautomatic handgun that was used in a shooting in the French Quarter of New Orleans about two years ago on Valentine's Day in an argument over parking.
Those are my cigarettes.
This is the house where the shooting took place.
This project involved a little bit of engineering.
I've got a bike chain rigged up as a cam shaft, with a computer driving it.
That computer and the mechanism are buried in a box.
The gun's on top welded to a steel plate.
There's a wire going through to the trigger, and the computer in the box is online.
It's listening to the 911 feed of the New Orleans Police Department, so that anytime there's a shooting reported in New Orleans, (Gunshot sound) the gun fires.
Now, there's a blank, so there's no bullet.
There's big light, big noise and most importantly, there's a casing.
There's about five shootings a day in New Orleans, so over the four months this piece was installed, the case filled up with bullets.
You guys know what this is -- you call this "data visualization."
When you do it right, it's illuminating.
When you do it wrong, it's anesthetizing.
It reduces people to numbers.
So watch out.
One last piece for you.
I spent the last summer as the artist in residence for Times Square.
And Times Square in New York is literally the crossroads of the world.
One of the things people don't notice about it is it's the most Instagrammed place on Earth.
About every five seconds, someone commits a selfie in Times Square.
That's 17,000 a day, and I have them all.
(Laughter) These are some of them with their eyes centered.
Every civilization, will use the maximum level of technology available to make art.
And it's the responsibility of the artist to ask questions about what that technology means and how it reflects our culture.
So I leave you with this: we're more than numbers.
We're people, and we have dreams and ideas.
And reducing us to statistics is something that's done at our peril.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hello.
This is my first trip, first time in life I'm outside of the walls of Gaza.
I'm so happy to be here.
(Applause) My ambition always was to be a pilot, to fly a plane, to feel free to fly the sky, to touch the sky.
But that didn't happen.
Simply, I live in Gaza, there is no airport.
All borders are closed on every side.
We live in one of the biggest prisons in the world.
The only thing I can do is just to look up to the sky.
On some days, we are lucky if we have electricity for four or five hours.
When it's cold, we make a fire on the front or on the roof of our homes.
Sometimes we make food, too.
My job in Gaza is to arrange everything for journalists who come to my homeland to tell the stories about what's going on in Gaza.
Many mornings, I had to go to the border area to collect a journalist.
If anything should happen to the journalist, or if the journalist decides to cover a story the government doesn't want us to cover, bad things could happen.
Navigating through my country helping journalists, filmmakers, news crews, is my working life.
I believe my success comes from building a relationship not only with journalists and the news crews, but also with the communities in the Gaza Strip.
These communities who don't want their stories to be told, I never looked to them as stories or numbers.
But like me, they are human beings.
I have built up many relationships over 10 years.
And guess what?
This gives me the chance to get access to people, to stories that others can't.
In some certain situations, I feel, as a woman, I have more power.
Many male journalists in my society, they want to cover a story about drug addiction in my country.
That problem started when the Gaza tunnel was being built.
With the siege on Gaza, tunnels brought people all the basic needs like food, building material, other stuff we needed.
But not anymore, because the Egyptian side flooded them up with water and they are not working anymore.
Drugs were being smuggled, and many young people got addicted, too.
In the tradition of the Palestinian society, it's forbidden for men to enter the household.
So, no male journalists get the story.
But I did.
I have a wonderful husband, a wonderful husband who supports me despite all the criticism he gets from the society.
He's at home now with my two kids, and I have another one that's growing in here.
(Applause) When I'm working, I call him every two hours, and he knows if he doesn't hear from me, he should call my contact, the one who gives me access to the story, which is the one who I trust.
One of the times in Gaza, during the kidnapping of the British journalist Alan Johnston, I was asked by an American magazine to set up a meeting with the kidnappers in Gaza, and I did.
The journalist covering the story and I were asked to meet outside of his hotel.
They came, they picked us up in a black van with black windows, they were wearing masks on that day.
And they drove us away, far away in the middle of a field.
They took our cell phones and we did the interview with the kidnapper outside in that field.
I was so scared that day, a day I will never forget.
So, why do I do what I do?
I do it because I believe if I didn't, a huge part of the story about Gaza will be missing.
There are some more stories I could tell you about my country.
And not all of them are bad.
I love my country, despite the terrible situation we live in -- siege, poverty, unemployment -- but there is life.
There are people who are dreamers and amazing people full of energy.
We have wonderful music, and a great music school.
We have parkour dancers who dance in the rubble of their homes.
And Gaza is the only place in the Arab world where Muslims and Christians live in strong brotherhood.
(Applause) During the time of war, the hardest part for me is leaving the house early in the morning, leaving my children.
I take a picture of them everyday because I never know if I will make it back to them.
Being a fixer and a journalist is difficult and dangerous in Gaza.
But when I hear the sound of the shelling or the sound of the bombing, I just head straight toward it, because I want to be there first, because these stories should be told.
When my children were small and we heard the sound of the war, I used to tell them that they were fireworks.
Now they are older, they understand.
I do have terrible nightmares because of all that I witnessed during war times, especially these lifeless bodies of young children.
I still remember a little girl, her name is Hala.
She's the only survivor from her family.
Her picture will be with me forever.
I will never forget her.
I'm proud that I can stand here and be here today with you.
I'm proud that I can tell you stories, sad and happy, stories about my small corner of the world, Gaza.
I'm proud that I am the first female fixer working in Gaza.
And the funny thing is they call me Mr. Rambo in Gaza.
(Laughter) I hope one day, I will get the chance to tell the stories of all other women, all other amazing women I know in my country.
I hope that one day I can help other women in my country to be fixers like me.
And of course sometimes, I feel I can't do this work anymore, it's just too much for me.
But I remember these words: "Don't limit your challenge, but challenge your limit.
Don't allow others to stand in front of your dreams."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Will we do whatever it takes to tackle climate change?
I come at this question not as a green campaigner, in fact, I confess to be rather hopeless at recycling.
I come at it as a professional observer of financial policy making and someone that wonders how history will judge us.
One day, this ring that belonged to my grandfather will pass to my son, Charlie.
And I wonder what his generation and perhaps the one that follows will make of the two lives this ring has worked.
My grandfather was a coal miner.
In his time, burning fossil fuels for energy and for allowing economies to develop was accepted.
We know now that that is not the case because of the greenhouse gases that coal produces.
But today, I fear it's the industry in which I work that will be judged more harshly because of its impact on the climate -- more harshly than my grandfather's industry, even.
I work, of course, in the banking industry, which will be remembered for its crisis in 2008 -- a crisis that diverted the attention and finances of governments away from some really, really important promises, like promises made at the Copenhagen Climate Summit in 2009 to mobilize 100 billion dollars a year to help developing countries move away from burning fossil fuels and transition to using cleaner energy.
That promise is already in jeopardy.
And that's a real problem, because that transition to cleaner energy needs to happen sooner rather than later.
Firstly, because greenhouse gases, once released, stay in the atmosphere for decades.
And secondly, if a developing economy builds its power grid around fossil fuels today, it's going to be way more costly to change later on.
So for the climate, history may judge that the banking crisis happened at just the wrong time.
The story need not be this gloomy, though.
Three years ago, I argued that governments could use the tools deployed to save the financial system to meet other global challenges.
And these arguments are getting stronger, not weaker, with time.
Let's take a brief reminder of what those tools looked like.
When the financial crisis hit in 2008, the central banks of the US and UK began buying bonds issued by their own governments in a policy known as "quantitative easing."
Depending on what happens to those bonds when they mature, this is money printing by another name.
And boy, did they print.
The US alone created four trillion dollars' worth of its own currency.
This was not done in isolation.
In a remarkable act of cooperation, the 188 countries that make up the International Monetary Fund, the IMF, agreed to issue 250 billion dollars' worth of their own currency -- the Special Drawing Right -- to boost reserves around the world.
When the financial crisis moved to Europe, the European Central Bank President, Mario Draghi, promised "to do whatever it takes."
And they did.
The Bank of Japan repeated those words -- that exact same commitment -- to do "whatever it takes" to reflate their economy.
In both cases, "whatever it takes" meant trillions of dollars more in money-printing policies that continue today.
What this shows is that when faced with some global challenges, policy makers are able to act collectively, with urgency, and run the risks of unconventional policies like money printing.
So, let's go back to that original question: Can we print money for climate finance?
Three years ago, the idea of using money in this way was something of a taboo.
Once you break down and dismantle the idea that money is a finite resource, governments can quickly get overwhelmed by demands from their people to print more and more money for other causes: education, health care, welfare -- even defense.
And there are some truly terrible historical examples of money printing -- uncontrolled money printing -- leading to hyperinflation.
Think: Weimar Republic in 1930; Zimbabwe more recently, in 2008, when the prices of basic goods like bread are doubling every day.
But all of this is moving the public debate forward, so much so, that money printing for the people is now discussed openly in the financial media, and even in some political manifestos.
But it's important the debate doesn't stop here, with printing national currencies.
Because climate change is a shared global problem, there are some really compelling reasons why we should be printing that international currency that's issued by the IMF, to fund it.
The Special Drawing Right, or SDR, is the IMF's electronic unit of account that governments use to transfer funds amongst each other.
Think of it as a peer-to-peer payment network, like Bitcoin, but for governments.
And it's truly global.
Each of the 188 members of the IMF hold SDR quotas as part of their foreign exchange reserves.
These are national stores of wealth that countries keep to protect themselves against currency crises.
And that global nature is why, at the height of the financial crisis in 2009, the IMF issued those extra 250 billion dollars -- because it served as a collective global action that safeguarded countries large and small in one fell swoop.
But here -- here's the intriguing part.
More than half of those extra SDRs that were printed in 2009 -- 150 billion dollars' worth -- went to developed market countries who, for the most part, have a modest need for these foreign exchange reserves, because they have flexible exchange rates.
So those extra reserves that were printed in 2009, in the end, for developed market countries at least, weren't really needed.
And they remain unused today.
So here's an idea.
As a first step, why don't we start spending those unused, those extra SDRs that were printed in 2009, to combat climate change?
They could, for example, be used to buy bonds issued by the UN's Green Climate Fund.
This was a fund created in 2009, following that climate agreement in Copenhagen.
And it was designed to channel funds towards developing countries to meet their climate projects.
It's been one of the most successful funds of its type, raising almost 10 billion dollars.
But if we use those extra SDRs that were issued, it helps governments get back on track, to meet that promise of 100 billion dollars a year that was derailed by the financial crisis.
It could also -- it could also serve as a test case.
If the inflationary consequences of using SDRs in this way are benign, it could be used to justify the additional, extra issuance of SDRs, say, every five years, again, with the commitment that developed-market countries would direct their share of the new reserves to the Green Climate Fund.
Printing international money in this way has several advantages over printing national currencies.
The first is it's really easy to argue that spending money to mitigate climate change benefits everyone.
No one section of society benefits from the printing press over another.
That problem of competing claims is mitigated.
It's also fair to say that because it takes so many countries to agree to issue these extra SDRs, it's highly unlikely that money printing would get out of control.
What you end up with is a collective, global action aimed -- and it's controlled global action -- aimed at a global good.
And, as we've learned with the money-printing schemes, whatever concerns we have can be allayed by rules.
So, for example, the issuance of these extra SDRs every five years could be capped, such that this international currency is never more than five percent of global foreign exchange reserves.
That's important because it would allay well, let's say, the ridiculous concerns that the US might have that the SDR could ever challenge the dollar's dominant role in international finance.
And in fact, I think the only thing that the SDR would likely steal from the dollar under this scheme is its nickname, the "greenback."
Because even with that cap in place, the IMF could have followed up its issuance -- its massive issuance of SDRs in 2009 -- with a further 200 billion dollars of SDRs in 2014.
So hypothetically, that would mean that developed countries could have contributed up to 300 billion dollars' worth of SDRs to the Green Climate Fund.
That's 30 times what it has today.
And you know, as spectacular as that sounds, it's only just beginning to look like "whatever it takes."
And just to think what amazing things could be done with that money, consider this: in 2009, Norway promised one billion dollars of its reserves to Brazil if they followed through on their goals on deforestation.
That program has since delivered a 70 percent reduction in deforestation in the past decade.
That's saving 3.2 billion tons of carbon dioxide emissions, which is the equivalent of taking all American cars off the roads for three whole years.
So what could we do with 300 other pay-for-performance climate projects like that, organized on a global scale?
We could take cars off the roads for a generation.
So, let's not quibble about whether we can afford to fund climate change.
The real question is: Do we care enough about future generations to take the very same policy risks we took to save the financial system?
After all, we could do it, we did do it and we are doing it today.
We must, must, must do "whatever it takes."
Thank you.
(Applause)
It is interesting that in the United States, the most significant health-care budget goes to cardiovascular disease care, whether it's private or public.
There's no comparison at all.
In Africa -- where it is a major killer -- it is totally ignored.
And that situation cannot be right. We must do something about it.
A health status of a nation parallels development of that nation.
17 million people die every year from heart disease.
32 million heart attacks and strokes occur.
Most of this is in developing countries, and the majority is in Africa.
85 percent of global disease burden for cardiovascular disease is in developing countries -- not in the West -- and yet 90 percent of the resources are in the West.
Who is at risk? People like you.
It's not just the Africans that should be concerned about that.
All friends of Africa, that will have reason to be in Africa at some point in time, should be very concerned about this deplorable situation.
Has anyone here wondered what will happen if you go back to your room at night, and you start getting chest pains, shortness of breath, sweating?
You're having a heart attack. What are you going to do?
Will you fly back to the U.S., Germany, Europe?
No, you will die. 50 percent will die within 24 hours, if not treated.
This is what's going on.
In a look at the map of the U.S. -- the graph here, 10 million people here, 10 million here.
By the time you get to 50, it's almost no one left in Nigeria -- life expectancy is 47.
It's not because some people don't survive childhood illnesses -- they do -- but they do not survive after the time that they reach about 45 years old and 50 years old.
And those are the times they're most productive.
Those are the times that they should be contributing to Africa's development. But they're not there.
The best way to spiral into a cycle of poverty is to kill the parents.
If you cannot secure the parents, you cannot guarantee the security of the African child.
What are the risk factors?
It's very well known. I'm not going to spend a lot of time on those.
These are just for information: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, lack of exercise. The usual suspects.
Right here in Tanzania, 30 percent of individuals have hypertension.
20 percent are getting treated.
Only less than one percent are adequately treated.
If we can treat hypertension alone in Africa, we'll save 250,000 lives a year. That's quite significant!
Easy to treat. Look at the situation in Mauritius.
In eight short years -- we're here talking about HIV, malaria, which is all good.
We cannot make the mistakes we've made with malaria and HIV.
In eight short years, non-communicable diseases will become the leading causes of death in Africa.
That is something to keep in mind. We can't deal with it with situations like this.
This is a typical African hospital. We can't depend on the elites -- they go to USA, Germany, U.K. for treatment. Unbelievable.
You can't depend on foreign aid alone.
Here is the situation: countries are turning inwards.
Post-9/11, [the] United States has had a lot of trouble to deal with, their own internal issues.
So, they spend their money trying to fix those problems.
You can't rightly -- it's not their responsibility, it is my responsibility. I have to take care of my own problems.
If they help, that's good! But that is not my expectation.
These worsening indices of health care or health studies in Africa demand a new look. We cannot keep on doing things the way we've always done them.
If they have not worked, we have to look for alternative solutions.
I'm here to talk to you about solutions.
This has been -- what has been a difficult sign to some of us.
Several years ago, we started thinking about it.
Everyone knows the problem. No one knows what the solutions are.
We decided that we needed to put our money where our mouth is.
Everyone is ready to throw in money, in terms of free money aid to developing countries.
Talk about sustainable investment, no one is interested.
You can't raise money.
I have done businesses in healthcare in the United States -- I live in Nashville, Tennessee, health care capital of America.
[It's] very easy to raise money for health-care ventures.
But start telling them, you know, we're going to try to do it in Nigeria -- everyone runs away.
That is totally wrong. Those of you in the audience here, if you want to help Africa, invest money in sustainable development.
Let me lead you through a day in the life of the Heart Institute, so you get a glimpse of what we do, and I'll talk a little bit more about it.
What we have done is to show that high-quality health care, comparable to the best anywhere in the world, can be done in a developing country environment.
We have 25 positions right now -- all of them trained, board certified in the USA, Canada or Britain.
We have every modality that can be done in Vanderbilt, Cleveland Clinic -- everywhere in the U.S. -- and we do it for about 10 percent of the cost that you will need to do those things in the United States.
(Applause) Additionally, we have a policy that no one is ever turned away because of ability to pay.
We take care of everyone.
(Applause) Whether you have one dollar, two dollars -- it doesn't matter.
And I will tell you how we're able to do it.
We make sure that we select our equipment properly.
We go for modular units. Units that have multi-modality functions have modular components. Easy to repair, and because of that, we do not take things that are not durable and cannot last.
We emphasize training, and we make sure that this process is regenerative.
Very soon we will all be dead and gone, but the problems will stay, unless we have people taking over from where we stopped.
We made sure that we produced some things ourselves.
We do not buy unit doses of radiopharmaceuticals.
We get the generators from the companies.
We manufacture them in-house, ourselves. That keeps the costs down.
So, for a radiopharmaceutical in the U.S. -- that you'll get a unit dose for 250 dollars -- when we're finished manufacturing it in-house, we come at a price of about two dollars.
(Applause) We recognize that the only way to bridge the gap between the rich and poor countries is through education and technology.
All these problems we're talking about -- if we bring development, they will all disappear.
Technology is a great equalizer. How do we make it work?
It's been proved: self-care is cost-effective.
It extends opportunity to the rural centers, and we can use expertise in a very smart way.
This is the way our centers are set up.
We currently have three locations in the Caribbean, and we're planning a fourth one.
And we have now decided to go into Africa.
We will be doing the West African Heart Institute in Port Harcourt, Nigeria. That project will be starting within the next few months. We hope to open in 2008-09.
And we will do other centers.
This model can be adapted to every disease process.
All the units, all the centers, are linked through a switched hub to a central server, and all the images are populated to review stations.
And we designed this telemedicine solution. It's proprietary to us, and we are happy to share what we have learned with anyone who is interested in doing it. You can still be profitable.
We make sure that the telemedicine platform gives access to expert medical specialists anywhere in the world, just by a click of the button.
I'll lead you through, to see how this happens.
This is at the Heart Institute. The doctors from anywhere can log in.
I can call you in Switzerland and say, "Listen, go into our system.
Look at Mrs. Jones. Look at the study, tell me what you think."
They'll give me that information, and we'll make the care of the patient better.
The patient doesn't have to travel.
He doesn't have to experience the anxiety of not knowing because of limited expertise.
We also use [an] electronic medical record system.
I'm happy to say that the things we have implemented -- 80 percent of U.S. practices do not have them, and yet the technology is there.
But you know, they have that luxury.
Because if you can't get it in Nashville, you can travel to Birmingham, two hours away, and you'll get it. If you can't get it in Cleveland, you can go to Cincinnati. We don't have that luxury, so we have to make it happen.
When we do it, we will put the cost of care down.
And we'll extend it to the rural centers and make it affordable.
And everyone will get the care they deserve.
It cannot just be technology, we recognize that.
Prevention must be part of the solution -- we emphasize that.
But, you know, you have to tell people what can be done.
It's not possible to tell people to do what is going to be expensive, and they go home and can't do it.
They need to be alive, they need to feed.
We recommend exercise as the most effective, simple, easy thing to do.
We have had walks every year -- every March, April.
We form people into groups and make them go into challenges.
Which group loses the most weight, we give them prizes.
Which groups record more walking distance by pedometer, we give them prizes. We do this constantly.
We encourage them to bring children.
That way we start exposing the children from very early on, on what these issues are. Because once they learn it, they will stay with it. In doing this we have created at least 100 skilled jobs in Jamaica alone, and these are physicians with expertise and special training.
We have taken care of over 1,000 indigent patients that could have died, including four free pacemakers in patients with complete heart block. For those that understand cardiology, complete heart block means certain death.
If you don't get this pacemaker, you will be dead.
So we are pleased with that.
Indirectly, we have saved the government of Jamaica five million dollars from people that would have gone to Miami or Atlanta for care.
And we've hopefully saved a lot of lives.
By the end of this year, we would have contributed over one million dollars in indigent care. In the first four months, it's been 340,000 dollars, averaging 85,000 dollars a month. The government will not do that, because they have competing needs.
They need to put resources elsewhere. But we can still do it.
People say, "How can you do that?" This is how we can do that.
At least 4,000 rich Jamaicans that were heading to Miami for treatment have self-confessed that they did not go to Miami because of the Heart Institute of the Caribbean.
And, if they went to Miami, they will spend significantly more -- eight to 10 times more. And they feel happy spending it at home, getting the same quality of care.
And for that money -- for every one patient that has the money to pay, it gives us an opportunity to take care of at least four people that do not have the resources to pay.
(Applause) For this to work, this progress must be sustainable.
So, we emphasize training. Training is critical.
We have gone further: we have formed a relationship with the University of Technology, Jamaica, where I now have an appointment.
And we are starting a biomedical engineering program, so that we will train people locally, who can repair that equipment.
That way we're not going to deal with obsolescence and all those kinds of issues.
We're also starting ancillary health-care technology training programs -- training people in echocardiography, cardiac ultrasound, those kinds of things. Now, with that kind of training, it gives people motivation.
Because now they will get a bachelors degree in medical imaging and all that kind of stuff. In the process, I want you to just hear from the trainees themselves what it has meant for them.
(Video) Dr. Jason Topping: My name is Jason Topping.
I'm a senior resident in anesthesia in intensive care at the University Hospital of the West Indies.
I came to the Heart Institute in 2006, as part of my elective in my anesthesia and intensive care program.
I spent three months at the Heart Institute.
There's been no doubt around my colleagues about the utility of the training I received here, and I think there's been an increased interest now in -- particularly in echocardiography and its use in our setting.
Sharon Lazarus: I am an echocardiographer at the Heart Institute of the Caribbean, since the past two years. I received training at this institution.
I think this aspect of training in cardiology that the Heart Institute of the Caribbean has introduced in Jamaica is very important in terms of diagnosing cardiac diseases.
Ernest Madu: The lesson in this is that it can be done, and it can be sustained, and you can make it possible for everyone.
Who are we to decide that poor people cannot get the best care?
When have you been appointed to play God?
It is not my decision. My job is to make sure that every person, no matter what fate has assigned to you, will have the opportunity to get the best quality health care in life.
Next stop is West African Heart Institute, that we are going to be doing in Port Harcourt, Nigeria, as I said before. We will do other centers across West Africa.
We will extend the same system into other areas, like dialysis treatment.
And anyone who is interested in doing it in any health care situation, we will be happy to assist you and tell you how we've done it, and how you can do it. If we do this, we can change the face of health care in Africa.
Africa has been good to us; it is time for us to give back to Africa.
I am going. Those who want to come, I welcome you to come along with me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the next 16 minutes, I'm going to take you on a journey that is probably the biggest dream of humanity: to understand the code of life.
So for me, everything started many, many years ago when I met the first 3D printer.
The concept was fascinating.
A 3D printer needs three elements: a bit of information, some raw material, some energy, and it can produce any object that was not there before.
I was doing physics, I was coming back home and I realized that I actually always knew a 3D printer.
And everyone does.
It was my mom.
(Laughter) My mom takes three elements: a bit of information, which is between my father and my mom in this case, raw elements and energy in the same media, that is food, and after several months, produces me.
And I was not existent before.
So apart from the shock of my mom discovering that she was a 3D printer, I immediately got mesmerized by that piece, the first one, the information.
What amount of information does it take to build and assemble a human?
Is it much? Is it little?
How many thumb drives can you fill?
Well, I was studying physics at the beginning and I took this approximation of a human as a gigantic Lego piece.
So, imagine that the building blocks are little atoms and there is a hydrogen here, a carbon here, a nitrogen here.
So in the first approximation, if I can list the number of atoms that compose a human being, I can build it.
Now, you can run some numbers and that happens to be quite an astonishing number.
So the number of atoms, the file that I will save in my thumb drive to assemble a little baby, will actually fill an entire Titanic of thumb drives -- multiplied 2,000 times.
This is the miracle of life.
Every time you see from now on a pregnant lady, she's assembling the biggest amount of information that you will ever encounter.
Forget big data, forget anything you heard of.
This is the biggest amount of information that exists.
(Applause) But nature, fortunately, is much smarter than a young physicist, and in four billion years, managed to pack this information in a small crystal we call DNA.
We met it for the first time in 1950 when Rosalind Franklin, an amazing scientist, a woman, took a picture of it.
But it took us more than 40 years to finally poke inside a human cell, take out this crystal, unroll it, and read it for the first time.
The code comes out to be a fairly simple alphabet, four letters: A, T, C and G.
And to build a human, you need three billion of them.
Three billion.
How many are three billion?
It doesn't really make any sense as a number, right?
So I was thinking how I could explain myself better about how big and enormous this code is.
But there is -- I mean, I'm going to have some help, and the best person to help me introduce the code is actually the first man to sequence it, Dr. Craig Venter.
So welcome onstage, Dr. Craig Venter.
(Applause) Not the man in the flesh, but for the first time in history, this is the genome of a specific human, printed page-by-page, letter-by-letter: 262,000 pages of information, 450 kilograms, shipped from the United States to Canada thanks to Bruno Bowden, Lulu.com, a start-up, did everything.
It was an amazing feat.
But this is the visual perception of what is the code of life.
And now, for the first time, I can do something fun.
I can actually poke inside it and read.
So let me take an interesting book ... like this one.
I have an annotation; it's a fairly big book.
So just to let you see what is the code of life.
Thousands and thousands and thousands and millions of letters.
And they apparently make sense.
Let's get to a specific part.
Let me read it to you: (Laughter) "AAG, AAT, ATA."
To you it sounds like mute letters, but this sequence gives the color of the eyes to Craig.
I'll show you another part of the book.
This is actually a little more complicated.
Chromosome 14, book 132: (Laughter) As you might expect.
(Laughter) "ATT, CTT, GATT."
This human is lucky, because if you miss just two letters in this position -- two letters of our three billion -- he will be condemned to a terrible disease: cystic fibrosis.
We have no cure for it, we don't know how to solve it, and it's just two letters of difference from what we are.
A wonderful book, a mighty book, a mighty book that helped me understand and show you something quite remarkable.
Every one of you -- what makes me, me and you, you -- is just about five million of these, half a book.
For the rest, we are all absolutely identical.
Five hundred pages is the miracle of life that you are.
The rest, we all share it.
So think about that again when we think that we are different.
This is the amount that we share.
So now that I have your attention, the next question is: How do I read it?
How do I make sense out of it?
Well, for however good you can be at assembling Swedish furniture, this instruction manual is nothing you can crack in your life.
(Laughter) And so, in 2014, two famous TEDsters, Peter Diamandis and Craig Venter himself, decided to assemble a new company.
Human Longevity was born, with one mission: trying everything we can try and learning everything we can learn from these books, with one target -- making real the dream of personalized medicine, understanding what things should be done to have better health and what are the secrets in these books.
An amazing team, 40 data scientists and many, many more people, a pleasure to work with.
The concept is actually very simple.
We're going to use a technology called machine learning.
On one side, we have genomes -- thousands of them.
On the other side, we collected the biggest database of human beings: phenotypes, 3D scan, NMR -- everything you can think of.
Inside there, on these two opposite sides, there is the secret of translation.
And in the middle, we build a machine.
We build a machine and we train a machine -- well, not exactly one machine, many, many machines -- to try to understand and translate the genome in a phenotype.
What are those letters, and what do they do?
It's an approach that can be used for everything, but using it in genomics is particularly complicated.
Little by little we grew and we wanted to build different challenges.
We started from the beginning, from common traits.
Common traits are comfortable because they are common, everyone has them.
So we started to ask our questions: Can we predict height?
Can we read the books and predict your height?
Well, we actually can, with five centimeters of precision.
BMI is fairly connected to your lifestyle, but we still can, we get in the ballpark, eight kilograms of precision.
Can we predict eye color?
Yeah, we can.
Eighty percent accuracy.
Can we predict skin color?
Yeah we can, 80 percent accuracy.
Can we predict age?
We can, because apparently, the code changes during your life.
It gets shorter, you lose pieces, it gets insertions.
We read the signals, and we make a model.
Now, an interesting challenge: Can we predict a human face?
It's a little complicated, because a human face is scattered among millions of these letters.
And a human face is not a very well-defined object.
So, we had to build an entire tier of it to learn and teach a machine what a face is, and embed and compress it.
And if you're comfortable with machine learning, you understand what the challenge is here.
Now, after 15 years -- 15 years after we read the first sequence -- this October, we started to see some signals.
And it was a very emotional moment.
What you see here is a subject coming in our lab.
This is a face for us.
So we take the real face of a subject, we reduce the complexity, because not everything is in your face -- lots of features and defects and asymmetries come from your life.
We symmetrize the face, and we run our algorithm.
The results that I show you right now, this is the prediction we have from the blood.
(Applause) Wait a second.
In these seconds, your eyes are watching, left and right, left and right, and your brain wants those pictures to be identical.
So I ask you to do another exercise, to be honest.
Please search for the differences, which are many.
The biggest amount of signal comes from gender, then there is age, BMI, the ethnicity component of a human.
And scaling up over that signal is much more complicated.
But what you see here, even in the differences, lets you understand that we are in the right ballpark, that we are getting closer.
And it's already giving you some emotions.
This is another subject that comes in place, and this is a prediction.
A little smaller face, we didn't get the complete cranial structure, but still, it's in the ballpark.
This is a subject that comes in our lab, and this is the prediction.
So these people have never been seen in the training of the machine.
These are the so-called "held-out" set.
But these are people that you will probably never believe.
We're publishing everything in a scientific publication, you can read it.
But since we are onstage, Chris challenged me.
I probably exposed myself and tried to predict someone that you might recognize.
So, in this vial of blood -- and believe me, you have no idea what we had to do to have this blood now, here -- in this vial of blood is the amount of biological information that we need to do a full genome sequence.
We just need this amount.
We ran this sequence, and I'm going to do it with you.
And we start to layer up all the understanding we have.
In the vial of blood, we predicted he's a male.
And the subject is a male.
We predict that he's a meter and 76 cm.
The subject is a meter and 77 cm.
So, we predicted that he's 76; the subject is 82.
We predict his age, 38.
The subject is 35.
We predict his eye color.
Too dark.
We predict his skin color.
We are almost there.
That's his face.
Now, the reveal moment: the subject is this person.
(Laughter) And I did it intentionally.
I am a very particular and peculiar ethnicity.
Southern European, Italians -- they never fit in models.
And it's particular -- that ethnicity is a complex corner case for our model.
But there is another point.
So, one of the things that we use a lot to recognize people will never be written in the genome.
It's our free will, it's how I look.
Not my haircut in this case, but my beard cut.
So I'm going to show you, I'm going to, in this case, transfer it -- and this is nothing more than Photoshop, no modeling -- the beard on the subject.
And immediately, we get much, much better in the feeling.
So, why do we do this?
We certainly don't do it for predicting height or taking a beautiful picture out of your blood.
We do it because the same technology and the same approach, the machine learning of this code, is helping us to understand how we work, how your body works, how your body ages, how disease generates in your body, how your cancer grows and develops, how drugs work and if they work on your body.
This is a huge challenge.
This is a challenge that we share with thousands of other researchers around the world.
It's called personalized medicine.
It's the ability to move from a statistical approach where you're a dot in the ocean, to a personalized approach, where we read all these books and we get an understanding of exactly how you are.
But it is a particularly complicated challenge, because of all these books, as of today, we just know probably two percent: four books of more than 175.
And this is not the topic of my talk, because we will learn more.
There are the best minds in the world on this topic.
The prediction will get better, the model will get more precise.
And the more we learn, the more we will be confronted with decisions that we never had to face before about life, about death, about parenting.
So, we are touching the very inner detail on how life works.
And it's a revolution that cannot be confined in the domain of science or technology.
This must be a global conversation.
We must start to think of the future we're building as a humanity.
We need to interact with creatives, with artists, with philosophers, with politicians.
Everyone is involved, because it's the future of our species.
Without fear, but with the understanding that the decisions that we make in the next year will change the course of history forever.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am holding something remarkably old.
It is older than any human artifact, older than life on Earth, older than the continents and the oceans between them.
This was formed over four billion years ago in the earliest days of the solar system while the planets were still forming.
This rusty lump of nickel and iron may not appear special, but when it is cut open ...
you can see that it is different from earthly metals.
This pattern reveals metallic crystals that can only form out in space where molten metal can cool extremely slowly, a few degrees every million years.
This was once part of a much larger object, one of millions left over after the planets formed.
We call these objects asteroids.
Asteroids are our oldest and most numerous cosmic neighbors.
This graphic shows near-Earth asteroids orbiting around the Sun, shown in yellow, and swinging close to the Earth's orbit, shown in blue.
The sizes of the Earth, Sun and asteroids have been greatly exaggerated so you can see them clearly.
Teams of scientists across the globe are searching for these objects, discovering new ones every day, steadily mapping near-Earth space.
Much of this work is funded by NASA.
I think of the search for these asteroids as a giant public works project, but instead of building a highway, we're charting outer space, building an archive that will last for generations.
These are the 1,556 near-Earth asteroids discovered just last year.
And these are all of the known near-Earth asteroids, which at last count was 13,733.
Each one has been imaged, cataloged and had its path around the Sun determined.
Although it varies from asteroid to asteroid, the paths of most asteroids can be predicted for dozens of years.
And the paths of some asteroids can be predicted with incredible precision.
For example, scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory predicted where the asteroid Toutatis was going to be four years in advance to within 30 kilometers.
In those four years, Toutatis traveled 8.5 billion kilometers.
That's a fractional precision of 0.000000004.
(Laughter) Now, the reason I have this beautiful asteroid fragment is because, like all neighbors, asteroids sometimes drop by unexpectedly.
(Laughter) Three years ago today, a small asteroid exploded over the city of Chelyabinsk, Russia.
That object was about 19 meters across, or about as big as a convenience store.
Objects of this size hit the Earth every 50 years or so.
66 million years ago, a much larger object hit the Earth, causing a massive extinction.
75 percent of plant and animal species were lost, including, sadly, the dinosaurs.
That object was about 10 kilometers across, and 10 kilometers is roughly the cruising altitude of a 747 jet.
So the next time you're in an airplane, snag a window seat, look out and imagine a rock so enormous that resting on the ground, it just grazes your wingtip.
It's so wide that it takes your plane one full minute to fly past it.
That's the size of the asteroid that hit the Earth.
It has only been within my lifetime that asteroids have been considered a credible threat to our planet.
And since then, there's been a focused effort underway to discover and catalog these objects.
I am lucky enough to be part of this effort.
I'm part of a team of scientists that use NASA's NEOWISE telescope.
Now, NEOWISE was not designed to find asteroids.
It was designed to orbit the earth and look far beyond our solar system to seek out the coldest stars and the most luminous galaxies.
And it did that very well for its designed lifetime of seven months.
But today, six years later, it's still going.
We've repurposed it to discover and study asteroids.
And although it's a wonderful little space robot, these days it's kind of like a used car.
The cryogen that used to refrigerate its sensors is long gone, so we joke that its air-conditioning is broken.
It's got 920 million miles on the odometer, but it still runs great and reliably takes a photograph of the sky every 11 seconds.
It's taken 23 photos since I began speaking to you.
One of the reasons NEOWISE is so valuable is that it sees the sky in the thermal infrared.
That means that instead of seeing the sunlight that asteroids reflect, NEOWISE sees the heat that they emit.
This is a vital capability since some asteroids are as dark as coal and can be difficult or impossible to spot with other telescopes.
But all asteroids, light or dark, shine brightly for NEOWISE.
Astronomers are using every technique at their disposal to discover and study asteroids.
In 2010, a historic milestone was reached.
The community, together, discovered over 90 percent of asteroids bigger than one kilometer across -- objects capable of massive destruction to Earth.
But the job's not done yet.
An object 140 meters or bigger could decimate a medium-sized country.
So far, we've only found 25 percent of those.
We must keep searching the sky for near-Earth asteroids.
We are the only species able to understand calculus or build telescopes.
We know how to find these objects.
This is our responsibility.
If we found a hazardous asteroid with significant early warning, we could nudge it out of the way.
Unlike earthquakes, hurricanes or volcanic eruptions, an asteroid impact can be precisely predicted and prevented.
What we need to do now is map near-Earth space.
We must keep searching the sky.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was three months pregnant with twins when my husband Ross and I went to my second sonogram.
I was 35 years old at the time, and I knew that that meant we had a higher risk of having a child with a birth defect.
So, Ross and I researched the standard birth defects, and we felt reasonably prepared.
Well, nothing would have prepared us for the bizarre diagnosis that we were about to face.
The doctor explained that one of our twins, Thomas, had a fatal birth defect called anencephaly.
This means that his brain was not formed correctly because part of his skull was missing.
Babies with this diagnosis typically die in utero or within a few minutes, hours or days of being born.
But the other twin, Callum, appeared to be healthy, as far as the doctor could tell, and these twins were identical, genetically identical.
So after a lot of questions about how this could have possibly happened, a selective reduction was mentioned, and while this procedure was not impossible, it posed some unique risks for the healthy twin and for me, so we decided to carry the pregnancy to term.
So there I was, three months pregnant, with two trimesters ahead of me, and I had to find a way to manage my blood pressure and my stress.
And it felt like having a roommate point a loaded gun at you for six months.
But I stared down the barrel of that gun for so long that I saw a light at the end of the tunnel.
While there was nothing we could do to prevent the tragedy, I wanted to find a way for Thomas's brief life to have some kind of positive impact.
So I asked my nurse about organ, eye and tissue donation.
She connected with our local organ-procurement organization, the Washington Regional Transplant Community.
WRTC explained to me that Thomas would probably be too small at birth to donate for transplant, and I was shocked: I didn't even know you could be rejected for that.
But they said that he would be a good candidate to donate for research.
This helped me see Thomas in a new light.
As opposed to just a victim of a disease, I started to see him as a possible key to unlock a medical mystery.
On March 23, 2010, the twins were born, and they were both born alive.
And just like the doctor said, Thomas was missing the top part of his skull, but he could nurse, drink from a bottle, cuddle and grab our fingers like a normal baby, and he slept in our arms.
After six days, Thomas died in Ross's arms surrounded by our family.
We called WRTC, who sent a van to our home and brought him to Children's National Medical Center.
A few hours later, we got a call to say that the recovery was a success, and Thomas's donations would be going to four different places.
His cord blood would go to Duke University.
His liver would go to a cell-therapy company called Cytonet in Durham.
His corneas would go to Schepens Eye Research Institute, which is part of Harvard Medical School, and his retinas would go to the University of Pennsylvania.
A few days later, we had a funeral with our immediate family, including baby Callum, and we basically closed this chapter in our lives.
But I did find myself wondering, what's happening now?
What are the researchers learning?
And was it even worthwhile to donate?
WRTC invited Ross and I to a grief retreat, and we met about 15 other grieving families who had donated their loved one's organs for transplant.
Some of them had even received letters from the people who received their loved one's organs, saying thank you.
I learned that they could even meet each other if they'd both sign a waiver, almost like an open adoption.
And I was so excited, I thought maybe I could write a letter or I could get a letter and learn about what happened.
But I was disappointed to learn that this process only exists for people who donate for transplant.
So I was jealous. I had transplant envy, I guess.
(Laughter) But over the years that followed, I learned a lot more about donation, and I even got a job in the field.
And I came up with an idea.
I wrote a letter that started out, "Dear Researcher."
I explained who I was, and I asked if they could tell me why they requested infant retinas in March of 2010, and I asked if my family could visit their lab.
I emailed it to the eye bank that arranged the donation, the Old Dominion Eye Foundation, and asked if they could send it to the right person.
They said that they had never done this before, and they couldn't guarantee a response, but they wouldn't be an obstacle, and they would deliver it.
Two days later, I got a response from Dr. Arupa Ganguly of the University of Pennsylvania.
She thanked me for the donation, and she explained that she is studying retinoblastoma, which is a deadly cancer of the retina that affects children under the age of five, and she said that yes, we were invited to visit her lab.
So next we talked on the phone, and one of the first things she said to me was that she couldn't possibly imagine how we felt, and that Thomas had given the ultimate sacrifice, and that she seemed to feel indebted to us.
So I said, "Nothing against your study, but we didn't actually pick it.
We donated to the system, and the system chose your study.
I said, "And second of all, bad things happen to children every day, and if you didn't want these retinas, they would probably be buried in the ground right now.
So to be able to participate in your study gives Thomas's life a new layer of meaning.
So, never feel guilty about using this tissue."
Next, she explained to me how rare it was.
She had placed a request for this tissue six years earlier with the National Disease Research Interchange.
She got only one sample of tissue that fit her criteria, and it was Thomas's.
Next, we arranged a date for me to come visit the lab, and we chose March 23, 2015, which was the twins' fifth birthday.
After we hung up, I emailed her some pictures of Thomas and Callum, and a few weeks later, we received this T-shirt in the mail.
A few months later, Ross, Callum and I piled in the car and we went for a road trip.
We met Arupa and her staff, and Arupa said that when I told her not to feel guilty, that it was a relief, and that she hadn't seen it from our perspective.
She also explained that Thomas had a secret code name.
The same way Henrietta Lacks is called HeLa, Thomas was called RES 360.
RES means research, and 360 means he was the 360th specimen over the course of about 10 years.
She also shared with us a unique document, and it was the shipping label that sent his retinas from DC to Philadelphia.
This shipping label is like an heirloom to us now.
It's the same way that a military medal or a wedding certificate might be.
Arupa also explained that she is using Thomas's retina and his RNA to try to inactivate the gene that causes tumor formation, and she even showed us some results that were based on RES 360.
Then she took us to the freezer and she showed us the two samples that she still has that are still labeled RES 360.
There's two little ones left.
She said she saved it because she doesn't know when she might get more.
After this, we went to the conference room and we relaxed and we had lunch together, and the lab staff presented Callum with a birthday gift.
It was a child's lab kit.
And they also offered him an internship.
(Laughter) So in closing, I have two simple messages today.
One is that most of us probably don't think about donating to research.
I know I didn't. I think I'm a normal person.
But I did it.
It was a good experience, and I recommend it, and it brought my family a lot of peace.
And second is if you work with human tissue and you wonder about the donor and about the family, write them a letter.
Tell them you received it, tell them what you're working on, and invite them to visit your lab, because that visit may be even more gratifying for you than it is for them.
And I'd also like to ask you a favor.
If you're ever successful in arranging one of these visits, please tell me about it.
The other part of my family's story is that we ended up visiting all four facilities that received Thomas's donations.
And we met amazing people doing inspiring work.
The way I see it now is that Thomas got into Harvard, Duke and Penn -- (Laughter) And he has a job at Cytonet, and he has colleagues and he has coworkers who are in the top of their fields.
And they need him in order to do their job.
And a life that once seemed brief and insignificant revealed itself to be vital, everlasting and relevant.
And I only hope that my life can be as relevant.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Probably not a surprise to you, but I don't like to be in a hospital or go to a hospital.
Do you?
I'm sure many of you feel the same way, right?
But why? Why is it that we hate hospitals so much?
Or is it just a fact of life we have to live with?
Is it the crappy food?
Is it the expensive parking?
Is it the intense smell?
Or is it the fear of the unknown?
Well, it's all of that, and it's more.
Patients often have to travel long distances to get to their nearest hospital, and access to hospital care is becoming more and more an issue in rural areas, in the US, but also in sparsely populated countries like Sweden.
And even when hospitals are more abundant, typically the poor and the elderly have trouble getting care because they lack transportation that is convenient and affordable to them.
And many people are avoiding hospital care altogether, and they miss getting proper treatment due to cost.
We see that 64 percent of Americans are avoiding care due to cost.
And even when you do get treatment, hospitals often make us sicker.
Medical errors are reported to be the third cause of death in the US, just behind cancer and heart disease, the third cause of death.
I'm in health care for over 20 years now, and I witness every day how broken and how obsolete our hospital system is.
Let me give you two examples.
Four in 10 Japanese medical doctors and five in 10 American medical doctors are burnt out.
In my home country, the Netherlands, only 17 million people live there.
We are short 125,000 nurses over the coming years.
But how did we even end up here, in this idea of placing all kinds of sick people together in one big building?
Well, we have to go back to the Ancient Greeks.
In 400 BC, temples for cure were erected where people could go to get their diagnosis, their treatment and their healing.
And then really for about 2,000 years, we've seen religious care centers all the way up to the Industrial Revolution, where we've seen hospitals being set up as assembly lines based on the principles of the Industrial Revolution, to produce efficiently and get the products, the patients in this case, out of the hospital as soon as possible.
Over the last century, we've seen lots of interesting innovations.
We figured out how to make insulin.
We invented pacemakers and X-ray, and we even came into this wonderful new era of cell and gene therapies.
But the biggest change to fix our hospital system altogether is still ahead of us.
And I believe it's time now, we have the opportunity, to revolutionize the system altogether and forget about our current hospital system.
I believe it's time to create a new system that revolves around health care at home.
Recent research has shown that 46 percent of hospital care can move to the patient's home.
That's a lot.
And that's mainly for those patients who suffer from chronic diseases.
With that, hospitals can and should reduce to smaller, agile and mobile care centers focused on acute care.
So things like neonatology, intensive care, surgery and imaging will still remain at the hospitals, at least I believe for the foreseeable future.
A few weeks ago, I met a colleague whose mom was diagnosed with incurable cancer, and she said, "Niels, it's hard.
It's so hard when we know that she's got only months to live.
Instead of playing with the grandchildren, she now has to travel three times a week two hours up and down to Amsterdam just to get her treatment and tests."
And that really breaks my heart, because we all know that a professional nurse could draw her blood at home as well, right?
And if she could get her tests and treatment at home as well, she could do the things that are really important to her in her last months.
My own mom, 82 years old now -- God bless her -- she's avoiding to go to the hospital because she finds it difficult to plan and manage the journey.
So my sisters and I, we help her out.
But there's many elderly people who are avoiding care and are waiting that long that it becomes life-threatening, and it's straight to the costly, intensive care.
Dr. Covinsky, a clinical researcher at the University of California, he concludes that a third of patients over 70 and more than half of patients over 85, leave the hospital more disabled than when they came in.
And a very practical problem that many patients face when they have to go to a hospital is: Where do I go with my main companion in life, where do I go with my dog?
That's our dog, by the way. Isn't she cute?
(Laughter) But it's not only about convenience.
It's also about unnecessary health care stays and costs.
A friend of mine, Art, he recently needed to be hospitalized for just a minor surgery, and he had to stay in the hospital for over two weeks, just because he needed a specific kind of IV antibiotics.
So he occupied a bed for two weeks that cost over a thousand euros a day.
It's just ridiculous.
And these costs are really at the heart of the issue.
So we've seen over many of our global economies, health care expense grow as a percentage of GDP over the last years.
So here we see that over the last 50 years, health care expense has grown from about five percent in Germany to about 11 percent now.
In the US, we've seen growth from six percent to over 17 percent now.
And a large portion of these costs are driven by investments in large, shiny hospital buildings.
And these buildings are not flexible, and they maintain a system where hospital beds need to be filled for a hospital to run efficiently.
There's no incentive for a hospital to run with less beds.
Just the thought of that makes you sick, right?
And here's the thing: the cost for treating my buddy Art at home can be up to 10 times cheaper than hospital care.
And that is where we're headed.
The hospital bed of the future will be in our own homes.
And it's already starting.
Global home care is growing 10 percent year over year.
And from my own experience, I see that logistics and technology are making these home health care solutions work.
Technology is already allowing us to do things that were once exclusive to hospitals.
Diagnosis tests like blood, glucose tests, urine tests, can now be taken in the comfort of our homes.
And more and more connected devices we see like pacemakers and insulin pumps that will proactively signal if help is needed soon.
And all that technology is coming together in much more insights into the patients' health, and that insight and all of the information leads to better control and to less medical errors -- remember, the third cause of death in the US.
And I see it every day at work.
I work in logistics and for me, home health care works.
So we see a delivery driver deliver the medicine to the patient's home.
A nurse joins him and actually administers the drug at the patient's home.
It's that simple.
Remember my buddy, Art?
He can now get the IV antibiotics in the comfort of his home: no hospital pajamas, no crappy food and no risk of these antibiotic-resistant superbugs that only bite you in these hospitals.
And it goes further.
So now the elderly people can get the treatment that they need in the comfort of their own home while with their best companion in life.
And there's no need anymore to drive hours and hours just to get your treatment and tests.
In the Netherlands and in Denmark, we've seen very good successes in cancer clinics organizing chemotherapies at the patient's homes, sometimes even together with fellow patients.
The best improvements for these patients have been improvements in reduction in stress, anxiety disorders and depression.
Home health care also helped them to get back a sense of normality and freedom in their lives, and they've actually helped them to forget about their disease.
But home health care, Niels -- what if I don't even have a home, when I'm homeless, or when I do have a home but there's no one to take care of me or even open up the door?
Well, in comes our sharing economy, or, as I like to call it, the Airbnb for home care.
In the Netherlands, we see churches and care organizations match people in need of care and company with people who actually have a home for them and can provide care and company to them.
Home health care is cheaper, it's easier to facilitate, and it's quick to set up -- in these rural areas we talked about, but also in humanitarian crisis situations where it's often safer, quicker and cheaper to set things up at home.
Home health care is very applicable in prosperous areas but also very much in underserved communities.
Home health care works in developed countries as well as in developing countries.
So I'm passionate to help facilitate improvements in patients' lives due to home health care.
I'm passionate to help facilitate that the elderly people get the treatment that they need in the comfort of their own homes, together with their best companion in life.
I'm passionate to make the change and help ensure that patients, and not their disease, are in control of their lives.
To me, that is health care delivered at home.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Design is a slippery and elusive phenomenon, which has meant different things at different times.
But all truly inspiring design projects have one thing in common: they began with a dream.
And the bolder the dream, the greater the design feat that will be required to achieve it.
And this is why the greatest designers are almost always the biggest dreamers and rebels and renegades.
This has been the case throughout history, all the way back to the year 300 BC, when a 13-year-old became the king of a remote, very poor and very small Asian country.
He dreamt of acquiring land, riches and power through military conquest.
And his design skills -- improbable though it sounds -- would be essential in enabling him to do so.
At the time, all weapons were made by hand to different specifications.
So if an archer ran out of arrows during a battle, they wouldn't necessarily be able to fire another archer's arrows from their bow.
This of course meant that they would be less effective in combat and very vulnerable, too.
Ying solved this problem by insisting that all bows and arrows were designed identically, so they were interchangeable.
And he did the same for daggers, axes, spears, shields and every other form of weaponry.
His formidably equipped army won batter after battle, and within 15 years, his tiny kingdom had succeeded in conquering all its larger, richer, more powerful neighbors, to found the mighty Chinese Empire.
Now, no one, of course, would have thought of describing Ying Zheng as a designer at the time -- why would they?
And yet he used design unknowingly and instinctively but with tremendous ingenuity to achieve his ends.
And so did another equally improbable, accidental designer, who was also not above using violence to get what he wanted.
This was Edward Teach, better known as the British pirate, Blackbeard.
This was the golden age of piracy, where pirates like Teach were terrorizing the high seas.
Colonial trade was flourishing, and piracy was highly profitable.
And the smarter pirates like him realized that to maximize their spoils, they needed to attack their enemies so brutally that they would surrender on sight.
So in other words, they could take the ships without wasting ammunition, or incurring casualties.
So Edward Teach redesigned himself as Blackbeard by playing the part of a merciless brute.
He wore heavy jackets and big hats to accentuate his height.
He grew the bushy black beard that obscured his face.
He slung braces of pistols on either shoulder.
He even attached matches to the brim of his hat and set them alight, so they sizzled menacingly whenever his ship was poised to attack.
And like many pirates of that era, he flew a flag that bore the macabre symbols of a human skull and a pair of crossed bones, because those motifs had signified death in so many cultures for centuries, that their meaning was instantly recognizable, even in the lawless, illiterate world of the high seas: surrender or you'll suffer.
So of course, all his sensible victims surrendered on sight.
Put like that, it's easy to see why Edward Teach and his fellow pirates could be seen as pioneers of modern communications design, and why their deadly symbol -- (Laughter) there's more -- why their deadly symbol of the skull and crossbones was a precursor of today's logos, rather like the big red letters standing behind me, but of course with a different message.
(Laughter) Yet design was also used to nobler ends by an equally brilliant and equally improbable designer, the 19th-century British nurse, Florence Nightingale.
Her mission was to provide decent healthcare for everyone.
Nightingale was born into a rather grand, very wealthy British family, who were horrified when she volunteered to work in military hospitals during the Crimean War.
Once there, she swiftly realized that more patients were dying of infections that they caught there, in the filthy, fetid wards, than they were of battle wounds.
So she campaigned for cleaner, lighter, airier clinics to be designed and built.
Back in Britain, she mounted another campaign, this time for civilian hospitals, and insisted that the same design principles were applied to them.
The Nightingale ward, as it is called, dominated hospital design for decades to come, and elements of it are still used today.
But by then, design was seen as a tool of the Industrial Age.
It was formalized and professionalized, but it was restricted to specific roles and generally applied in pursuit of commercial goals rather than being used intuitively, as Florence Nightingale, Blackbeard and Ying Zheng had done.
By the 20th century, this commercial ethos was so powerful, that any designers who deviated from it risked being seen as cranks or subversives.
Now among them is one of my great design heroes, the brilliant László Moholy-Nagy.
He was the Hungarian artist and designer whose experiments with the impact of technology on daily life were so powerful that they still influence the design of the digital images we see on our phone and computer screens.
He radicalized the Bauhaus Design School in 1920s Germany, and yet some of his former colleagues shunned him when he struggled to open a new Bauhaus in Chicago years later.
Moholy's ideas were as bold and incisive as ever, but his approach to design was too experimental, as was his insistence on seeing it, as he put it, as an attitude, not a profession to be in tune with the times.
And sadly, the same applied to another design maverick: Richard Buckminster Fuller.
He was yet another brilliant design visionary and design activist, who was completely committed to designing a sustainable society in such a forward-thinking way that he started talking about the importance of environmentalism in design in the 1920s.
Now he, despite his efforts, was routinely mocked as a crank by many in the design establishment, and admittedly, some of his experiments failed, like the flying car that never got off the ground.
And yet, the geodesic dome, his design formula to build an emergency shelter from scraps of wood, metal, plastic, bits of tree, old blankets, plastic sheeting -- just about anything that's available at the time -- is one of the greatest feats of humanitarian design, and has provided sorely needed refuge to many, many people in desperate circumstances ever since.
Now, it was the courage and verve of radical designers like Bucky and Moholy that drew me to design.
I began my career as a news journalist and foreign correspondent.
I wrote about politics, economics and corporate affairs, and I could have chosen to specialize in any of those fields.
But I picked design, because I believe it's one of the most powerful tools at our disposal to improve our quality of life.
Thank you, fellow TED design buffs.
(Applause) And greatly as I admire the achievements of professional designers, which have been extraordinary and immense, I also believe that design benefits hugely from the originality, the lateral thinking and the resourcefulness of its rebels and renegades.
And we're living at a remarkable moment in design, because this is a time when the two camps are coming closer together.
Because even very basic advances in digital technology have enabled them to operate increasingly independently, in or out of a commercial context, to pursue ever more ambitious and eclectic objectives.
So in theory, basic platforms like crowdfunding, cloud computing, social media are giving greater freedom to professional designers and giving more resources for the improvisational ones, and hopefully, a more receptive response to their ideas.
Now, some of my favorite examples of this are in Africa, where a new generation of designers are developing incredible Internet of Things technologies to fulfill Florence Nightingale's dream of improving healthcare in countries where more people now have access to cell phones than to clean, running water.
And among them is Arthur Zang.
He's a young, Cameroonian design engineer who has a adapted a tablet computer into the Cardiopad, a mobile heart-monitoring device.
It can be used to monitor the hearts of patients in remote, rural areas.
The data is then sent on a cellular network to well-equipped hospitals hundreds of miles away for analysis.
And if any problems are spotted by the specialists there, a suitable course of treatment is recommended.
And this of course saves many patients from making long, arduous, expensive and often pointless journeys to those hospitals, and makes it much, much likelier that their hearts will actually be checked.
Arthur Zang started working on the Cardiopad eight years ago, in his final year at university.
But he failed to persuade any conventional sources to give him investment to get the project off the ground.
He posted the idea on Facebook, where a Cameroonian government official saw it and managed to secure a government grant for him.
He's now developing not only the Cardiopad, but other mobile medical devices to treat different conditions.
And he isn't alone, because there are many other inspiring and enterprising designers who are also pursuing extraordinary projects of their own.
And I'm going to finish by looking at just a few of them.
One is Peek Vision.
This is a group of doctors and designers in Kenya, who've developed an Internet of Things technology of their own, as a portable eye examination kit.
Then there's Gabriel Maher, who is developing a new design language to enable us to articulate the subtleties of our changing gender identities, without recourse to traditional stereotypes.
All of these designers and many more are pursuing their dreams, by the making the most of their newfound freedom, with the discipline of professional designers and the resourcefulness of rebels and renegades.
And we all stand to benefit.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So this is a talk about gene drives, but I'm going to start by telling you a brief story.
20 years ago, a biologist named Anthony James got obsessed with the idea of making mosquitos that didn't transmit malaria.
It was a great idea, and pretty much a complete failure.
For one thing, it turned out to be really hard to make a malaria-resistant mosquito.
James managed it, finally, just a few years ago, by adding some genes that make it impossible for the malaria parasite to survive inside the mosquito.
But that just created another problem.
Now that you've got a malaria-resistant mosquito, how do you get it to replace all the malaria-carrying mosquitos?
There are a couple options, but plan A was basically to breed up a bunch of the new genetically-engineered mosquitos release them into the wild and hope that they pass on their genes.
The problem was that you'd have to release literally 10 times the number of native mosquitos to work.
So in a village with 10,000 mosquitos, you release an extra 100,000.
As you might guess, this was not a very popular strategy with the villagers.
(Laughter) Then, last January, Anthony James got an email from a biologist named Ethan Bier.
Bier said that he and his grad student Valentino Gantz had stumbled on a tool that could not only guarantee that a particular genetic trait would be inherited, but that it would spread incredibly quickly.
If they were right, it would basically solve the problem that he and James had been working on for 20 years.
As a test, they engineered two mosquitos to carry the anti-malaria gene and also this new tool, a gene drive, which I'll explain in a minute.
Finally, they set it up so that any mosquitos that had inherited the anti-malaria gene wouldn't have the usual white eyes, but would instead have red eyes.
That was pretty much just for convenience so they could tell just at a glance which was which.
So they took their two anti-malarial, red-eyed mosquitos and put them in a box with 30 ordinary white-eyed ones, and let them breed.
In two generations, those had produced 3,800 grandchildren.
That is not the surprising part.
This is the surprising part: given that you started with just two red-eyed mosquitos and 30 white-eyed ones, you expect mostly white-eyed descendants.
Instead, when James opened the box, all 3,800 mosquitos had red eyes.
When I asked Ethan Bier about this moment, he became so excited that he was literally shouting into the phone.
That's because getting only red-eyed mosquitos violates a rule that is the absolute cornerstone of biology, Mendelian genetics.
I'll keep this quick, but Mendelian genetics says when a male and a female mate, their baby inherits half of its DNA from each parent.
So if our original mosquito was aa and our new mosquito is aB, where B is the anti-malarial gene, the babies should come out in four permutations: aa, aB, aa, Ba.
Instead, with the new gene drive, they all came out aB.
Biologically, that shouldn't even be possible.
So what happened?
The first thing that happened was the arrival of a gene-editing tool known as CRISPR in 2012.
Many of you have probably heard about CRISPR, so I'll just say briefly that CRISPR is a tool that allows researchers to edit genes very precisely, easily and quickly.
It does this by harnessing a mechanism that already existed in bacteria.
Basically, there's a protein that acts like a scissors and cuts the DNA, and there's an RNA molecule that directs the scissors to any point on the genome you want.
The result is basically a word processor for genes.
You can take an entire gene out, put one in, or even edit just a single letter within a gene.
And you can do it in nearly any species.
OK, remember how I said that gene drives originally had two problems?
The first was that it was hard to engineer a mosquito to be malaria-resistant.
That's basically gone now, thanks to CRISPR.
But the other problem was logistical.
How do you get your trait to spread?
This is where it gets clever.
A couple years ago, a biologist at Harvard named Kevin Esvelt wondered what would happen if you made it so that CRISPR inserted not only your new gene but also the machinery that does the cutting and pasting.
In other words, what if CRISPR also copied and pasted itself.
You'd end up with a perpetual motion machine for gene editing.
And that's exactly what happened.
This CRISPR gene drive that Esvelt created not only guarantees that a trait will get passed on, but if it's used in the germline cells, it will automatically copy and paste your new gene into both chromosomes of every single individual.
It's like a global search and replace, or in science terms, it makes a heterozygous trait homozygous.
So, what does this mean?
For one thing, it means we have a very powerful, but also somewhat alarming new tool.
Up until now, the fact that gene drives didn't work very well was actually kind of a relief.
Normally when we mess around with an organism's genes, we make that thing less evolutionarily fit.
So biologists can make all the mutant fruit flies they want without worrying about it.
If some escape, natural selection just takes care of them.
What's remarkable and powerful and frightening about gene drives is that that will no longer be true.
Assuming that your trait does not have a big evolutionary handicap, like a mosquito that can't fly, the CRISPR-based gene drive will spread the change relentlessly until it is in every single individual in the population.
Now, it isn't easy to make a gene drive that works that well, but James and Esvelt think that we can.
The good news is that this opens the door to some remarkable things.
If you put an anti-malarial gene drive in just 1 percent of Anopheles mosquitoes, the species that transmits malaria, researchers estimate that it would spread to the entire population in a year.
So in a year, you could virtually eliminate malaria.
In practice, we're still a few years out from being able to do that, but still, a 1,000 children a day die of malaria.
In a year, that number could be almost zero.
The same goes for dengue fever, chikungunya, yellow fever.
And it gets better.
Say you want to get rid of an invasive species, like get Asian carp out of the Great Lakes.
All you have to do is release a gene drive that makes the fish produce only male offspring.
In a few generations, there'll be no females left, no more carp.
In theory, this means we could restore hundreds of native species that have been pushed to the brink.
OK, that's the good news, this is the bad news.
Gene drives are so effective that even an accidental release could change an entire species, and often very quickly.
Anthony James took good precautions.
He bred his mosquitos in a bio-containment lab and he also used a species that's not native to the US so that even if some did escape, they'd just die off, there'd be nothing for them to mate with.
But it's also true that if a dozen Asian carp with the all-male gene drive accidentally got carried from the Great Lakes back to Asia, they could potentially wipe out the native Asian carp population.
And that's not so unlikely, given how connected our world is.
In fact, it's why we have an invasive species problem.
And that's fish.
Things like mosquitos and fruit flies, there's literally no way to contain them.
They cross borders and oceans all the time.
OK, the other piece of bad news is that a gene drive might not stay confined to what we call the target species.
That's because of gene flow, which is a fancy way of saying that neighboring species sometimes interbreed.
If that happens, it's possible a gene drive could cross over, like Asian carp could infect some other kind of carp.
That's not so bad if your drive just promotes a trait, like eye color.
In fact, there's a decent chance that we'll see a wave of very weird fruit flies in the near future.
But it could be a disaster if your drive is deigned to eliminate the species entirely.
The last worrisome thing is that the technology to do this, to genetically engineer an organism and include a gene drive, is something that basically any lab in the world can do.
An undergraduate can do it.
A talented high schooler with some equipment can do it.
Now, I'm guessing that this sounds terrifying.
(Laughter) Interestingly though, nearly every scientist I talk to seemed to think that gene drives were not actually that frightening or dangerous.
Partly because they believe that scientists will be very cautious and responsible about using them.
(Laughter) So far, that's been true.
But gene drives also have some actual limitations.
So for one thing, they work only in sexually reproducing species.
So thank goodness, they can't be used to engineer viruses or bacteria.
Also, the trait spreads only with each successive generation.
So changing or eliminating a population is practical only if that species has a fast reproductive cycle, like insects or maybe small vertebrates like mice or fish.
In elephants or people, it would take centuries for a trait to spread widely enough to matter.
Also, even with CRISPR, it's not that easy to engineer a truly devastating trait.
Say you wanted to make a fruit fly that feeds on ordinary fruit instead of rotting fruit, with the aim of sabotaging American agriculture.
First, you'd have to figure out which genes control what the fly wants to eat, which is already a very long and complicated project.
Then you'd have to alter those genes to change the fly's behavior to whatever you'd want it to be, which is an even longer and more complicated project.
And it might not even work, because the genes that control behavior are complex.
So if you're a terrorist and have to choose between starting a grueling basic research program that will require years of meticulous lab work and still might not pan out, or just blowing stuff up?
You'll probably choose the later.
This is especially true because at least in theory, it should be pretty easy to build what's called a reversal drive.
That's one that basically overwrites the change made by the first gene drive.
So if you don't like the effects of a change, you can just release a second drive that will cancel it out, at least in theory.
OK, so where does this leave us?
We now have the ability to change entire species at will.
Should we?
Are we gods now?
I'm not sure I'd say that.
But I would say this: first, some very smart people are even now debating how to regulate gene drives.
At the same time, some other very smart people are working hard to create safeguards, like gene drives that self-regulate or peter out after a few generations.
That's great.
But this technology still requires a conversation.
And given the nature of gene drives, that conversation has to be global.
What if Kenya wants to use a drive but Tanzania doesn't?
Who decides whether to release a gene drive that can fly?
I don't have the answer to that question.
All we can do going forward, I think, is talk honestly about the risks and benefits and take responsibility for our choices.
By that I mean, not just the choice to use a gene drive, but also the choice not to use one.
Humans have a tendency to assume that the safest option is to preserve the status quo.
But that's not always the case.
Gene drives have risks, and those need to be discussed, but malaria exists now and kills 1,000 people a day.
To combat it, we spray pesticides that do grave damage to other species, including amphibians and birds.
So when you hear about gene drives in the coming months, and trust me, you will be hearing about them, remember that.
It can be frightening to act, but sometimes, not acting is worse.
(Applause)
Imagine that you invented a device that can record my memories, my dreams, my ideas, and transmit them to your brain.
That would be a game-changing technology, right?
But in fact, we already possess this device, and it's called human communication system and effective storytelling.
To understand how this device works, we have to look into our brains.
And we have to formulate the question in a slightly different manner.
Now we have to ask how these neuron patterns in my brain that are associated with my memories and ideas are transmitted into your brains.
And we think there are two factors that enable us to communicate.
First, your brain is now physically coupled to the sound wave that I'm transmitting to your brain.
And second, we developed a common neural protocol that enabled us to communicate.
So how do we know that?
In my lab in Princeton, we bring people to the fMRI scanner and we scan their brains while they are either telling or listening to real-life stories.
And to give you a sense of the stimulus we are using, let me play 20 seconds from a story that we used, told by a very talented storyteller, Jim O'Grady.
(Audio) Jim O'Grady: So I'm banging out my story and I know it's good, and then I start to make it better -- (Laughter) by adding an element of embellishment.
Reporters call this "making shit up."
(Laughter) And they recommend against crossing that line.
But I had just seen the line crossed between a high-powered dean and assault with a pastry.
And I kinda liked it."
Uri Hasson: OK, so now let's look into your brain and see what's happening when you listen to these kinds of stories.
And let's start simple -- let's start with one listener and one brain area: the auditory cortex that processes the sounds that come from the ear.
And as you can see, in this particular brain area, the responses are going up and down as the story is unfolding.
Now we can take these responses and compare them to the responses in other listeners in the same brain area.
And we can ask: How similar are the responses across all listeners?
So here you can see five listeners.
And we start to scan their brains before the story starts, when they're simply lying in the dark and waiting for the story to begin.
As you can see, the brain area is going up and down in each one of them, but the responses are very different, and not in sync.
However, immediately as the story is starting, something amazing is happening.
(Audio) JO: So I'm banging out my story and I know it's good, and then I start to make it -- UH: Suddenly, you can see that the responses in all of the subjects lock to the story, and now they are going up and down in a very similar way across all listeners.
And in fact, this is exactly what is happening now in your brains when you listen to my sound speaking.
We call this effect "neural entrainment."
And to explain to you what is neural entrainment, let me first explain what is physical entrainment.
So, we'll look and see five metronomes.
Think of these five metronomes as five brains.
And similar to the listeners before the story starts, these metronomes are going to click, but they're going to click out of phase.
(Clicking) Now see what will happen when I connect them together by placing them on these two cylinders.
(Clicking) Now these two cylinders start to rotate.
This rotation vibration is going through the wood and is going to couple all the metronomes together.
And now listen to the click.
(Synchronized clicking) This is what you call physical entrainment.
Now let's go back to the brain and ask: What's driving this neural entrainment?
Is it simply the sounds that the speaker is producing?
Or maybe it's the words.
Or maybe it's the meaning that the speaker is trying to convey.
So to test it, we did the following experiment.
First, we took the story and played it backwards.
And that preserved many of the original auditory features, but removed the meaning.
And it sounds something like that.
(Audio) JO: (Unintelligible) And we flashed colors in the two brains to indicate brain areas that respond very similarly across people.
And as you can see, this incoming sound induced entrainment or alignment in all of the brains in auditory cortices that process the sounds, but it didn't spread deeper into the brain.
Now we can take these sounds and build words out of it.
So if we take Jim O'Grady and scramble the words, we'll get a list of words.
(Audio) JO: ... an animal ... assorted facts ...
and right on ... pie man ... potentially ... my stories UH: And you can see that these words start to induce alignment in early language areas, but not more than that.
Now we can take the words and start to build sentences out of them.
(Audio) JO: And they recommend against crossing that line.
He says: "Dear Jim, Good story. Nice details.
Didn't she only know about him through me?"
UH: Now you can see that the responses in all the language areas that process the incoming language become aligned or similar across all listeners.
However, only when we use the full, engaging, coherent story do the responses spread deeper into the brain into higher-order areas, which include the frontal cortex and the parietal cortex, and make all of them respond very similarly.
And we believe that these responses in higher-order areas are induced or become similar across listeners because of the meaning conveyed by the speaker, and not by words or sound.
And if we are right, there's a strong prediction over here if I tell you the exact same ideas using two very different sets of words, your brain responses will still be similar.
And to test it, we did the following experiment in my lab.
We took the English story and translated it to Russian.
Now you have two different sounds and linguistic systems that convey the exact same meaning.
And you play the English story to the English listeners and the Russian story to the Russian listeners, and we can compare their responses across the groups.
And when we did that, we didn't see responses that are similar in auditory cortices in language, because the language and sound are very different.
However, you can see that the responses in high-order areas were still similar across these two groups.
We believe this is because they understood the story in a very similar way, as we confirmed, using a test after the story ended.
And we think that this alignment is necessary for communication.
For example, as you can tell, I am not a native English speaker.
I grew up with another language, and the same might be for many of you in the audience.
And still, we can communicate.
How come?
We think we can communicate because we have this common code that presents meaning.
So far, I've only talked about what's happening in the listener's brain, in your brain, when you're listening to talks.
But what's happening in the speaker's brain, in my brain, when I'm speaking to you?
To look in the speaker's brain, we asked the speaker to go into the scanner, we scan his brain and then compare his brain responses to the brain responses of the listeners listening to the story.
You have to remember that producing speech and comprehending speech are very different processes.
Here we're asking: How similar are they?
To our surprise, we saw that all these complex patterns within the listeners actually came from the speaker brain.
So production and comprehension rely on very similar processes.
And we also found the stronger the similarity between the listener's brain and the speaker's brain, the better the communication.
So I know that if you are completely confused now, and I do hope that this is not the case, your brain responses are very different than mine.
But I also know that if you really understand me now, then your brain ... and your brain ... and your brain are really similar to mine.
Now, let's take all this information together and ask: How can we use it to transmit a memory that I have from my brain to your brains?
So we did the following experiment.
We let people watch, for the first time in their life, a TV episode from the BBC series "Sherlock," while we scanned their brains.
And then we asked them to go back to the scanner and tell the story to another person that never watched the movie.
So let's be specific.
Think about this exact scene, when Sherlock is entering the cab in London driven by the murderer he is looking for.
With me, as a viewer, there is a specific brain pattern in my brain when I watch it.
Now, the exact same pattern, I can reactivate in my brain again by telling the word: Sherlock, London, murderer.
And when I'm transmitting these words to your brains now, you have to reconstruct it in your mind.
In fact, we see that pattern emerging now in your brains.
And we were really surprised to see that the pattern you have now in your brains when I'm describing to you these scenes would be very similar to the pattern I had when I watched this movie a few months ago in the scanner.
This starts to tell you about the mechanism by which we can tell stories and transmit information.
Because, for example, now you're listening really hard and trying to understand what I'm saying.
And I know that it's not easy.
But I hope that at one point in the talk we clicked, and you got me.
And I think that in a few hours, a few days, a few months, you're going to meet someone at a party, and you're going to tell him about this lecture, and suddenly it will be as if he is standing now here with us.
Now you can see how we can take this mechanism and try to transmit memories and knowledge across people, which is wonderful, right?
But our ability to communicate relies on our ability to have common ground.
Because, for example, if I'm going to use the British synonym "hackney carriage" instead of "cab," I know that I'm going to be misaligned with most of you in the audience.
This alignment depends not only on our ability to understand the basic concept; it also depends on our ability to develop common ground and understanding and shared belief systems.
Because we know that in many cases, people understand the exact same story in very different ways.
So to test it in the lab, we did the following experiment.
We took a story by J.D. Salinger, in which a husband lost track of his wife in the middle of a party, and he's calling his best friend, asking, "Did you see my wife?"
For half of the subjects, we said that the wife was having an affair with the best friend.
For the other half, we said that the wife is loyal and the husband is very jealous.
This one sentence before the story started was enough to make the brain responses of all the people that believed the wife was having an affair be very similar in these high-order areas and different than the other group.
And if one sentence is enough to make your brain similar to people that think like you and very different than people that think differently than you, think how this effect is going to be amplified in real life, when we are all listening to the exact same news item after being exposed day after day after day to different media channels, like Fox News or The New York Times, that give us very different perspectives on reality.
So let me summarize.
If everything worked as planned tonight, I used my ability to vocalize sound to be coupled to your brains.
And I used this coupling to transmit my brain patterns associated with my memories and ideas into your brains.
In this, I start to reveal the hidden neural mechanism by which we communicate.
And we know that in the future it will enable us to improve and facilitate communication.
But these studies also reveal that communication relies on a common ground.
And we have to be really worried as a society if we lose this common ground and our ability to speak with people that are slightly different than us because we let a few very strong media channels take control of the mic, and manipulate and control the way we all think.
And I'm not sure how to fix it because I'm only a scientist.
But maybe one way to do it is to go back to the more natural way of communication, which is a dialogue, in which it's not only me speaking to you now, but a more natural way of talking, in which I am speaking and I am listening, and together we are trying to come to a common ground and new ideas.
Because after all, the people we are coupled to define who we are.
And our desire to be coupled to another brain is something very basic that starts at a very early age.
So let me finish with an example from my own private life that I think is a good example of how coupling to other people is really going to define who we are.
This my son Jonathan at a very early age.
See how he developed a vocal game together with my wife, only from the desire and pure joy of being coupled to another human being.
(Both vocalizing) (Laughter) Now, think how the ability of my son to be coupled to us and other people in his life is going to shape the man he is going to become.
And think how you change on a daily basis from the interaction and coupling to other people in your life.
So keep being coupled to other people.
Keep spreading your ideas, because the sum of all of us together, coupled, is greater than our parts.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As a conceptual artist, I'm constantly looking for creative ways to spark challenging conversations.
I do this though painting, sculpture, video and performance.
But regardless of the format, two of my favorite materials are history and dialogue.
In 2007, I created "Lotus," a seven-and-a-half-foot diameter, 600-pound glass depiction of a lotus blossom.
In Buddhism, the lotus is a symbol for transcendence and for purity of mind and spirit.
But a closer look at this lotus reveals each petal to be the cross-section of a slave ship.
This iconic diagram was taken from a British slaving manual and later used by abolitionists to show the atrocities of slavery.
In America, we don't like to talk about slavery, nor do we look at it as a global industry.
But by using this Buddhist symbol, I hope to universalize and transcend the history and trauma of black America and encourage discussions about our shared past.
To create "Lotus," we carved over 6,000 figures.
And this later led to a commission by the City of New York to create a 28-foot version in steel as a permanent installation at the Eagle Academy for Young Men, a school for black and latino students, the two groups most affected by this history.
The same two groups are very affected by a more recent phenomenon, but let me digress.
I've been collecting wooden African figures from tourist shops and flea markets around the world.
The authenticity and origin of them is completely debatable, but people believe these to be imbued with power, or even magic.
Only recently have I figured out how to use this in my own work.
(Gun shots) Since 2012, the world has witnessed the killings of Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Eric Garner, Sandra Bland, Tamir Rice and literally countless other unarmed black citizens at the hands of the police, who frequently walk away with no punishment at all.
In consideration of these victims and the several times that even I, a law-abiding, Ivy League professor, have been targeted and harassed at gunpoint by the police.
I created this body of work simply entitled "BAM."
It was important to erase the identity of each of these figures, to make them all look the same and easier to disregard.
To do this, I dip them in a thick, brown wax before taking them to a shooting range where I re-sculpted them using bullets.
And it was fun, playing with big guns and high-speed video cameras.
But my reverence for these figures kept me from actually pulling the trigger, somehow feeling as if I would be shooting myself.
Finally, my cameraman, Raul, fired the shots.
I then took the fragments of these and created molds, and cast them first in wax, and finally in bronze like the image you see here, which bears the marks of its violent creation like battle wounds or scars.
When I showed this work recently in Miami, a woman told me she felt every gun shot to her soul.
But she also felt that these artworks memorialized the victims of these killings as well as other victims of racial violence throughout US history.
But "Lotus" and "BAM" are larger than just US history.
While showing in Berlin last year, a philosophy student asked me what prompted these recent killings.
I showed him a photo of a lynching postcard from the early 1900s and reminded him that these killings have been going on for over 500 years.
But it's only through questions like his and more thoughtful dialogue about history and race can we evolve as individuals and society.
I hope my artwork creates a safe space for this type of honest exchange and an opportunity for people to engage one another in real and necessary conversation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I think about dreams, like many of you, I think about this picture.
I was eight when I watched Neil Armstrong step off the Lunar Module onto the surface of the Moon.
I had never seen anything like it before, and I've never seen anything like it since.
We got to the Moon for one simple reason: John Kennedy committed us to a deadline.
And in the absence of that deadline, we would still be dreaming about it.
Leonard Bernstein said two things are necessary for great achievement: a plan and not quite enough time.
(Laughter) Deadlines and commitments are the great and fading lessons of Apollo.
And they are what give the word "moonshot" its meaning.
And our world is in desperate need of political leaders willing to set bold deadlines for the achievement of daring dreams on the scale of Apollo again.
When I think about dreams, I think about the drag queens of LA and Stonewall and millions of other people risking everything to come out when that was really dangerous, and of this picture of the White House lit up in rainbow colors, yes -- (Applause) -- celebrating America's gay and lesbian citizens' right to marry.
It is a picture that in my wildest dreams I could never have imagined when I was 18 and figuring out that I was gay and feeling estranged from my country and my dreams because of it.
I think about this picture of my family that I never dreamed I could ever have -- (Applause) -- and of our children holding this headline I never dreamed could ever be printed about the Supreme Court ruling.
We need more of the courage of drag queens and astronauts.
(Laughter) (Applause) But I want to talk about the need for us to dream in more than one dimension, because there was something about Apollo that I didn't know when I was 8, and something about organizing that the rainbow colors over.
Of the 30 astronauts in the original Mercury, Gemini and Apollo programs, only seven marriages survived.
Those iconic images of the astronauts bouncing on the Moon obscure the alcoholism and depression on Earth.
Thomas Merton, the Trappist monk, asked during the time of Apollo, "What can we gain by sailing to the moon if we are not able to cross the abyss that separates us from ourselves?"
And what can we gain by the right to marry if we are not able to cross the acrimony and emotional distance that so often separates us from our love?
And not just in marriage.
I have seen the most hurtful, destructive, tragic infighting in LGBT and AIDS and breast cancer and non-profit activism, all in the name of love.
Thomas Merton also wrote about wars among saints and that "there is a pervasive form of contemporary violence to which the idealist most easily succumbs: activism and overwork.
The frenzy of our activism neutralizes our work for peace.
It destroys our own inner capacity for peace."
Too often our dreams become these compartmentalized fixations on some future that destroy our ability to be present for our lives right now.
Our dreams of a better life for some future humanity or some other humanity in another country alienate us from the beautiful human beings sitting next to us at this very moment.
Well, that's just the price of progress, we say.
You can go to the Moon or you can have stability in your family life.
And we can't conceive of dreaming in both dimensions at the same time.
And we don't set the bar much higher than stability when it comes to our emotional life.
Which is why our technology for talking to one another has gone vertical, our ability to listen and understand one another has gone nowhere.
Our access to information is through the roof, our access to joy, grounded.
But this idea, that our present and our future are mutually exclusive, that to fulfill our potential for doing we have to surrender our profound potential for being, that the number of transistors on a circuit can be doubled and doubled, but our capacity for compassion and humanity and serenity and love is somehow limited is a false and suffocating choice.
Now, I'm not suggesting simply the uninspiring idea of more work-life balance.
What good is it for me to spend more time with my kids at home if my mind is always somewhere else while I'm doing it?
I'm not even talking about mindfulness.
Mindfulness is all of a sudden becoming a tool for improving productivity.
(Laughter) Right?
I'm talking about dreaming as boldly in the dimension of our being as we do about industry and technology.
I'm talking about an audacious authenticity that allows us to cry with one another, a heroic humility that allows us to remove our masks and be real.
It is our inability to be with one another, our fear of crying with one another, that gives rise to so many of the problems we are frantically trying to solve in the first place, from Congressional gridlock to economic inhumanity.
(Applause) I'm talking about what Jonas Salk called an Epoch B, a new epoch in which we become as excited about and curious about and scientific about the development of our humanity as we are about the development of our technology.
We should not shrink from this opportunity simply because we don't really understand it.
There was a time when we didn't understand space.
Or because we're more used to technology and activism.
That is the very definition of being stuck in a comfort zone.
We are now very comfortable imagining unimaginable technological achievement.
In 2016, it is the dimension of our being itself that cries out for its fair share of our imagination.
Now, we're all here to dream, but maybe if we're honest about it, each of us chasing our own dream.
You know, looking at the name tags to see who can help me with my dream, sometimes looking right through one another's humanity.
I can't be bothered with you right now. I have an idea for saving the world.
Right?
(Laughter) Years ago, once upon a time, I had this beautiful company that created these long journeys for heroic civic engagement.
And we had this mantra: "Human. Kind. Be Both."
And we encouraged people to experiment outrageously with kindness.
Like, "Go help everybody set up their tents."
And there were a lot of tents.
(Laughter) "Go buy everybody Popsicles."
"Go help people fix their flat tires even though you know the dinner line is going to get longer."
And people really took us up on this, so much so that if you got a flat tire on the AIDS ride, you had trouble fixing it, because there were so many people there asking you if you needed help.
For a few days, for tens of thousands of people, we created these worlds that everybody said were the way they wish the world could always be.
What if we experimented with creating that kind of world these next few days?
And instead of going up to someone and asking them, "What do you do?"
ask them, "So what are your dreams?"
or "What are your broken dreams?"
You know, "TED." Tend to Each other's Dreams.
(Applause) Maybe it's "I want to stay sober" or "I want to build a tree house with my kid."
You know, instead of going up to the person everybody wants to meet, go up to the person who is all alone and ask them if they want to grab a cup of coffee.
I think what we fear most is that we will be denied the opportunity to fulfill our true potential, that we are born to dream and we might die without ever having the chance.
Imagine living in a world where we simply recognize that deep, existential fear in one another and love one another boldly because we know that to be human is to live with that fear.
It's time for us to dream in multiple dimensions simultaneously, and somewhere that transcends all of the wondrous things we can and will and must do lies the domain of all the unbelievable things we could be.
It's time we set foot into that dimension and came out about the fact that we have dreams there, too.
If the Moon could dream, I think that would be its dream for us.
It's an honor to be with you.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In the space that used to house one transistor, we can now fit one billion.
That made it so that a computer the size of an entire room now fits in your pocket.
You might say the future is small.
As an engineer, I'm inspired by this miniaturization revolution in computers.
As a physician, I wonder whether we could use it to reduce the number of lives lost due to one of the fastest-growing diseases on Earth: cancer.
Now when I say that, what most people hear me say is that we're working on curing cancer.
And we are.
But it turns out that there's an incredible opportunity to save lives through the early detection and prevention of cancer.
Worldwide, over two-thirds of deaths due to cancer are fully preventable using methods that we already have in hand today.
Things like vaccination, timely screening and of course, stopping smoking.
But even with the best tools and technologies that we have today, some tumors can't be detected until 10 years after they've started growing, when they are 50 million cancer cells strong.
What if we had better technologies to detect some of these more deadly cancers sooner, when they could be removed, when they were just getting started?
Let me tell you about how miniaturization might get us there.
This is a microscope in a typical lab that a pathologist would use for looking at a tissue specimen, like a biopsy or a pap smear.
This $7,000 microscope would be used by somebody with years of specialized training to spot cancer cells.
This is an image from a colleague of mine at Rice University, Rebecca Richards-Kortum.
What she and her team have done is miniaturize that whole microscope into this $10 part, and it fits on the end of an optical fiber.
Now what that means is instead of taking a sample from a patient and sending it to the microscope, you can bring the microscope to the patient.
And then, instead of requiring a specialist to look at the images, you can train the computer to score normal versus cancerous cells.
Now this is important, because what they found working in rural communities, is that even when they have a mobile screening van that can go out into the community and perform exams and collect samples and send them to the central hospital for analysis, that days later, women get a call with an abnormal test result and they're asked to come in.
Fully half of them don't turn up because they can't afford the trip.
With the integrated microscope and computer analysis, Rebecca and her colleagues have been able to create a van that has both a diagnostic setup and a treatment setup.
And what that means is that they can do a diagnosis and perform therapy on the spot, so no one is lost to follow up.
That's just one example of how miniaturization can save lives.
Now as engineers, we think of this as straight-up miniaturization.
You took a big thing and you made it little.
But what I told you before about computers was that they transformed our lives when they became small enough for us to take them everywhere.
So what is the transformational equivalent like that in medicine?
Well, what if you had a detector that was so small that it could circulate in your body, find the tumor all by itself and send a signal to the outside world?
It sounds a little bit like science fiction.
But actually, nanotechnology allows us to do just that.
Nanotechnology allows us to shrink the parts that make up the detector from the width of a human hair, which is 100 microns, to a thousand times smaller, which is 100 nanometers.
And that has profound implications.
It turns out that materials actually change their properties at the nanoscale.
You take a common material like gold, and you grind it into dust, into gold nanoparticles, and it changes from looking gold to looking red.
If you take a more exotic material like cadmium selenide -- forms a big, black crystal -- if you make nanocrystals out of this material and you put it in a liquid, and you shine light on it, they glow.
And they glow blue, green, yellow, orange, red, depending only on their size.
It's wild! Can you imagine an object like that in the macro world?
It would be like all the denim jeans in your closet are all made of cotton, but they are different colors depending only on their size.
(Laughter) So as a physician, what's just as interesting to me is that it's not just the color of materials that changes at the nanoscale; the way they travel in your body also changes.
And this is the kind of observation that we're going to use to make a better cancer detector.
So let me show you what I mean.
This is a blood vessel in the body.
Surrounding the blood vessel is a tumor.
We're going to inject nanoparticles into the blood vessel and watch how they travel from the bloodstream into the tumor.
Now it turns out that the blood vessels of many tumors are leaky, and so nanoparticles can leak out from the bloodstream into the tumor.
Whether they leak out depends on their size.
So in this image, the smaller, hundred-nanometer, blue nanoparticles are leaking out, and the larger, 500-nanometer, red nanoparticles are stuck in the bloodstream.
So that means as an engineer, depending on how big or small I make a material, I can change where it goes in your body.
In my lab, we recently made a cancer nanodetector that is so small that it could travel into the body and look for tumors.
We designed it to listen for tumor invasion: the orchestra of chemical signals that tumors need to make to spread.
For a tumor to break out of the tissue that it's born in, it has to make chemicals called enzymes to chew through the scaffolding of tissues.
We designed these nanoparticles to be activated by these enzymes.
One enzyme can activate a thousand of these chemical reactions in an hour.
Now in engineering, we call that one-to-a-thousand ratio a form of amplification, and it makes something ultrasensitive.
So we've made an ultrasensitive cancer detector.
OK, but how do I get this activated signal to the outside world, where I can act on it?
For this, we're going to use one more piece of nanoscale biology, and that has to do with the kidney.
The kidney is a filter.
Its job is to filter out the blood and put waste into the urine.
It turns out that what the kidney filters is also dependent on size.
So in this image, what you can see is that everything smaller than five nanometers is going from the blood, through the kidney, into the urine, and everything else that's bigger is retained.
OK, so if I make a 100-nanometer cancer detector, I inject it in the bloodstream, it can leak into the tumor where it's activated by tumor enzymes to release a small signal that is small enough to be filtered out of the kidney and put into the urine, I have a signal in the outside world that I can detect.
OK, but there's one more problem.
This is a tiny little signal, so how do I detect it?
Well, the signal is just a molecule.
They're molecules that we designed as engineers.
They're completely synthetic, and we can design them so they are compatible with our tool of choice.
If we want to use a really sensitive, fancy instrument called a mass spectrometer, then we make a molecule with a unique mass.
Or maybe we want make something that's more inexpensive and portable.
Then we make molecules that we can trap on paper, like a pregnancy test.
In fact, there's a whole world of paper tests that are becoming available in a field called paper diagnostics.
Alright, where are we going with this?
What I'm going to tell you next, as a lifelong researcher, represents a dream of mine.
I can't say that's it's a promise; it's a dream.
But I think we all have to have dreams to keep us pushing forward, even -- and maybe especially -- cancer researchers.
I'm going to tell you what I hope will happen with my technology, that my team and I will put our hearts and souls into making a reality.
OK, here goes.
I dream that one day, instead of going into an expensive screening facility to get a colonoscopy, or a mammogram, or a pap smear, that you could get a shot, wait an hour, and do a urine test on a paper strip.
I imagine that this could even happen without the need for steady electricity, or a medical professional in the room.
Maybe they could be far away and connected only by the image on a smartphone.
Now I know this sounds like a dream, but in the lab we already have this working in mice, where it works better than existing methods for the detection of lung, colon and ovarian cancer.
And I hope that what this means is that one day we can detect tumors in patients sooner than 10 years after they've started growing, in all walks of life, all around the globe, and that this would lead to earlier treatments, and that we could save more lives than we can today, with early detection.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Do I look real to you?
Hope so.
I have no idea if you're seeing this, but I'm just going to look ahead and trust that you're there.
I've drawn a semicircle in the sand in front of me so I don't walk past it and look like I'm floating in midair.
Right now I'm standing in the open air, on a beach under a palm tree, in the exact spot where your stage used to be.
I have 12 minutes with you.
I set a limit.
My wife Navid once said that infinite possibility is a creator's worst enemy.
For example, this dress: I'd asked her to design something that a priest might have worn in 23rd-century Cairo.
But we only had three days to make it, and the only fabric we had was an old duvet cover that another resident left behind.
But she did it, and it's perfect.
And she looked at it and said, "Proof of concept -- creation needs constraint."
So with these 12 minutes, I'm going to tell you about my greatest discovery.
For my whole life, my obsession has been eternal life, as I know it is so many of yours.
You may be happy to know that your research will pay off.
I am 318 years old.
The average human lifespan is now 432 years, and my work has been to extend the human lifespan indefinitely.
And I've never questioned that someday, we'll reach a point where we'll be content.
But the opposite keeps happening: the longer we live, the longer we want to live, the less we want to die.
Who can blame us?
The universe is so big.
There won't ever not be more to see.
Just yesterday, I was reading about how you can take out a boat on Europa and sail from island to island all over the planet, and some of the islands have villages that you can stay and visit and sleep under the shadow of Jupiter.
And then there's this other island where there's just one songwriter who sits and plays mandolin for the ocean.
And then there are others where there's no one and there never has been, and so you go just for the pleasure of touching your foot to sand that no foot has ever touched before.
You could spend 400 years doing just that.
Right now the Moon is rising in the Northeast.
I can see the cities on it with my naked eye.
They're connected like nerve clusters: Mariapolis on the South Pole, and Ramachandran on the Equator.
And New Tehran in the Sea of Tranquility.
That's where Navid and I met.
We were both artists downtown.
The day we met, we were passing each other in Azadi Square, and we bumped shoulders.
And I turned to apologize and she, without saying hello or introducing herself or anything, said, "Well, why do you think we didn't just pass through each other?"
And first of all, I thought, "Who the hell are you?"
But second, the question annoyed me, because the answer is so simple.
I said, "We didn't pass through each other because elementary particles have mass and because the space between elementary particles is filled with the binding energy that also has the properties of mass, and we've known that for 800 years."
She must have been in one of those moods where she likes to mess with strangers.
Or maybe she was just flirting with me, because she looked at me and said, "I thought you'd say that.
Think deeper."
And then she took off her belt, this belt that I'm wearing now, and she said, "Our universe is built so that particles have mass.
Without that basic constraint, we'd have just passed right through each other at the speed of light and never even known."
And that's how our romance began.
Navid and I never ran out of things to talk about.
Never.
It was incredible.
It was like we were both heroes climbing up into a mountain range together and we kept arriving at new vistas, and these new, perfect constellations of words would come out of us to describe them.
And we'd forget them as soon as we made them, and throw them over our shoulder and go on to the next thing, on and up.
Or one time, Navid said that our talk was like we were always making bread, and that we were always adding in a little more flour and a little more water, and folding it in and turning it over and never getting around to baking it.
If my obsession was eternal life, Navid's obsession was touch.
She had a genius for it.
All of her work revolved around it.
My body was like a canvas for her, and she would draw her fingertip down over my face so slowly that I couldn't feel it moving.
And she was obsessed with the exact moment when I would stop being able to tell the difference between her body and mine.
Or she would just lie across me and dig her shoulder into mine and say, "Pilar, why does this feel so good?"
I'd say, "I don't know!"
And she always had a facetious answer for her facetious question, but the answer I remember today is, "It feels good because the universe chose its constraints, and we are its art."
It's always funny what you think the future is going to be like versus what it turns out to be.
In your time, scientists thought humans could freeze themselves and wake up in the future.
And they did -- but then they died.
In your time, scientists thought humans could replace organs and extend life for hundreds of years.
And they did, but eventually, they died anyway.
In your time, Earth is the only place people live.
In my time, Earth is the place people come to die.
So when Navid started to show the signs, our friends assumed I would do what everyone does, which is say goodbye and send her to Earth, so that none of us would have to look at her or be around her or think about her and her ...
failure to keep living.
More than anything, they didn't want to be around her actual physical body.
They kept referring to it as "declining," even though she herself was fascinated by it, the changes it was going through, following the rules of its nature day by day, independent of her will.
I did send Navid to Earth.
But I came with her.
I remember a friend of ours, just before we left, said, "I just think it's arrogant, like the rules don't apply to you, like you think your love is that special."
But I did.
So, even here on Earth, I kept working on how to extend life.
It didn't occur to me that there could be any other response.
I kept going back to that thing that Navid said to me that day in Azadi Square, that without that basic constraint -- a universe that granted mass to matter -- we would not exist.
That's one rule.
Another rule is that all mass is subject to entropy.
And there is no way to be in this universe without mass.
I know. I tried everything.
I tried creating a photon box where the Higgs field was altered.
I tried recording all subatomic movements in my body and replaying them on closed loop.
Nothing worked.
But my final innovation was to create a coil dimension with the boundaries of a body in which time moved infinitely slower, but whose projection would appear to move in normal time.
That body would then appear in our universe as a hologram -- here but not here.
When I realized I'd done it, I ran to her room, so happy to tell her I'd done it, moving through space almost normally to all eyes, even to my own, and went to lie down next to her, and forgot, and fell right through her.
I'd found a way to eternal life, at the expense of the one thing Navid loved most, which was to touch and be touched.
And she threw me out.
I still got to watch, though.
Humans live 400 years now, and we still die.
And when death comes, the dying still pick at their bedsheets, and their arms break out in blue and violet blooms on the insides, and their breaths get further and further apart, like they're falling asleep.
I've always thought that what gives a life meaning is adventure.
And death is just a problem we haven't discovered the solution to yet.
But maybe a life has meaning only because it ends.
Maybe that's the paradox: constraints don't constrain, they allow perfect freedom.
(Sighs) There was a thunderstorm here this morning.
There is another forecast for tonight, but for now the sky is clear.
I can't feel the wind here, but I just asked one of the caretakers who passed by what it felt like, and she said it felt warm, like melted butter.
An answer worthy of my wife.
I have to find my way back to the flesh.
Until then, I take up no space but the space you give me.
I'm Rich Baraniuk and what I'd like to talk a little bit about today are some ideas that I think have just tremendous resonance with all the things that have been talked about the last two days.
So many different points of resonance that it's going to be difficult to bring them all up, but I'll try to do my best.
(Laughter) OK, so these are LP records and they've been replaced, right?
They've been swept away over the last two decades by these types of world-flattening digitization technologies, right?
And I think it was best witnessed when Thomas was playing the music as we came in the room today.
What's happened in the music world is there's a culture, or an ecosystem that's been created that, if you take some words from Apple, the catchphrase -- that we create, rip, mix and burn.
What I mean by that is that anyone in the world is free and allowed to create new music and musical ideas.
Anyone in the world is allowed to rip or copy musical ideas, use them in innovative ways.
Anyone is allowed to mix them in different types of ways, draw connections between musical ideas, and people can burn them or create final products and continue the circle.
And what that's done is it's created, like I said, a vibrant community that's very inclusive, with people continually working to connect musical ideas, innovate them and keep things constantly up to date.
Today's hit single is not last year's hit single.
But I'm not here to talk about music today.
I'm here to talk about books.
In particular, textbooks and the kind of educational materials that we use every day in school.
Has anyone here ever been to school?
(Laughter) OK, does anybody realize there's a crisis in our schools, around the world?
I'm not going to spend too much time on that, but what I want to talk about is some of the disconnects that appear when an author publishes a book.
That in fact, the publishing process -- just because of the fact that it's complicated, it's heavy, books are expensive -- creates a sort of a wall between authors of books and the ultimate users of books, be they teachers, students or just general readers.
And this is even more true if you happen to speak a language other than one of the world's major languages, and especially English.
I'm going to call these people below the barrier "shutouts" because they're really shut out of the process of being able to share their knowledge with the world.
And so what I want to talk about today is trying to take these ideas that we've seen in the musical culture and try to bring these towards reinventing the way we think about writing books, using them and teaching from them.
So, that's what I'd like to talk about and, really, how we get from where we are now to where we need to go.
The first thing I'd like you to do is a little thought experiment.
Imagine taking all the world's books.
OK, everybody imagine books and imagine just tearing out the pages.
So, liberating these pages and imagine digitizing them and then storing them in a vast, interconnected, global repository.
Think of it as a massive iTunes for book-type content.
And then take that material and imagine making it all open, so that people can modify it, play with it, improve it.
Imagine making it free, so that anyone in the world can have access to all of this knowledge, and imagine using information technology so that you can update this content, improve it, play with it, on a timescale that's more on the order of seconds instead of years.
Instead of editions of a book coming out every two years, imagine them coming out every 25 seconds.
So, imagine we could do that and imagine we could put people into this.
So that we could truly build an ecosystem with not just authors, but all the people who could be or want to be authors in all the different languages of the world, and I think if you could do this, it would be called -- I'm just going to refer to it as a knowledge ecosystem.
So, really, this is the dream, and in a sense what you can think of it is we're trying to enable anyone in the world, I mean anyone in the world -- (Laughter) to be their own educational DJ, creating educational materials, sharing them with the world, constantly innovating on them.
In fact, this dream is actually being realized.
Over the last six-and-a-half years, we've been working really hard at Rice University on a project called Connexions, and so what I'd like to do for the rest of the talk is just tell you a little bit about what people are doing with Connexions, which you can kind of think of as the counterpoint to Nicholas Negroponte's talk yesterday, where they're working on the hardware of bringing education to the world.
We're working on the open-source tools and the content.
So, that's sort of to put it in perspective here.
So, create.
Well, the first thing is, there's a community of engineering professors, from Cambridge to Kyoto, who are developing engineering content in electrical engineering to develop what you can think of as a massive, super textbook that covers the entire area of electrical engineering.
And not only that -- it can be customized for use in each of their own individual institutions.
If people like Kitty Jones, a shut-out -- a private music teacher and mom from Champagne, Illinois, who wanted to share her fantastic music content with the world, on how to teach kids how to play music -- Her material is now used over 600,000 times per month.
Tremendous use.
In fact, a lot of this use coming from United States K-12 schools, because anyone who's involved in a school scale back, the first thing that's cut is the music curriculum.
And so this is just indicating the tremendous thirst for this kind of open, free content.
A lot of teachers are using this stuff.
What about ripping? What about copying, reusing?
A team of volunteers at the University of Texas at El Paso -- graduate students translating this engineering super textbook ideas.
And within about a week, having this be some of our most popular material in widespread use all over Latin America, and in particular in Mexico, because of the open, extensible nature of this.
People, volunteers and even companies that are translating materials into Asian languages like Chinese, Japanese and Thai, to spread the knowledge even further.
OK, what about people who are mixing?
What does "mixing" mean?
"Mixing" means building customized courses, means building customized books.
Companies like National Instruments, who are embedding very powerful, interactive simulations into the materials, so that we can go way beyond our regular kind of textbook to an experience that all the teaching materials are things you can actually interact with and play around with and actually learn as you do.
We've been working with Teachers Without Borders, who are very interested in mixing our materials.
They're going to be using Connexions as their platform to develop and deliver teaching materials for teaching teachers how to teach in 84 countries around the world.
TWB is currently in Iraq, training 20,000 teachers supported by USAID.
And to them, this idea of being able to remix and customize to the local context is extraordinarily important, because just providing free content to people has actually been likened by people in the developing world to a kind of cultural imperialism -- that if you don't empower people with the ability to re-contextualize the material, translate it into their own language and take ownership of it, it's not good.
OK, other organizations we've been working with, UC Merced -- people know about UC Merced.
It's a new university in California, in the Central Valley, working very closely with community colleges.
They're actually developing a lot of their science and engineering curriculum to spread widely around the world in our system.
And they're also trying to develop all of their software tools completely open-source.
We've been working with AMD, which has a project called 50x15, which is trying to bring Internet connectivity to 50 percent of the world's population by 2015.
We're going to be providing content to them in a whole range of different languages.
And we've also been working with a number of other organizations.
In particular, a bunch of the projects that are funded by Hewlett Foundation, who have taken a real leadership role in this area of open content.
OK, burn -- I think this is, sort of, quite interesting.
"Burn" is the idea of trying to create the physical instantiation of one of these courses.
And I think a lot of you received -- I think all of you received one of these music books in your gift pack.
A little present for you.
Just to tell you quickly about it: this is an engineering textbook.
It's about 300 pages long, hardbound.
This costs -- anybody guess?
How much would it cost in a bookstore?
(Audience) 65 dollars.
Richard Baraniuk: OK. This costs 22 dollars to the student.
Why does it cost 22 dollars?
Because it's published on demand and it's developed from this repository of open materials.
If this book were to be published by a regular publisher, it would cost at least 122 dollars.
So what we're seeing is moving this burning or publication process from the regular, sort of single-authored book towards community-authored materials that are modular, that are customized to each individual class and published on demand very inexpensively, either pushed out through Amazon or published directly through an on-demand press, like QOOP.
And I think that this is an extraordinarily interesting area because there is tremendous area under this long tail in publishing.
We're not talking about the Harry Potter end, right at the left side.
We're talking about books on hypergeometric partial differential equations.
Books that might sell 100 copies a year, 1,000 copies a year.
There is tremendous sustaining revenue under this long tail to sustain open projects like ours, but also to sustain this new emergence of on-demand publishers, like QOOP, who produced these two books.
And I think one of the things that you should take away from this talk is that there's an impending cut-out-the-middle-man disintermediation, that's going to be happening in the publishing industry.
And it's going to reach a crescendo over the next few years, and I think that it's for our benefit, really, and for the world's benefit.
OK, so what are the enablers?
What's really making all of this happen?
There's tons of technology, and the only piece of technology that I really want to talk about is XML.
How many people know about XML?
Oh, great.
It's semantic representation of content.
And what you can really think of XML in this case is it's the packaging that we're putting around these pages.
Remember we took the book, tore the pages out?
Well, what the XML is going to do is it's going to turn those pages into Lego blocks.
XML are the nubs on the Lego that allow us to combine the content together in a myriad different ways, and it provides us a framework to share content.
So, it lets you take this ecosystem in its primordial state of all this content, all the pages you've torn out of books, and create highly sophisticated learning machines: books, courses, course packs.
It gives you the ability to personalize the learning experience to each individual student, so that every student can have a book or a course that's customized to their learning style, their context, their language and the things that excite them.
It lets you reuse the same materials in multiple different ways, and surprising new ways.
It lets you interconnect ideas, indicating how fields relate to each other.
And I'll just give you my personal story.
We came up with this six-and-a-half years ago because I teach the stuff in the red box.
And my day job, as Chris said -- I'm an electrical engineering professor.
I teach signal processing and my challenge was to show that this math -- Wow, about half of you have already fallen asleep just looking at the equation.
(Laughter) But this seemingly dry math is actually the center of this tremendously powerful web that links technology -- that links really cool applications like music synthesizers to tremendous economic opportunities, but also governed by intellectual property.
And the thing that I realized is there was no way that I, as an engineer, could write this book that would get all of this across.
We needed a community to do it and we needed new tools to be able to interconnect these ideas.
And I think that really, in a sense, what we're trying to do is make Minsky's dream come to a reality, where you can imagine all the books in a library actually starting to talk to each other.
And people who are teachers out here -- whoever taught, you know this -- it's the interconnections between ideas that teaching is really all about.
OK, back to math.
Imagine -- this is possible: that every single equation that you click on in one of your new e-texts is something that you're going to be able to explore and experiment with.
So imagine your kid's algebra textbook in seventh grade.
You can click on every single equation and bring up a little tool to be able to experiment with it, tinker with it, understand it.
Because we really don't understand until we do.
The same type of mark-up, like MathML, for chemistry.
Imagine chemistry textbooks that actually understand the structure of how molecules are formed.
Imagine Music XML that actually lets you delve into the semantic structure of music, play with it, understand it.
It's no wonder that everybody's getting into it, right?
Even the three wise men.
(Laughter) OK, the second big enabler, and this is where I told a big lie.
The second big enabler is intellectual property.
Because, in fact, I got up here and I talked about how great the music culture is.
We can share and rip, mix and burn, but in fact, that's all illegal.
And we would be accused of [piracy] for doing that, because this music has been propertized.
It's now owned, much of it by big industries.
So, really, the key thing here is we can't let this happen.
We can't let this Napster thing happen here.
So, what we have to do is get it right from the very beginning.
And what we have to do is find an intellectual property framework that makes sharing safe and makes it easily understandable.
And the inspiration here is taken from open-source software.
Things like Linux and the GPL.
The Creative Commons licenses.
How many people have heard of creative commons?
If you have not, you must learn about it.
At the bottom of every piece of material in Connexions and in lots of other projects, you can find their logo.
Clicking on that logo takes you to an absolute no-nonsense, human-readable document, a deed, that tells you exactly what you can do with this content.
In fact, you're free to share it, to do all of these things: to copy it, to change it, even to make commercial use of it, as long as you attribute the author.
Because in academic publishing and much of educational publishing, it's really this idea of sharing knowledge and making impact.
That's why people write, not necessarily making bucks.
We're not talking about Harry Potter, right?
We're at the long tail end here.
Behind that is the legal code, very carefully constructed.
And Creative Commons is taking off -- over 43 million things out there, licensed with a Creative Commons license.
Not just text, but music, images, video.
And there's actually a tremendous uptake of the number of people that are actually licensing music to make it free for people who do this whole idea of re-sampling, ripping, mixing, burning and sharing.
OK, I'd like to conclude with just the last few points.
So, we've built this idea of a commons.
We get over 500,000 unique visitors per month, just to our particular site.
MIT OpenCourseWare, which is another large open-content site, gets a similar number of hits.
How do we protect it into the future?
And the first thing that people are probably thinking is quality control, right?
Because we're saying that anybody can contribute things to this commons.
Anybody can contribute anything.
So that could be a problem.
It didn't take long until people started contributing materials, for example, on lingerie, which is actually a pretty good module.
The only problem is it's plagiarized from a major French feminist journal, and when you go to the supposed course website, it points to a lingerie-selling website.
So this is a little bit of a problem.
So we clearly need some kind of idea of quality control and this is really where the idea of review and peer review comes in.
You come to TED. Why do you come to TED?
Because Chris and his team have ensured that things are very, very high quality, right?
And so we need to be able to do the same thing.
And we need to be able to design structures, and what we're doing is designing social software to enable anyone to build their own peer review process, and we call these things "lenses."
And basically what they allow is anyone out there can develop their own peer-review process, so that they can focus on the content in the repository that they think is really important.
And you can think of TED as a potential lens.
So I'd just like to end by saying: you can really view this as a call to action.
Connexions and open content is all about sharing knowledge.
All of you here are tremendously imbued with tremendous amounts of knowledge, and what I'd like to do is invite each and every one of you to contribute to this project and other projects of its type, because I think together we can truly change the landscape of education and educational publishing.
So, thanks very much.
The Value of Nothing: Out of Nothing Comes Something.
That was an essay I wrote when I was 11 years old and I got a B+. (Laughter) What I'm going to talk about: nothing out of something, and how we create.
And I'm gonna try and do that within the 18-minute time span that we were told to stay within, and to follow the TED commandments: that is, actually, something that creates a near-death experience, but near-death is good for creativity.
(Laughter) OK.
So, I also want to explain, because Dave Eggers said he was going to heckle me if I said anything that was a lie, or not true to universal creativity.
And I've done it this way for half the audience, who is scientific.
When I say we, I don't mean you, necessarily; I mean me, and my right brain, my left brain and the one that's in between that is the censor and tells me what I'm saying is wrong.
And I'm going do that also by looking at what I think is part of my creative process, which includes a number of things that happened, actually -- the nothing started even earlier than the moment in which I'm creating something new.
And that includes nature, and nurture, and what I refer to as nightmares.
Now in the nature area, we look at whether or not we are innately equipped with something, perhaps in our brains, some abnormal chromosome that causes this muse-like effect.
And some people would say that we're born with it in some other means.
And others, like my mother, would say that I get my material from past lives.
Some people would also say that creativity may be a function of some other neurological quirk -- van Gogh syndrome -- that you have a little bit of, you know, psychosis, or depression.
I do have to say, somebody -- I read recently that van Gogh wasn't really necessarily psychotic, that he might have had temporal lobe seizures, and that might have caused his spurt of creativity, and I don't -- I suppose it does something in some part of your brain.
And I will mention that I actually developed temporal lobe seizures a number of years ago, but it was during the time I was writing my last book, and some people say that book is quite different.
I think that part of it also begins with a sense of identity crisis: you know, who am I, why am I this particular person, why am I not black like everybody else?
And sometimes you're equipped with skills, but they may not be the kind of skills that enable creativity.
I used to draw. I thought I would be an artist.
And I had a miniature poodle.
And it wasn't bad, but it wasn't really creative.
Because all I could really do was represent in a very one-on-one way.
And I have a sense that I probably copied this from a book.
And then, I also wasn't really shining in a certain area that I wanted to be, and you know, you look at those scores, and it wasn't bad, but it was not certainly predictive that I would one day make my living out of the artful arrangement of words.
Also, one of the principles of creativity is to have a little childhood trauma.
And I had the usual kind that I think a lot of people had, and that is that, you know, I had expectations placed on me.
That figure right there, by the way, figure right there was a toy given to me when I was but nine years old, and it was to help me become a doctor from a very early age.
I have some ones that were long lasting: from the age of five to 15, this was supposed to be my side occupation, and it led to a sense of failure.
But actually, there was something quite real in my life that happened when I was about 14.
And it was discovered that my brother, in 1967, and then my father, six months later, had brain tumors.
And my mother believed that something had gone wrong, and she was gonna find out what it was, and she was gonna fix it.
My father was a Baptist minister, and he believed in miracles, and that God's will would take care of that.
But, of course, they ended up dying, six months apart.
And after that, my mother believed that it was fate, or curses -- she went looking through all the reasons in the universe why this would have happened.
Everything except randomness. She did not believe in randomness.
There was a reason for everything.
And one of the reasons, she thought, was that her mother, who had died when she was very young, was angry at her.
And so, I had this notion of death all around me, because my mother also believed that I would be next, and she would be next.
And when you are faced with the prospect of death very soon, you begin to think very much about everything.
You become very creative, in a survival sense.
And this, then, led to my big questions.
And they're the same ones that I have today.
And they are: why do things happen, and how do things happen?
And the one my mother asked: how do I make things happen?
It's a wonderful way to look at these questions, when you write a story.
Because, after all, in that framework, between page one and 300, you have to answer this question of why things happen, how things happen, in what order they happen. What are the influences?
How do I, as the narrator, as the writer, also influence that?
And it's also one that, I think, many of our scientists have been asking.
It's a kind of cosmology, and I have to develop a cosmology of my own universe, as the creator of that universe.
And you see, there's a lot of back and forth in trying to make that happen, trying to figure it out -- years and years, oftentimes.
So, when I look at creativity, I also think that it is this sense or this inability to repress, my looking at associations in practically anything in life.
And I got a lot of them during what's been going on throughout this conference, almost everything that's been going on.
And so I'm going to use, as the metaphor, this association: quantum mechanics, which I really don't understand, but I'm still gonna use it as the process for explaining how it is the metaphor.
So, in quantum mechanics, of course, you have dark energy and dark matter.
And it's the same thing in looking at these questions of how things happen.
There's a lot of unknown, and you often don't know what it is except by its absence.
But when you make those associations, you want them to come together in a kind of synergy in the story, and what you're finding is what matters. The meaning.
And that's what I look for in my work, a personal meaning.
There is also the uncertainty principle, which is part of quantum mechanics, as I understand it. (Laughter) And this happens constantly in the writing.
And there's the terrible and dreaded observer effect, in which you're looking for something, and you know, things are happening simultaneously, and you're looking at it in a different way, and you're trying to really look for the about-ness, or what is this story about. And if you try too hard, then you will only write the about.
You won't discover anything.
And what you were supposed to find, what you hoped to find in some serendipitous way, is no longer there.
Now, I don't want to ignore the other side of what happens in our universe, like many of our scientists have.
And so, I am going to just throw in string theory here, and just say that creative people are multidimensional, and there are 11 levels, I think, of anxiety.
(Laughter) And they all operate at the same time.
There is also a big question of ambiguity.
And I would link that to something called the cosmological constant.
And you don't know what is operating, but something is operating there.
And ambiguity, to me, is very uncomfortable in my life, and I have it. Moral ambiguity.
It is constantly there. And, just as an example, this is one that recently came to me.
It was something I read in an editorial by a woman who was talking about the war in Iraq. And she said, "Save a man from drowning, you are responsible to him for life."
A very famous Chinese saying, she said.
And that means because we went into Iraq, we should stay there until things were solved. You know, maybe even 100 years.
So, there was another one that I came across, and it's "saving fish from drowning."
And it's what Buddhist fishermen say, because they're not supposed to kill anything.
And they also have to make a living, and people need to be fed.
So their way of rationalizing that is they are saving the fish from drowning, and unfortunately, in the process the fish die.
Now, what's encapsulated in both these drowning metaphors -- actually, one of them is my mother's interpretation, and it is a famous Chinese saying, because she said it to me: "save a man from drowning, you are responsible to him for life."
And it was a warning -- don't get involved in other people's business, or you're going to get stuck.
OK. I think if somebody really was drowning, she'd save them.
But, both of these sayings -- saving a fish from drowning, or saving a man from drowning -- to me they had to do with intentions.
And all of us in life, when we see a situation, we have a response.
And then we have intentions.
There's an ambiguity of what that should be that we should do, and then we do something.
And the results of that may not match what our intentions had been.
Maybe things go wrong. And so, after that, what are our responsibilities?
What are we supposed to do?
Do we stay in for life, or do we do something else and justify and say, well, my intentions were good, and therefore I cannot be held responsible for all of it?
That is the ambiguity in my life that really disturbed me, and led me to write a book called "Saving Fish From Drowning."
I saw examples of that. Once I identified this question, it was all over the place.
I got these hints everywhere.
And then, in a way, I knew that they had always been there.
And then writing, that's what happens. I get these hints, these clues, and I realize that they've been obvious, and yet they have not been.
And what I need, in effect, is a focus.
And when I have the question, it is a focus.
And all these things that seem to be flotsam and jetsam in life actually go through that question, and what happens is those particular things become relevant.
And it seems like it's happening all the time.
You think there's a sort of coincidence going on, a serendipity, in which you're getting all this help from the universe.
And it may also be explained that now you have a focus.
And you are noticing it more often.
But you apply this.
You begin to look at things having to do with your tensions.
Your brother, who's fallen in trouble, do you take care of him?
Why or why not?
It may be something that is perhaps more serious -- as I said, human rights in Burma.
I was thinking that I shouldn't go because somebody said, if I did, it would show that I approved of the military regime there.
And then, after a while, I had to ask myself, "Why do we take on knowledge, why do we take on assumptions that other people have given us?"
And it was the same thing that I felt when I was growing up, and was hearing these rules of moral conduct from my father, who was a Baptist minister.
So I decided that I would go to Burma for my own intentions, and still didn't know that if I went there, what the result of that would be, if I wrote a book -- and I just would have to face that later, when the time came.
We are all concerned with things that we see in the world that we are aware of.
We come to this point and say, what do I as an individual do?
Not all of us can go to Africa, or work at hospitals, so what do we do, if we have this moral response, this feeling?
Also, I think one of the biggest things we are all looking at, and we talked about today, is genocide.
This leads to this question.
When I look at all these things that are morally ambiguous and uncomfortable, and I consider what my intentions should be, I realize it goes back to this identity question that I had when I was a child -- and why am I here, and what is the meaning of my life, and what is my place in the universe?
It seems so obvious, and yet it is not.
We all hate moral ambiguity in some sense, and yet it is also absolutely necessary.
In writing a story, it is the place where I begin.
Sometimes I get help from the universe, it seems.
My mother would say it was the ghost of my grandmother from the very first book, because it seemed I knew things I was not supposed to know.
Instead of writing that the grandmother died accidentally, from an overdose of opium, while having too much of a good time, I actually put down in the story that the woman killed herself, and that actually was the way it happened.
And my mother decided that that information must have come from my grandmother.
There are also things, quite uncanny, which bring me information that will help me in the writing of the book.
In this case, I was writing a story that included some kind of detail, period of history, a certain location.
And I needed to find something historically that would match that.
And I took down this book, and I -- first page that I flipped it to was exactly the setting, and the time period, and the kind of character I needed -- was the Taiping rebellion, happening in the area near Guilin, outside of that, and a character who thought he was the son of God.
You wonder, are these things random chance?
Well, what is random? What is chance? What is luck?
What are things that you get from the universe that you can't really explain?
And that goes into the story, too.
These are the things I constantly think about from day to day.
Especially when good things happen, and, in particular, when bad things happen.
But I do think there's a kind of serendipity, and I do want to know what those elements are, so I can thank them, and also try to find them in my life.
Because, again, I think that when I am aware of them, more of them happen.
Another chance encounter is when I went to a place -- I just was with some friends, and we drove randomly to a different place, and we ended up in this non-tourist location, a beautiful village, pristine.
And we walked three valleys beyond, and the third valley, there was something quite mysterious and ominous, a discomfort I felt. And then I knew that had to be [the] setting of my book.
And in writing one of the scenes, it happened in that third valley.
For some reason I wrote about cairns -- stacks of rocks -- that a man was building.
And I didn't know exactly why I had it, but it was so vivid.
I got stuck, and a friend, when she asked if I would go for a walk with her dogs, that I said, sure. And about 45 minutes later, walking along the beach, I came across this.
And it was a man, a Chinese man, and he was stacking these things, not with glue, not with anything.
And I asked him, "How is it possible to do this?"
And he said, "Well, I guess with everything in life, there's a place of balance."
And this was exactly the meaning of my story at that point.
I had so many examples -- I have so many instances like this, when I'm writing a story, and I cannot explain it.
Is it because I had the filter that I have such a strong coincidence in writing about these things?
Or is it a kind of serendipity that we cannot explain, like the cosmological constant?
A big thing that I also think about is accidents.
And as I said, my mother did not believe in randomness.
What is the nature of accidents?
And how are we going to assign what the responsibility and the causes are, outside of a court of law?
I was able to see that in a firsthand way, when I went to beautiful Dong village, in Guizhou, the poorest province of China.
And I saw this beautiful place. I knew I wanted to come back.
And I had a chance to do that, when National Geographic asked me if I wanted to write anything about China.
And I said yes, about this village of singing people, singing minority.
And they agreed, and between the time I saw this place and the next time I went, there was a terrible accident. A man, an old man, fell asleep, and his quilt dropped in a pan of fire that kept him warm.
60 homes were destroyed, and 40 were damaged.
Responsibility was assigned to the family.
The man's sons were banished to live three kilometers away, in a cowshed.
And, of course, as Westerners, we say, "Well, it was an accident. That's not fair.
It's the son, not the father."
When I go on a story, I have to let go of those kinds of beliefs.
It takes a while, but I have to let go of them and just go there, and be there.
And so I was there on three occasions, different seasons.
And I began to sense something different about the history, and what had happened before, and the nature of life in a very poor village, and what you find as your joys, and your rituals, your traditions, your links with other families. And I saw how this had a kind of justice, in its responsibility.
I was able to find out also about the ceremony that they were using, a ceremony they hadn't used in about 29 years. And it was to send some men -- a Feng Shui master sent men down to the underworld on ghost horses.
Now you, as Westerners, and I, as Westerners, would say well, that's superstition. But after being there for a while, and seeing the amazing things that happened, you begin to wonder whose beliefs are those that are in operation in the world, determining how things happen.
So I remained with them, and the more I wrote that story, the more I got into those beliefs, and I think that's important for me -- to take on the beliefs, because that is where the story is real, and that is where I'm gonna find the answers to how I feel about certain questions that I have in life.
Years go by, of course, and the writing, it doesn't happen instantly, as I'm trying to convey it to you here at TED.
The book comes and it goes. When it arrives, it is no longer my book.
It is in the hands of readers, and they interpret it differently.
But I go back to this question of, how do I create something out of nothing?
And how do I create my own life?
And I think it is by questioning, and saying to myself that there are no absolute truths.
I believe in specifics, the specifics of story, and the past, the specifics of that past, and what is happening in the story at that point.
I also believe that in thinking about things -- my thinking about luck, and fate, and coincidences and accidents, God's will, and the synchrony of mysterious forces -- I will come to some notion of what that is, how we create.
I have to think of my role. Where I am in the universe, and did somebody intend for me to be that way, or is it just something I came up with?
And I also can find that by imagining fully, and becoming what is imagined -- and yet is in that real world, the fictional world.
And that is how I find particles of truth, not the absolute truth, or the whole truth.
And they have to be in all possibilities, including those I never considered before.
So, there are never complete answers.
Or rather, if there is an answer, it is to remind myself that there is uncertainty in everything, and that is good, because then I will discover something new.
And if there is a partial answer, a more complete answer from me, it is to simply imagine.
And to imagine is to put myself in that story, until there was only -- there is a transparency between me and the story that I am creating.
And that's how I've discovered that if I feel what is in the story -- in one story -- then I come the closest, I think, to knowing what compassion is, to feeling that compassion.
Because for everything, in that question of how things happen, it has to do with the feeling.
I have to become the story in order to understand a lot of that.
We've come to the end of the talk, and I will reveal what is in the bag, and it is the muse, and it is the things that transform in our lives, that are wonderful and stay with us.
There she is.
Thank you very much!
(Applause)
Today, I am going to show you how this tablet and this virtual-reality headset that I'm wearing are going to completely revolutionize science education.
And I'm also going to show you how it can make any science teacher more than twice as effective.
But before I show you how all of this is possible, let's talk briefly about why improving the quality of science education is so vitally important.
If you think about it, the world is growing incredibly fast.
And with that growth comes a whole list of growing challenges, challenges such as dealing with global warming, solving starvation and water shortages and curing diseases, to name just a few.
And who, exactly, is going to help us solve all of these great challenges?
Well, to a very last degree, it is these young students.
This is the next generation of young, bright scientists.
And in many ways, we all rely on them for coming up with new, great innovations to help us solve all these challenges ahead of us.
And so a couple of years back, my cofounder and I were teaching university students just like these, only the students we were teaching looked a little bit more like this here.
(Laughter) And yes, this is really the reality out there in way too many universities around the world: students that are bored, disengaged and sometimes not even sure why they're learning about a topic in the first place.
So we started looking around for new, innovative teaching methods, but what we found was quite disappointing.
We saw that books were being turned into e-books, blackboards were being turned into YouTube videos and lecture hall monologues were being turned into MOOCs -- massive online open courses.
And if you think about it, all we're really doing here is taking the same content and the same format, and bringing it out to more students -- which is great, don't get me wrong, that is really great -- but the teaching method is still more or less the same, no real innovation there.
So we started looking elsewhere.
What we found was that flight simulators had been proven over and over again to be far more effective when used in combination with real, in-flight training to train the pilots.
And so we thought to ourselves: Why not just apply that to science?
Why not build a virtual laboratory simulator?
Well, we did it.
We basically set out to create a fully simulated, one-to-one, virtual reality laboratory simulator, where the students could perform experiments with mathematical equations that would simulate what would happen in a real-world lab.
But not just simple simulations -- we would also create advanced simulations with top universities like MIT, to bring out cutting-edge cancer research to these students.
And suddenly, the universities could save millions of dollars by letting the students perform virtual experiments before they go into the real laboratory.
And not only that; now, they could also understand -- even on a molecular level inside the machine -- what is happening to the machines.
And then they could suddenly perform dangerous experiments in the labs as well.
For instance also here, learning about salmonella bacteria, which is an important topic that many schools cannot teach for good safety reasons.
And we, of course, quiz the students and then give the teachers a full dashboard, so they fully understand where the students are at.
But we didn't stop there, because we had seen just how important meaning is for the students' engagement in the class.
So we brought in game designers to create fun and engaging stories.
For instance, here in this case, where the students have to solve a mysterious CSI murder case using their core science skills.
And the feedback we got when we launched all of this was quite overwhelmingly positive.
Here we have 300 students, all passionately solving CSI murder cases while learning core science skills.
And what I love the most about this is really when the students come up to me sometimes afterwards, all surprised and a little confused, and say, "I just spent two hours in this virtual lab, and ... and I didn't check Facebook."
(Laughter) That's how engaging and immersive this really is for the students.
And so, to investigate whether this really worked, a learning psychologist did a study with 160 students -- that was from Stanford University and Technical University of Denmark.
And what they did is split the students into two groups.
One group would only use the virtual laboratory simulations, the other group would only use traditional teaching methods, and they had the same amount of time.
Then, interestingly, they gave the students a test before and after the experiment, so they could clearly measure the learning impact of the students.
And what they found was a surprisingly high 76 percent increase in the learning effectiveness when using virtual laboratories over traditional teaching methods.
But even more interestingly, the second part of this study investigated what the teacher's impact was on the learning.
And what they found was that when you combined the virtual laboratories with teacher-led coaching and mentoring, then we saw a total 101 percent increase in the learning effectiveness, which effectively doubles the science teacher's impact with the same amount of time spent.
So a couple of months back, we started asking ourselves -- we have a wonderful team now of learning psychologists and teachers and scientists and game developers -- and we started asking ourselves: How can we keep ourselves to our promise of constantly reimagining education?
And today, I am really excited to be presenting what we came up with and have been working incredibly hard to create.
I will explain briefly what this is.
Basically, I take my mobile phone -- most students already have these, smartphones -- and I plug it into this virtual-reality headset, a low-cost headset.
And now what I can effectively do is, I can literally step into this virtual world.
We'll have some of you in the audience also get to try this, because it is really something that you have to try to fully feel how immersive it really is.
It literally feels like I just stepped inside this virtual lab.
Do you see me up on the screen?
Audience: Yes.
Michael Bodekaer: Great! Awesome.
So basically, I have just turned my mobile phone into a fully simulated, million-dollar Ivy League laboratory with all this amazing equipment that I can interact with.
I can, for instance, pick up the pipette and do experiments with it.
I have my E-Ggel, my PCR and -- oh, look there, I have my next-generation sequencing machine, and there I even have my electron microscope.
I mean, who's carrying around an electron microscope in their pocket?
And here I have my machine, I can do different experiments on the machine.
And over here I have the door, I can go into other experiments, I can perform in the laboratories.
And here, I have my learning tablet.
This is an intelligent tablet that allows me to read about relevant theory.
As you can see, I can interact with it.
I can watch videos and see content that is relevant to the experiment that I'm performing right now.
Then over here, I have Marie.
She is my teacher -- my lab assistant -- and what she does is guides me through this whole laboratory.
And very soon, the teachers will be able to literally teleport themselves into this virtual world that I'm in right now and help me, guide me, through this whole experiment.
And now before I finalize this, I want to show you an even cooler thing, I think -- something you cannot even do in real laboratories.
This is a PCR machine.
I'm now going to start this experiment.
And what I just did is literally shrunk myself a million times into the size of a molecule -- and it really feels like it, you have to try this.
So now it feels like I'm standing inside the machine and I'm seeing all the DNA, and I see the molecules.
I see the polymerase and the enzymes and so forth.
And I can see how in this case, DNA is being replicated millions of times, just like it's happening inside your body right now.
And I can really feel and understand how all of this works.
Now, I hope that gives you a little bit of a sense of the possibilities in these new teaching methods.
And I want to also emphasize that everything you just saw also works on iPads and laptops without the headsets.
I say that for a very important reason.
In order for us to really empower and inspire the next generation of scientists, we really need teachers to drive the adoption of new technologies in the classroom.
And so in many ways, I believe that the next big, quantum leap in science education lies no longer with the technology, but rather with the teachers' decision to push forward and adopt these technologies inside the classrooms.
And so it is our hope that more universities and schools and teachers will collaborate with technology companies to realize this full potential.
And so, lastly, I'd like to leave you with a little story that really inspires me.
And that is the story of Jack Andraka.
Some of you might already know him.
Jack invented a new, groundbreaking low-cost test for pancreatic cancer at the age 15.
And when Jack shares his story of how he did this huge breakthrough, he also explains that one thing almost prevented him from making this breakthrough.
And that was that he did not have access to real laboratories, because he was too inexperienced to be allowed in.
Now, imagine if we could bring Ivy League, million-dollar virtual laboratories out to all these students just like Jack, all over the world, and give them the latest, greatest, most fancy machines you can imagine that would quite literally make any scientist in here jump up and down out of pure excitement.
And then imagine how that would empower and inspire a whole new generation of young and bright scientists, ready to innovate and change the world.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hi.
Let me ask the audience a question: Did you ever lie as a child?
If you did, could you please raise your hand?
Wow! This is the most honest group of people I've ever met.
(Laughter) So for the last 20 years, I've been studying how children learn to tell lies.
And today, I'm going to share with you some of the discoveries we have made.
But to begin, I'm going to tell you a story from Mr. Richard Messina, who is my friend and an elementary school principal.
He got a phone call one day.
The caller says, "Mr. Messina, my son Johnny will not come to school today because he's sick."
Mr. Messina asks, "Who am I speaking to, please?"
And the caller says, "I am my father."
(Laughter) So this story -- (Laughter) sums up very nicely three common beliefs we have about children and lying.
One, children only come to tell lies after entering elementary school.
Two, children are poor liars.
We adults can easily detect their lies.
And three, if children lie at a very young age, there must be some character flaws with them, and they are going to become pathological liars for life.
Well, it turns out all of the three beliefs are wrong.
We have been playing guessing games with children all over the world.
Here is an example.
So in this game, we asked children to guess the numbers on the cards.
And we tell them if they win the game, they are going to get a big prize.
But in the middle of the game, we make an excuse and leave the room.
And before we leave the room, we tell them not to peek at the cards.
Of course, we have hidden cameras in the room to watch their every move.
Because the desire to win the game is so strong, more than 90 percent of children will peek as soon as we leave the room.
(Laughter) The crucial question is: When we return and ask the children whether or not they have peeked, will the children who peeked confess or lie about their transgression?
We found that regardless of gender, country, religion, at two years of age, 30 percent lie, 70 percent tell the truth about their transgression.
At three years of age, 50 percent lie and 50 percent tell the truth.
At four years of age, more than 80 percent lie.
And after four years of age, most children lie.
So as you can see, lying is really a typical part of development.
And some children begin to tell lies as young as two years of age.
So now, let's take a closer look at the younger children.
Why do some but not all young children lie?
In cooking, you need good ingredients to cook good food.
And good lying requires two key ingredients.
The first key ingredient is theory of mind, or the mind-reading ability.
Mind reading is the ability to know that different people have different knowledge about the situation and the ability to differentiate between what I know and what you know.
Mind reading is important for lying because the basis of lying is that I know you don't know what I know.
Therefore, I can lie to you.
The second key ingredient for good lying is self-control.
It is the ability to control your speech, your facial expression and your body language, so that you can tell a convincing lie.
And we found that those young children who have more advanced mind-reading and self-control abilities tell lies earlier and are more sophisticated liars.
As it turns out, these two abilities are also essential for all of us to function well in our society.
In fact, deficits in mind-reading and self-control abilities are associated with serious developmental problems, such as ADHD and autism.
So if you discover your two-year-old is telling his or her first lie, instead of being alarmed, you should celebrate -- (Laughter) because it signals that your child has arrived at a new milestone of typical development.
Now, are children poor liars?
Do you think you can easily detect their lies?
Would you like to give it a try?
Yes? OK.
So I'm going to show you two videos.
In the videos, the children are going to respond to a researcher's question, "Did you peek?"
So try to tell me which child is lying and which child is telling the truth.
Here's child number one.
Are you ready?
(Video) Adult: Did you peek? Child: No.
Kang Lee: And this is child number two.
(Video) Adult: Did you peek? Child: No.
KL: OK, if you think child number one is lying, please raise your hand.
And if you think child number two is lying, please raise your hand.
OK, so as a matter of fact, child number one is telling the truth, child number two is lying.
Looks like many of you are terrible detectors of children's lies.
(Laughter) Now, we have played similar kinds of games with many, many adults from all walks of life.
And we show them many videos.
In half of the videos, the children lied.
In the other half of the videos, the children told the truth.
And let's find out how these adults performed.
Because there are as many liars as truth tellers, if you guess randomly, there's a 50 percent chance you're going to get it right.
So if your accuracy is around 50 percent, it means you are a terrible detector of children's lies.
So let's start with undergrads and law school students, who typically have limited experience with children.
No, they cannot detect children's lies.
Their performance is around chance.
Now how about social workers and child-protection lawyers, who work with children on a daily basis?
Can they detect children's lies?
No, they cannot.
(Laughter) What about judges, customs officers and police officers, who deal with liars on a daily basis?
Can they detect children's lies?
No, they cannot.
What about parents?
Can parents detect other children's lies?
No, they cannot.
What about, can parents detect their own children's lies?
No, they cannot.
(Laughter) (Applause) So now you may ask why children's lies are so difficult to detect.
Let me illustrate this with my own son, Nathan.
This is his facial expression when he lies.
(Laughter) So when children lie, their facial expression is typically neutral.
However, behind this neutral expression, the child is actually experiencing a lot of emotions, such as fear, guilt, shame and maybe a little bit of liar's delight.
(Laughter) Unfortunately, such emotions are either fleeting or hidden.
Therefore, it's mostly invisible to us.
So in the last five years, we have been trying to figure out a way to reveal these hidden emotions.
Then we made a discovery.
We know that underneath our facial skin, there's a rich network of blood vessels.
When we experience different emotions, our facial blood flow changes subtly.
And these changes are regulated by the autonomic system that is beyond our conscious control.
By looking at facial blood flow changes, we can reveal people's hidden emotions.
Unfortunately, such emotion-related facial blood flow changes are too subtle to detect by our naked eye.
So to help us reveal people's facial emotions, we have developed a new imaging technology we call "transdermal optical imaging."
To do so, we use a regular video camera to record people when they experience various hidden emotions.
And then, using our image processing technology, we can extract transdermal images of facial blood flow changes.
By looking at transdermal video images, now we can easily see facial blood flow changes associated with the various hidden emotions.
And using this technology, we can now reveal the hidden emotions associated with lying, and therefore detect people's lies.
We can do so noninvasively, remotely, inexpensively, with an accuracy at about 85 percent, which is far better than chance level.
And in addition, we discovered a Pinocchio effect.
No, not this Pinocchio effect.
(Laughter) This is the real Pinocchio effect.
When people lie, the facial blood flow on the cheeks decreases, and the facial blood flow on the nose increases.
Of course, lying is not the only situation that will evoke our hidden emotions.
So then we asked ourselves, in addition to detecting lies, how can our technology be used?
One application is in education.
For example, using this technology, we can help this mathematics teacher to identify the student in his classroom who may experience high anxiety about the topic he's teaching so that he can help him.
And also we can use this in health care.
For example, every day I Skype my parents, who live thousands of miles away.
And using this technology, I can not only find out what's going on in their lives but also simultaneously monitor their heart rate, their stress level, their mood and whether or not they are experiencing pain.
And perhaps in the future, their risks for heart attack or hypertension.
And you may ask: Can we use this also to reveal politicians' emotions?
(Laughter) For example, during a debate.
Well, the answer is yes.
Using TV footage, we could detect the politicians' heart rate, mood and stress, and perhaps in the future, whether or not they are lying to us.
We can also use this in marketing research, for example, to find out whether or not people like certain consumer products.
We can even use it in dating.
So for example, if your date is smiling at you, this technology can help you to determine whether she actually likes you or she is just trying to be nice to you.
And in this case, she is just trying to be nice to you.
(Laughter) So transdermal optical imaging technology is at a very early stage of development.
Many new applications will come about that we don't know today.
However, one thing I know for sure is that lying will never be the same again.
Thank you very much.
Xiè xie.
(Applause)
I've got a confession.
I love looking through people's garbage.
Now, it's not some creepy thing.
I'm usually just looking for old electronics, stuff I can take to my workshop and hack.
I do have a fetish for CD-ROM drives.
Each one's got three different motors, so now you can build things that move.
There's switches so you can turn things on and off.
There's even a freaking laser, so you can make a cool robot into an awesome robot.
Now, I've built a lot of stuff out of garbage, and some of these things have even been kind of useful.
But here's the thing, for me, garbage is just a chance to play, to be creative and build things to amuse myself.
This is what I love doing, so I just made it part of my day job.
I lead a university-based biological research lab, where we value curiosity and exploration above all else.
We aren't focused on any particular problem, and we're not trying to solve any particular disease.
This is just a place where people can come and ask fascinating questions and find answers.
And I realized a long time ago that if I challenge people to build the equipment they need out of the garbage I find, it's a great way to foster creativity.
And what happened was that artists and scientists from around the world started coming to my lab.
And it's not just because we value unconventional ideas, it's because we test and validate them with scientific rigor.
So one day I was hacking something, I was taking it apart, and I had this sudden idea: Could I treat biology like hardware?
Could I dismantle a biological system, mix and match the parts and then put it back together in some new and creative way?
My lab started working on this, and I want to show you the result.
Can any of you guys tell me what fruit this is?
Audience: Apple!
Andrew Pelling: That's right -- it's an apple.
Now, I actually want you to notice as well that this is a lot redder than most apples.
And that's because we grew human cells into it.
We took a totally innocent Macintosh apple, removed all the apple cells and DNA and then implanted human cells.
And what we're left with after removing all the apple cells is this cellulose scaffold.
This is the stuff that gives plants their shape and texture.
And these little holes that you can see, this is where all the apple cells used to be.
So then we come along, we implant some mammalian cells that you can see in blue.
What happens is, these guys start multiplying and they fill up this entire scaffold.
As weird as this is, it's actually really reminiscent of how our own tissues are organized.
And we found in our pre-clinical work that you can implant these scaffolds into the body, and the body will send in cells and a blood supply and actually keep these things alive.
This is the point when people started asking me, "Andrew, can you make body parts out of apples?"
And I'm like, "You've come to the right place."
(Laughter) I actually brought this up with my wife.
She's a musical instrument maker, and she does a lot of wood carving for a living.
So I asked her, "Could you, like, literally carve some ears out of an apple for us?"
And she did.
So I took her ears to the lab.
We then started preparing them.
Yeah, I know.
(Laughter) It's a good lab, man.
(Laughter) And then we grew cells on them.
And this is the result.
Listen, my lab is not in the ear-manufacturing business.
People have actually been working on this for decades.
Here's the issue: commercial scaffolds can be really expensive and problematic, because they're sourced from proprietary products, animals or cadavers.
We used an apple and it cost pennies.
What's also really cool here is it's not that hard to make these things.
The equipment you need can be built from garbage, and the key processing step only requires soap and water.
So what we did was put all the instructions online as open source.
And then we founded a mission-driven company, and we're developing kits to make it easier for anyone with a sink and a soldering iron to make these things at home.
What I'm really curious about is if one day, it will be possible to repair, rebuild and augment our own bodies with stuff we make in the kitchen.
Speaking of kitchens, here's some asparagus.
They're tasty, and they make your pee smell funny.
(Laughter) Now, I was in my kitchen, and I was noticing that when you look down the stalks of these asparagus, what you can see are all these tiny little vessels.
And when we image them in the lab, you can see how the cellulose forms these structures.
This image reminds me of two things: our blood vessels and the structure and organization of our nerves and spinal cord.
So here's the question: Can we grow axons and neurons down these channels?
Because if we can, then maybe we can use asparagus to form new connections between the ends of damaged and severed nerves.
Or maybe even a spinal cord.
Don't get me wrong -- this is exceptionally challenging and really hard work to do, and we are not the only ones working on this.
But we are the only ones using asparagus.
(Laughter) Right now, we've got really promising pilot data.
And we're working with tissue engineers and neurosurgeons to find out what's actually possible.
So listen, all of the work I've shown you, the stuff that I've built that's all around me on this stage and the other projects my lab is involved in are all a direct result of me playing with your garbage.
Play -- play is a key part of my scientific practice.
It's how I train my mind to be unconventional and to be creative and to decide to make human apple ears.
So, the next time any of you are looking at some old, broken-down, malfunctioning, piece-of-crap technology, I want you to think of me.
Because I want it.
(Laughter) Seriously, please find any way to get in touch with me, and let's see what we can build.
Thank you.
(Applause)
By raising your hand, how many of you know at least one person on the screen?
Wow, it's almost a full house.
It's true, they are very famous in their fields.
And do you know what all of them have in common?
They all died of pancreatic cancer.
However, although it's very, very sad this news, it's also thanks to their personal stories that we have raised awareness of how lethal this disease can be.
It's become the third cause of cancer deaths, and only eight percent of the patients will survive beyond five years.
That's a very tiny number, especially if you compare it with breast cancer, where the survival rate is almost 90 percent.
So it doesn't really come as a surprise that being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer means facing an almost certain death sentence.
What's shocking, though, is that in the last 40 years, this number hasn't changed a bit, while much more progress has been made with other types of tumors.
So how can we make pancreatic cancer treatment more effective?
As a biomedical entrepreneur, I like to work on problems that seem impossible, understanding their limitations and trying to find new, innovative solutions that can change their outcome.
The first piece of bad news with pancreatic cancer is that your pancreas is in the middle of your belly, literally.
It's depicted in orange on the screen.
But you can barely see it until I remove all the other organs in front.
It's also surrounded by many other vital organs, like the liver, the stomach, the bile duct.
And the ability of the tumor to grow into those organs is the reason why pancreatic cancer is one of the most painful tumor types.
The hard-to-reach location also prevents the doctor from surgically removing it, as is routinely done for breast cancer, for example.
So all of these reasons leave chemotherapy as the only option for the pancreatic cancer patient.
This brings us to the second piece of bad news.
Pancreatic cancer tumors have very few blood vessels.
Why should we care about the blood vessel of a tumor?
Let's think for a second how chemotherapy works.
The drug is injected in the vein and it navigates throughout the body until it reaches the tumor site.
It's like driving on a highway, trying to reach a destination.
But what if your destination doesn't have an exit on the highway?
You will never get there.
And that's exactly the same problem for chemotherapy and pancreatic cancer.
The drugs navigate throughout all of your body.
They will reach healthy organs, resulting in high toxic effect for the patients overall, but very little will go to the tumor.
Therefore, the efficacy is very limited.
To me, it seems very counterintuitive to have a whole-body treatment to target a specific organ.
However, in the last 40 years, a lot of money, research and effort have gone towards finding new, powerful drugs to treat pancreatic cancer, but nothing has been done in changing the way we deliver them to the patient.
So after two pieces of bad news, I'm going to give you good news, hopefully.
With a collaborator at MIT and the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, we have revolutionized the way we treat cancer by making localized drug delivery a reality.
We are basically parachuting you on top of your destination, avoiding your having to drive all around the highway.
We have embedded the drug into devices that look like this one.
They are flexible enough that they can be folded to fit into the catheter, so the doctor can implant it directly on top of the tumor with minimally invasive surgery.
But they are solid enough that once they are positioned on top of the tumor, they will act as a cage.
They will actually physically prevent the tumor from entering other organs, controlling the metastasis.
The devices are also biodegradable.
That means that once in the body, they start dissolving, delivering the drug only locally, slowly and more effectively than what is done with the current whole-body treatment.
In pre-clinical study, we have demonstrated that this localized approach is able to improve by 12 times the response to treatment.
So we took a drug that is already known and by just delivering it locally where it's needed the most, we allow a response that is 12 times more powerful, reducing the systemic toxic effect.
We are working relentlessly to bring this technology to the next level.
We are finalizing the pre-clinical testing and the animal model required prior to asking the FDA for approval for clinical trials.
Currently, the majority of patients will die from pancreatic cancer.
We are hoping that one day, we can reduce their pain, extend their life and potentially make pancreatic cancer a curable disease.
By rethinking the way we deliver the drug, we don't only make it more powerful and less toxic, we are also opening the door to finding new innovative solutions for almost all other impossible problems in pancreatic cancer patients and beyond.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I worked as a war reporter for 15 years before I realized that I really had a problem.
There was something really wrong with me.
This was about a year before 9/11, and America wasn't at war yet.
We weren't talking about PTSD.
We were not yet talking about the effect of trauma and war on the human psyche.
I'd been in Afghanistan for a couple of months with the Northern Alliance as they were fighting the Taliban.
And at that point the Taliban had an air force, they had fighter planes, they had tanks, they had artillery, and we really got hammered pretty badly a couple of times.
We saw some very ugly things.
But I didn't really think it affected me.
I didn't think much about it.
I came home to New York, where I live.
Then one day I went down into the subway, and for the first time in my life, I knew real fear.
I had a massive panic attack.
I was way more scared than I had ever been in Afghanistan.
Everything I was looking at seemed like it was going to kill me, but I couldn't explain why.
The trains were going too fast.
There were too many people.
The lights were too bright.
Everything was too loud, everything was moving too quickly.
I backed up against a support column and just waited for it.
When I couldn't take it any longer, I ran out of the subway station and walked wherever I was going.
Later, I found out that what I had was short-term PTSD: post-traumatic stress disorder.
We evolved as animals, as primates, to survive periods of danger, and if your life has been in danger, you want to react to unfamiliar noises.
You want to sleep lightly, wake up easily.
You want to have nightmares and flashbacks of the thing that could kill you.
You want to be angry because it makes you predisposed to fight, or depressed, because it keeps you out of circulation a little bit.
Keeps you safe.
It's not very pleasant, but it's better than getting eaten.
Most people recover from that pretty quickly.
It takes a few weeks, a few months.
I kept having panic attacks, but they eventually went away.
I had no idea it was connected to the war that I'd seen.
I just thought I was going crazy, and then I thought, well, now I'm not going crazy anymore.
About 20 percent of people, however, wind up with chronic, long-term PTSD.
They are not adapted to temporary danger.
They are maladapted for everyday life, unless they get help.
We know that the people who are vulnerable to long-term PTSD are people who were abused as children, who suffered trauma as children, people who have low education levels, people who have psychiatric disorders in their family.
If you served in Vietnam and your brother is schizophrenic, you're way more likely to get long-term PTSD from Vietnam.
So I started to study this as a journalist, and I realized that there was something really strange going on.
The numbers seemed to be going in the wrong direction.
Every war that we have fought as a country, starting with the Civil War, the intensity of the combat has gone down.
As a result, the casualty rates have gone down.
But disability rates have gone up.
They should be going in the same direction, but they're going in different directions.
The recent wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have produced, thank God, a casualty rate about one third of what it was in Vietnam.
But they've also created -- they've also produced three times the disability rates.
Around 10 percent of the US military is actively engaged in combat, 10 percent or under.
They're shooting at people, killing people, getting shot at, seeing their friends get killed.
It's incredibly traumatic.
But it's only about 10 percent of our military.
But about half of our military has filed for some kind of PTSD compensation from the government.
And suicide doesn't even fit into this in a very logical way.
We've all heard the tragic statistic of 22 vets a day, on average, in this country, killing themselves.
Most people don't realize that the majority of those suicides are veterans of the Vietnam War, that generation, and their decision to take their own lives actually might not be related to the war they fought 50 years earlier.
In fact, there's no statistical connection between combat and suicide.
If you're in the military and you're in a lot of combat, you're no more likely to kill yourself than if you weren't.
In fact, one study found that if you deploy to Iraq or Afghanistan, you're actually slightly less likely to commit suicide later.
I studied anthropology in college.
I did my fieldwork on the Navajo reservation.
I wrote a thesis on Navajo long-distance runners.
And recently, while I was researching PTSD, I had this thought.
I thought back to the work I did when I was young, and I thought, I bet the Navajo, the Apache, the Comanche -- I mean, these are very warlike nations -- I bet they weren't getting PTSD like we do.
When their warriors came back from fighting the US military or fighting each other, I bet they pretty much just slipped right back into tribal life.
And maybe what determines the rate of long-term PTSD isn't what happened out there, but the kind of society you come back to.
And maybe if you come back to a close, cohesive, tribal society, you can get over trauma pretty quickly.
And if you come back to an alienating, modern society, you might remain traumatized your entire life.
In other words, maybe the problem isn't them, the vets; maybe the problem is us.
Certainly, modern society is hard on the human psyche by every metric that we have.
As wealth goes up in a society, the suicide rate goes up instead of down.
If you live in modern society, you're up to eight times more likely to suffer from depression in your lifetime than if you live in a poor, agrarian society.
Modern society has probably produced the highest rates of suicide and depression and anxiety and loneliness and child abuse ever in human history.
I saw one study that compared women in Nigeria, one of the most chaotic and violent and corrupt and poorest countries in Africa, to women in North America.
And the highest rates of depression were urban women in North America.
That was also the wealthiest group.
So let's go back to the US military.
Ten percent are in combat.
Around 50 percent have filed for PTSD compensation.
So about 40 percent of veterans really were not traumatized overseas but have come home to discover they are dangerously alienated and depressed.
So what is happening with them?
What's going on with those people, the phantom 40 percent that are troubled but don't understand why?
Maybe it's this: maybe they had an experience of sort of tribal closeness in their unit when they were overseas.
They were eating together, sleeping together, doing tasks and missions together.
They were trusting each other with their lives.
And then they come home and they have to give all that up and they're coming back to a society, a modern society, which is hard on people who weren't even in the military.
It's just hard on everybody.
And we keep focusing on trauma, PTSD.
But for a lot of these people, maybe it's not trauma.
I mean, certainly, soldiers are traumatized and the ones who are have to be treated for that.
But a lot of them -- maybe what's bothering them is actually a kind of alienation.
I mean, maybe we just have the wrong word for some of it, and just changing our language, our understanding, would help a little bit.
"Post-deployment alienation disorder."
Maybe even just calling it that for some of these people would allow them to stop imagining trying to imagine a trauma that didn't really happen in order to explain a feeling that really is happening.
And in fact, it's an extremely dangerous feeling.
That alienation and depression can lead to suicide.
These people are in danger.
It's very important to understand why.
The Israeli military has a PTSD rate of around one percent.
The theory is that everyone in Israel is supposed to serve in the military.
When soldiers come back from the front line, they're not going from a military environment to a civilian environment.
They're coming back to a community where everyone understands about the military.
Everyone's been in it or is going to be in it.
Everyone understands the situation they're all in.
It's as if they're all in one big tribe.
We know that if you take a lab rat and traumatize it and put it in a cage by itself, you can maintain its trauma symptoms almost indefinitely.
And if you take that same lab rat and put it in a cage with other rats, after a couple of weeks, it's pretty much OK.
After 9/11, the murder rate in New York City went down by 40 percent.
The suicide rate went down.
The violent crime rate in New York went down after 9/11.
Even combat veterans of previous wars who suffered from PTSD said that their symptoms went down after 9/11 happened.
The reason is that if you traumatize an entire society, we don't fall apart and turn on one another.
We come together. We unify.
Basically, we tribalize, and that process of unifying feels so good and is so good for us, that it even helps people who are struggling with mental health issues.
During the blitz in London, admissions to psychiatric wards went down during the bombings.
For a while, that was the kind of country that American soldiers came back to -- a unified country.
We were sticking together.
We were trying to understand the threat against us.
We were trying to help ourselves and the world.
But that's changed.
Now, American soldiers, American veterans are coming back to a country that is so bitterly divided that the two political parties are literally accusing each other of treason, of being an enemy of the state, of trying to undermine the security and the welfare of their own country.
The gap between rich and poor is the biggest it's ever been.
It's just getting worse.
Race relations are terrible.
There are demonstrations and even riots in the streets because of racial injustice.
And veterans know that any tribe that treated itself that way -- in fact, any platoon that treated itself that way -- would never survive.
We've gotten used to it.
Veterans have gone away and are coming back and seeing their own country with fresh eyes.
And they see what's going on.
This is the country they fought for.
No wonder they're depressed.
No wonder they're scared.
Sometimes, we ask ourselves if we can save the vets.
I think the real question is if we can save ourselves.
If we can, I think the vets are going to be fine.
It's time for this country to unite, if only to help the men and women who fought to protect us.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When trains began to shuttle people across the coutryside, many insisted they would never replace horses.
Less than a century later, people repeated that same prediction about cars, telephones, radio, television, and computers.
Each had their own host of detractors.
Even some experts insisted they wouldn’t catch on.
Of course, we can’t predict exactly what the future will look like or what new inventions will populate it.
But time and time again, we’ve also failed to predict that the technologies of the present will change the future.
And recent research has revealed a similar pattern in our individual lives: we’re unable to predict change in ourselves.
Three psychologists documented our inability to predict personal change in a 2013 paper called, “The End of History Illusion.” Named after political scientist Francis Fukuyama’s prediction that liberal democracy was the final form of government, or as he called it, “the end of history,” their work highlights the way we see ourselves as finished products at any given moment.
The researchers recruited over 7,000 participants ages 18 to 68.
They asked half of these participants to report their current personality traits, values, and preferences, along with what each of those metrics had been ten years before.
The other half described those features in their present selves, and predicted what they would be ten years in the future.
Based on these answers, the researchers then calculated the degree of change each participant reported or predicted.
For every age group in the sample, they compared the predicted changes to the reported changes.
So they compared the degree to which 18-year-olds thought they would change to the degree to which 28-year-olds reported they had changed.
Overwhelmingly, at all ages, people’s future estimates of change came up short compared to the changes their older counterparts recalled.
20-year-olds expected to still like the same foods at 30, but 30-year-olds no longer had the same tastes.
30-year-olds predicted they’d still have the same best friend at 40, but 40-year-olds had lost touch with theirs.
And 40-year-olds predicted they’d maintain the same core values that 50-year-olds had reconsidered.
While older people changed less than younger people on the whole, they underestimated their capacity for change just as much.
Wherever we are in life, the end of history illusion persists: we tend to think that the bulk of our personal change is behind us.
One consequence of this thinking is that we’re inclined to overinvest in future choices based on present preferences.
On average, people are willing to pay about 60% more to see their current favorite musician ten years in the future than they’d currently pay to see their favorite musician from ten years ago.
While the stakes involved in concert-going are low, we’re susceptible to similar miscalculations in more serious commitments, like homes, partners, and jobs.
At the same time, there’s no real way to predict what our preferences will be in the future.
Without the end of history Illusion, it would be difficult to make any long-term plans.
So the end of history illusion applies to our individual lives, but what about the wider world?
Could we be assuming that how things are now is how they will continue to be?
If so, fortunately, there are countless records to remind us that the world does change, sometimes for the better.
Our own historical moment isn’t the end of history, and that can be just as much a source of comfort as a cause for concern.
I want to talk about sex for money.
I'm not like most of the people you'll have heard speaking about prostitution before.
I'm not a police officer or a social worker.
I'm not an academic, a journalist or a politician.
And as you'll probably have picked up from Maryam's blurb, I'm not a nun, either.
(Laughter) Most of those people would tell you that selling sex is degrading; that no one would ever choose to do it; that it's dangerous; women get abused and killed.
In fact, most of those people would say, "There should be a law against it!"
Maybe that sounds reasonable to you.
It sounded reasonable to me until the closing months of 2009, when I was working two dead-end, minimum-wage jobs.
Every month my wages would just replenish my overdraft.
I was exhausted and my life was going nowhere.
Like many others before me, I decided sex for money was a better option.
Now don't get me wrong -- I would have loved to have won the lottery instead.
But it wasn't going to happen anytime soon, and my rent needed paying.
So I signed up for my first shift in a brothel.
In the years that have passed, I've had a lot of time to think.
I've reconsidered the ideas I once had about prostitution.
I've given a lot of thought to consent and the nature of work under capitalism.
I've thought about gender inequality and the sexual and reproductive labor of women.
I've experienced exploitation and violence at work.
I've thought about what's needed to protect other sex workers from these things.
Maybe you've thought about them, too.
In this talk, I'll take you through the four main legal approaches applied to sex work throughout the world, and explain why they don't work; why prohibiting the sex industry actually exacerbates every harm that sex workers are vulnerable to.
Then I'm going tell you about what we, as sex workers, actually want.
The first approach is full criminalization.
Half the world, including Russia, South Africa and most of the US, regulates sex work by criminalizing everyone involved.
So that's seller, buyer and third parties.
Lawmakers in these countries apparently hope that the fear of getting arrested will deter people from selling sex.
But if you're forced to choose between obeying the law and feeding yourself or your family, you're going to do the work anyway, and take the risk.
Criminalization is a trap.
It's hard to get a conventional job when you have a criminal record.
Potential employers won't hire you.
Assuming you still need money, you'll stay in the more flexible, informal economy.
The law forces you to keep selling sex, which is the exact opposite of its intended effect.
Being criminalized leaves you exposed to mistreatment by the state itself.
In many places you may be coerced into paying a bribe or even into having sex with a police officer to avoid arrest.
Police and prison guards in Cambodia, for example, have been documented subjecting sex workers to what can only be described as torture: threats at gunpoint, beatings, electric shocks, rape and denial of food.
Another worrying thing: if you're selling sex in places like Kenya, South Africa or New York, a police officer can arrest you if you're caught carrying condoms, because condoms can legally be used as evidence that you're selling sex.
Obviously, this increases HIV risk.
Imagine knowing if you're busted carrying condoms, it'll be used against you.
It's a pretty strong incentive to leave them at home, right?
Sex workers working in these places are forced to make a tough choice between risking arrest or having risky sex.
What would you choose?
Would you pack condoms to go to work?
How about if you're worried the police officer would rape you when he got you in the van?
The second approach to regulating sex work seen in these countries is partial criminalization, where the buying and selling of sex are legal, but surrounding activities, like brothel-keeping or soliciting on the street, are banned.
Laws like these -- we have them in the UK and in France -- essentially say to us sex workers, "Hey, we don't mind you selling sex, just make sure it's done behind closed doors and all alone."
And brothel-keeping, by the way, is defined as just two or more sex workers working together.
Making that illegal means that many of us work alone, which obviously makes us vulnerable to violent offenders.
But we're also vulnerable if we choose to break the law by working together.
A couple of years ago, a friend of mine was nervous after she was attacked at work, so I said that she could see her clients from my place for a while.
During that time, we had another guy turn nasty.
I told the guy to leave or I'd call the police.
And he looked at the two of us and said, "You girls can't call the cops.
You're working together, this place is illegal."
He was right.
He eventually left without getting physically violent, but the knowledge that we were breaking the law empowered that man to threaten us.
He felt confident he'd get away with it.
The prohibition of street prostitution also causes more harm than it prevents.
Firstly, to avoid getting arrested, street workers take risks to avoid detection, and that means working alone or in isolated locations like dark forests where they're vulnerable to attack.
If you're caught selling sex outdoors, you pay a fine.
How do you pay that fine without going back to the streets?
It was the need for money that saw you in the streets in the first place.
And so the fines stack up, and you're caught in a vicious cycle of selling sex to pay the fines you got for selling sex.
Let me tell you about Mariana Popa who worked in Redbridge, East London.
The street workers on her patch would normally wait for clients in groups for safety in numbers and to warn each other about how to avoid dangerous guys.
But during a police crackdown on sex workers and their clients, she was forced to work alone to avoid being arrested.
She was stabbed to death in the early hours of October 29, 2013.
She had been working later than usual to try to pay off a fine she had received for soliciting.
So if criminalizing sex workers hurts them, why not just criminalize the people who buy sex?
This is the aim of the third approach I want to talk about -- the Swedish or Nordic model of sex-work law.
The idea behind this law is that selling sex is intrinsically harmful and so you're, in fact, helping sex workers by removing the option.
Despite growing support for what's often described as the "end demand" approach, there's no evidence that it works.
There's just as much prostitution in Sweden as there was before.
Why might that be?
It's because people selling sex often don't have other options for income.
If you need that money, the only effect that a drop in business is going have is to force you to lower your prices or offer more risky sexual services.
If you need to find more clients, you might seek the help of a manager.
So you see, rather than putting a stop to what's often descried as pimping, a law like this actually gives oxygen to potentially abusive third parties.
To keep safe in my work, I try not to take bookings from someone who calls me from a withheld number.
If it's a home or a hotel visit, I try to get a full name and details.
If I worked under the Swedish model, a client would be too scared to give me that information.
I might have no other choice but to accept a booking from a man who is untraceable if he later turns out to be violent.
If you need their money, you need to protect your clients from the police.
If you work outdoors, that means working alone or in isolated locations, just as if you were criminalized yourself.
It might mean getting into cars quicker, less negotiating time means snap decisions.
Is this guy dangerous or just nervous?
Can you afford to take the risk?
Can you afford not to?
Something I'm often hearing is, "Prostitution would be fine if we made it legal and regulated it."
We call that approach legalization, and it's used by countries like the Netherlands, Germany and Nevada in the US.
But it's not a great model for human rights.
And in state-controlled prostitution, commercial sex can only happen in certain legally-designated areas or venues, and sex workers are made to comply with special restrictions, like registration and forced health checks.
Regulation sounds great on paper, but politicians deliberately make regulation around the sex industry expensive and difficult to comply with.
It creates a two-tiered system: legal and illegal work.
We sometimes call it "backdoor criminalization."
Rich, well-connected brothel owners can comply with the regulations, but more marginalized people find those hoops impossible to jump through.
And even if it's possible in principle, getting a license or proper venue takes time and costs money.
It's not going to be an option for someone who's desperate and needs money tonight.
They might be a refugee or fleeing domestic abuse.
In this two-tiered system, the most vulnerable people are forced to work illegally, so they're still exposed to all the dangers of criminalization I mentioned earlier.
So.
It's looking like all attempts to control or prevent sex work from happening makes things more dangerous for people selling sex.
Fear of law enforcement makes them work alone in isolated locations, and allows clients and even cops to get abusive in the knowledge they'll get away with it.
Fines and criminal records force people to keep selling sex, rather than enabling them to stop.
Crackdowns on buyers drive sellers to take dangerous risks and into the arms of potentially abusive managers.
These laws also reinforce stigma and hatred against sex workers.
When France temporarily brought in the Swedish model two years ago, ordinary citizens took it as a cue to start carrying out vigilante attacks against people working on the street.
In Sweden, opinion surveys show that significantly more people want sex workers to be arrested now than before the law was brought in.
If prohibition is this harmful, you might ask, why it so popular?
Firstly, sex work is and always has been a survival strategy for all kinds of unpopular minority groups: people of color, migrants, people with disabilities, LGBTQ people, particularly trans women.
These are the groups most heavily profiled and punished through prohibitionist law.
I don't think this is an accident.
These laws have political support precisely because they target people that voters don't want to see or know about.
Why else might people support prohibition?
Well, lots of people have understandable fears about trafficking.
Folks think that foreign women kidnapped and sold into sexual slavery can be saved by shutting a whole industry down.
So let's talk about trafficking.
Forced labor does occur in many industries, especially those where the workers are migrants or otherwise vulnerable, and this needs to be addressed.
But it's best addressed with legislation targeting those specific abuses, not an entire industry.
When 23 undocumented Chinese migrants drowned while picking cockles in Morecambe Bay in 2004, there were no calls to outlaw the entire seafood industry to save trafficking victims.
The solution is clearly to give workers more legal protections, allowing them to resist abuse and report it to authorities without fear of arrest.
The way the term trafficking is thrown around implies that all undocumented migration into prostitution is forced.
In fact, many migrants have made a decision, out of economic need, to place themselves into the hands of people smugglers.
Many do this with the full knowledge that they'll be selling sex when they reach their destination.
And yes, it can often be the case that these people smugglers demand exorbitant fees, coerce migrants into work they don't want to do and abuse them when they're vulnerable.
That's true of prostitution, but it's also true of agricultural work, hospitality work and domestic work.
Ultimately, nobody wants to be forced to do any kind of work, but that's a risk many migrants are willing to take, because of what they're leaving behind.
If people were allowed to migrate legally they wouldn't have to place their lives into the hands of people smugglers.
The problems arise from the criminalization of migration, just as they do from the criminalization of sex work itself.
This is a lesson of history.
If you try to prohibit something that people want or need to do, whether that's drinking alcohol or crossing borders or getting an abortion or selling sex, you create more problems than you solve.
Prohibition barely makes a difference to the amount of people actually doing those things.
But it makes a huge difference as to whether or not they're safe when they do them.
Why else might people support prohibition?
As a feminist, I know that the sex industry is a site of deeply entrenched social inequality.
It's a fact that most buyers of sex are men with money, and most sellers are women without.
You can agree with all that -- I do -- and still think prohibition is a terrible policy.
In a better, more equal world, maybe there would be far fewer people selling sex to survive, but you can't simply legislate a better world into existence.
If someone needs to sell sex because they're poor or because they're homeless or because they're undocumented and they can't find legal work, taking away that option doesn't make them any less poor or house them or change their immigration status.
People worry that selling sex is degrading.
Ask yourself: is it more degrading than going hungry or seeing your children go hungry?
There's no call to ban rich people from hiring nannies or getting manicures, even though most of the people doing that labor are poor, migrant women.
It's the fact of poor migrant women selling sex specifically that has some feminists uncomfortable.
And I can understand why the sex industry provokes strong feelings.
People have all kinds of complicated feelings when it comes to sex.
But we can't make policy on the basis of mere feelings, especially not over the heads of the people actually effected by those policies.
If we get fixated on the abolition of sex work, we end up worrying more about a particular manifestation of gender inequality, rather than about the underlying causes.
People get really hung up on the question, "Well, would you want your daughter doing it?"
That's the wrong question.
Instead, imagine she is doing it.
How safe is she at work tonight?
Why isn't she safer?
So we've looked at full criminalization, partial criminalization, the Swedish or Nordic Model and legalization, and how they all cause harm.
Something I never hear asked is: "What do sex workers want?"
After all, we're the ones most affected by these laws.
New Zealand decriminalized sex work in 2003.
It's crucial to remember that decriminalization and legalization are not the same thing.
Decriminalization means the removal of laws that punitively target the sex industry, instead treating sex work much like any other kind of work.
In New Zealand, people can work together for safety, and employers of sex workers are accountable to the state.
A sex worker can refuse to see a client at any time, for any reason, and 96 percent of street workers report that they feel the law protects their rights.
New Zealand hasn't actually seen an increase in the amount of people doing sex work, but decriminalizing it has made it a lot safer.
But the lesson from New Zealand isn't just that its particular legislation is good, but that crucially, it was written in collaboration with sex workers; namely, the New Zealand Prostitutes' Collective.
When it came to making sex work safer, they were ready to hear it straight from sex workers themselves.
Here in the UK, I'm part of sex worker-led groups like the Sex Worker Open University and the English Collective of Prostitutes.
And we form part of a global movement demanding decriminalization and self-determination.
The universal symbol of our movement is the red umbrella.
We're supported in our demands by global bodies like UNAIDS, the World Health Organization and Amnesty International.
But we need more allies.
If you care about gender equality or poverty or migration or public health, then sex worker rights matter to you.
Make space for us in your movements.
That means not only listening to sex workers when we speak but amplifying our voices.
Resist those who silence us, those who say that a prostitute is either too victimized, too damaged to know what's best for herself, or else too privileged and too removed from real hardship, not representative of the millions of voiceless victims.
This distinction between victim and empowered is imaginary.
It exists purely to discredit sex workers and make it easy to ignore us.
No doubt many of you work for a living.
Well, sex work is work, too.
Just like you, some of us like our jobs, some of us hate them.
Ultimately, most of us have mixed feelings.
But how we feel about our work isn't the point.
And how others feel about our work certainly isn't.
What's important is that we have the right to work safely and on our own terms.
Sex workers are real people.
We've had complicated experiences and complicated responses to those experiences.
But our demands are not complicated.
You can ask expensive escorts in New York City, brothel workers in Cambodia, street workers in South Africa and every girl on the roster at my old job in Soho, and they will all tell you the same thing.
You can speak to millions of sex workers and countless sex work-led organizations.
We want full decriminalization and labor rights as workers.
I'm just one sex worker on the stage today, but I'm bringing a message from all over the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So this is James Risen.
You may know him as the Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter for The New York Times.
Long before anybody knew Edward Snowden's name, Risen wrote a book in which he famously exposed that the NSA was illegally wiretapping the phone calls of Americans.
But it's another chapter in that book that may have an even more lasting impact.
In it, he describes a catastrophic US intelligence operation in which the CIA quite literally handed over blueprints of a nuclear bomb to Iran.
If that sounds crazy, go read it.
It's an incredible story.
But you know who didn't like that chapter?
The US government.
For nearly a decade afterwards, Risen was the subject of a US government investigation in which prosecutors demanded that he testify against one of his alleged sources.
And along the way, he became the face for the US government's recent pattern of prosecuting whistleblowers and spying on journalists.
You see, under the First Amendment, the press has the right to publish secret information in the public interest.
But it's impossible to exercise that right if the media can't also gather that news and protect the identities of the brave men and women who get it to them.
So when the government came knocking, Risen did what many brave reporters have done before him: he refused and said he'd rather go to jail.
So from 2007 to 2015, Risen lived under the specter of going to federal prison.
That is, until just days before the trial, when a curious thing happened.
Suddenly, after years of claiming it was vital to their case, the government dropped their demands to Risen altogether.
It turns out, in the age of electronic surveillance, there are very few places reporters and sources can hide.
And instead of trying and failing to have Risen testify, they could have his digital trail testify against him instead.
So completely in secret and without his consent, prosecutors got Risen's phone records.
They got his email records, his financial and banking information, his credit reports, even travel records with a list of flights he had taken.
And it was among this information that they used to convict Jeffrey Sterling, Risen's alleged source and CIA whistleblower.
Sadly, this is only one case of many.
President Obama ran on a promise to protect whistleblowers, and instead, his Justice Department has prosecuted more than all other administrations combined.
Now, you can see how this could be a problem, especially because the government considers so much of what it does secret.
Since 9/11, virtually every important story about national security has been the result of a whistleblower coming to a journalist.
So we risk seeing the press unable to do their job that the First Amendment is supposed to protect because of the government's expanded ability to spy on everyone.
But just as technology has allowed the government to circumvent reporters' rights, the press can also use technology to protect their sources even better than before.
And they can start from the moment they begin speaking with them, rather than on the witness stand after the fact.
Communications software now exists that wasn't available when Risen was writing his book, and is much more surveillance-resistant than regular emails or phone calls.
For example, one such tool is SecureDrop, an open-source whistleblower submission system that was originally created by the late Internet luminary Aaron Swartz, and is now developed at the non-profit where I work, Freedom of the Press Foundation.
Instead of sending an email, you go to a news organization's website, like this one here on The Washington Post.
From there, you can upload a document or send information much like you would on any other contact form.
It'll then be encrypted and stored on a server that only the news organization has access to.
So the government can no longer secretly demand the information, and much of the information they would demand wouldn't be available in the first place.
SecureDrop, though, is really only a small part of the puzzle for protecting press freedom in the 21st century.
Unfortunately, governments all over the world are constantly developing new spying techniques that put us all at risk.
And it's up to us going forward to make sure that it's not just the tech-savvy whistleblowers, like Edward Snowden, who have an avenue for exposing wrongdoing.
It's just as vital that we protect the next veteran's health care whistleblower alerting us to overcrowded hospitals, or the next environmental worker sounding the alarm about Flint's dirty water, or a Wall Street insider warning us of the next financial crisis.
After all, these tools weren't just built to help the brave men and women who expose crimes, but are meant to protect all of our rights under the Constitution.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I know TED is about a lot of things that are big, but I want to talk to you about something very small.
So small, it's a single word.
The word is "misfit."
It's one of my favorite words, because it's so literal.
I mean, it's a person who sort of missed fitting in.
Or a person who fits in badly.
Or this: "a person who is poorly adapted to new situations and environments."
I'm a card-carrying misfit.
And I'm here for the other misfits in the room, because I'm never the only one.
I'm going to tell you a misfit story.
Somewhere in my early 30s, the dream of becoming a writer came right to my doorstep.
Actually, it came to my mailbox in the form of a letter that said I'd won a giant literary prize for a short story I had written.
The short story was about my life as a competitive swimmer and about my crappy home life, and a little bit about how grief and loss can make you insane.
The prize was a trip to New York City to meet big-time editors and agents and other authors.
So kind of it was the wannabe writer's dream, right?
You know what I did the day the letter came to my house?
Because I'm me, I put the letter on my kitchen table, I poured myself a giant glass of vodka with ice and lime, and I sat there in my underwear for an entire day, just staring at the letter.
I was thinking about all the ways I'd already screwed my life up.
Who the hell was I to go to New York City and pretend to be a writer?
Who was I?
I'll tell you.
I was a misfit.
Like legions of other children, I came from an abusive household that I narrowly escaped with my life.
I already had two epically failed marriages underneath my belt.
I'd flunked out of college not once but twice and maybe even a third time that I'm not going to tell you about.
(Laughter) And I'd done an episode of rehab for drug use.
And I'd had two lovely staycations in jail.
So I'm on the right stage.
(Laughter) But the real reason, I think, I was a misfit, is that my daughter died the day she was born, and I hadn't figured out how to live with that story yet.
After my daughter died I also spent a long time homeless, living under an overpass in a kind of profound state of zombie grief and loss that some of us encounter along the way.
Maybe all of us, if you live long enough.
You know, homeless people are some of our most heroic misfits, because they start out as us.
So you see, I'd missed fitting in to just about every category out there: daughter, wife, mother, scholar.
And the dream of being a writer was really kind of like a small, sad stone in my throat.
It was pretty much in spite of myself that I got on that plane and flew to New York City, where the writers are.
Fellow misfits, I can almost see your heads glowing.
I can pick you out of a room.
At first, you would've loved it.
You got to choose the three famous writers you wanted to meet, and these guys went and found them for you.
You got set up at the Gramercy Park Hotel, where you got to drink Scotch late in the night with cool, smart, swank people.
And you got to pretend you were cool and smart and swank, too.
And you got to meet a bunch of editors and authors and agents at very, very fancy lunches and dinners.
Ask me how fancy.
Audience: How fancy?
Lidia Yuknavitch: I'm making a confession: I stole three linen napkins -- (Laughter) from three different restaurants.
And I shoved a menu down my pants.
(Laughter) I just wanted some keepsakes so that when I got home, I could believe it had really happened to me.
You know?
The three writers I wanted to meet were Carole Maso, Lynne Tillman and Peggy Phelan.
These were not famous, best-selling authors, but to me, they were women-writer titans.
Carole Maso wrote the book that later became my art bible.
Lynne Tillman gave me permission to believe that there was a chance my stories could be part of the world.
And Peggy Phelan reminded me that maybe my brains could be more important than my boobs.
They weren't mainstream women writers, but they were cutting a path through the mainstream with their body stories, I like to think, kind of the way water cut the Grand Canyon.
It nearly killed me with joy to hang out with these three over-50-year-old women writers.
And the reason it nearly killed me with joy is that I'd never known a joy like that.
I'd never been in a room like that.
My mother never went to college.
And my creative career to that point was a sort of small, sad, stillborn thing.
So kind of in those first nights in New York I wanted to die there.
I was just like, "Kill me now. I'm good. This is beautiful."
Some of you in the room will understand what happened next.
First, they took me to the offices of Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux was like my mega-dream press.
I mean, T.S. Eliot and Flannery O'Connor were published there.
The main editor guy sat me down and talked to me for a long time, trying to convince me I had a book in me about my life as a swimmer.
You know, like a memoir.
The whole time he was talking to me, I sat there smiling and nodding like a numb idiot, with my arms crossed over my chest, while nothing, nothing, nothing came out of my throat.
So in the end, he patted me on the shoulder like a swim coach might.
And he wished me luck and he gave me some free books and he showed me out the door.
Next, they took me to the offices of W.W. Norton, where I was pretty sure I'd be escorted from the building just for wearing Doc Martens.
But that didn't happen.
Being at the Norton offices felt like reaching up into the night sky and touching the moon while the stars stitched your name across the cosmos.
I mean, that's how big a deal it was to me.
You get it?
Their lead editor, Carol Houck Smith, leaned over right in my face with these beady, bright, fierce eyes and said, "Well, send me something then, immediately!"
See, now most people, especially TED people, would have run to the mailbox, right?
It took me over a decade to even imagine putting something in an envelope and licking a stamp.
On the last night, I gave a big reading at the National Poetry Club.
And at the end of the reading, Katharine Kidde of Kidde, Hoyt &amp; Picard Literary Agency, walked straight up to me and shook my hand and offered me representation, like, on the spot.
I stood there and I kind of went deaf.
Has this ever happened to you?
And I almost started crying because all the people in the room were dressed so beautifully, and all that came out of my mouth was: "I don't know. I have to think about it."
And she said, "OK, then," and walked away.
All those open hands out to me, that small, sad stone in my throat ...
You see, I'm trying to tell you something about people like me.
Misfit people -- we don't always know how to hope or say yes or choose the big thing, even when it's right in front of us.
It's a shame we carry.
It's the shame of wanting something good.
It's the shame of feeling something good.
It's the shame of not really believing we deserve to be in the room with the people we admire.
If I could, I'd go back and I'd coach myself.
I'd be exactly like those over-50-year-old women who helped me.
I'd teach myself how to want things, how to stand up, how to ask for them.
I'd say, "You! Yeah, you! You belong in the room, too."
The radiance falls on all of us, and we are nothing without each other.
Instead, I flew back to Oregon, and as I watched the evergreens and rain come back into view, I just drank many tiny bottles of airplane "feel sorry for yourself."
I thought about how, if I was a writer, I was some kind of misfit writer.
What I'm saying is, I flew back to Oregon without a book deal, without an agent, and with only a headful and heart-ful of memories of having sat so near the beautiful writers.
Memory was the only prize I allowed myself.
And yet, at home in the dark, back in my underwear, I could still hear their voices.
They said, "Don't listen to anyone who tries to get you to shut up or change your story."
They said, "Give voice to the story only you know how to tell."
They said, "Sometimes telling the story is the thing that saves your life."
Now I am, as you can see, the woman over 50.
And I'm a writer.
And I'm a mother.
And I became a teacher.
Guess who my favorite students are.
Although it didn't happen the day that dream letter came through my mailbox, I did write a memoir, called "The Chronology of Water."
In it are the stories of how many times I've had to reinvent a self from the ruins of my choices, the stories of how my seeming failures were really just weird-ass portals to something beautiful.
All I had to do was give voice to the story.
There's a myth in most cultures about following your dreams.
It's called the hero's journey.
But I prefer a different myth, that's slightly to the side of that or underneath it.
It's called the misfit's myth.
And it goes like this: even at the moment of your failure, right then, you are beautiful.
You don't know it yet, but you have the ability to reinvent yourself endlessly.
That's your beauty.
You can be a drunk, you can be a survivor of abuse, you can be an ex-con, you can be a homeless person, you can lose all your money or your job or your husband or your wife, or the worst thing of all, a child.
You can even lose your marbles.
You can be standing dead center in the middle of your failure and still, I'm only here to tell you, you are so beautiful.
Your story deserves to be heard, because you, you rare and phenomenal misfit, you new species, are the only one in the room who can tell the story the way only you would.
And I'd be listening.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The discovery of an alien monolith on planet RH-1729 has scientists across the world racing to unlock its mysteries.
Your engineering team has developed an elegant probe to study it.
The probe is a collection of 27 cube modules capable of running all the scientific tests necessary to analyze the monolith.
The modules can self-assemble into a large 3x3x3 cube, with each individual module placed anywhere in the cube, and at any orientation.
It can also break itself apart and reassemble into any other orientation.
Now comes your job.
The probe will need a special protective coating for each of the extreme environments it passes through.
The red coating will seal it against the cold of deep space, the purple coating will protect it from the intense heat as it enters the atmosphere of RH-1729, and the green coating will shield it from the alien planet’s electric storms.
You can apply the coatings to each of the faces of all 27 of the cubic modules in any way you like, but each face can only take a single color coating.
You need to figure out how you can apply the colors so the cubes can re-assemble themselves to show only red, then purple, then green.
How can you apply the colored coatings to the 27 cubes so the probe will be able to make the trip?
Pause here if you want to figure it out yourself.
You can start by painting the outside of the complete cube red, since you’ll need that regardless.
Then you can break it into 27 pieces, and look at what you have.
There are 8 corner cubes, which each have three red faces, 12 edge cubes, which have two red faces, 6 face cubes, which have 1 red face, and a single center cube, which has no red faces.
You’ve painted a total of 54 faces red at this point, so you’ll need the same number of faces for the green and purple cubes, too.
When you’re done, you’ll have painted 54 faces red, 54 faces green, and 54 faces purple.
That’s 162 faces, which is precisely how many the cubes have in total.
So there’s no margin for waste.
If there’s any way to do this, it’ll probably be highly symmetrical.
Maybe you can use that to help you.
You look at the center cube.
You’d better paint it half green and half purple, so you can use it as a corner for each of those cubes, and not waste a single face.
There’ll need to be center cubes with no green and no purple too.
So you take 2 corner cubes from the red cube and paint the 3 blank faces of 1 purple, and the 3 blank faces of the other green.
Now you’ve got the 6 face cubes that each have 1 face painted red.
That leaves 5 empty faces on each.
You can split them in half.
In the first group, you paint 3 faces green and 2 faces purple; In the second group, paint 3 faces purple and 2 green.
Counting on symmetry, you replicate these piles again with the colors rearranged.
That gives you 6 with 1 green face, 6 with 1 red face, and 6 with 1 purple face.
Counting up what you’ve completely painted, you see 8 corner cubes in each color, 6 edge cubes in each color, 6 face cubes in each color, and 1 center cube.
That means you just need 6 more edge cubes in green and purple.
And there are exactly 6 cubes left, each with 4 empty faces.
You paint 2 faces of each green and 2 faces of each purple.
And now you have a cube that’s perfectly painted to make an incredible trip.
It rearranges itself to be red in deep space, purple as it enters RH-1729’s atmosphere, and green when it flies through the electric storms.
As it reaches the monolith, you realize you’ve achieved something humans have dreamt of for eons: alien contact.
In the year 1919, a virtually unknown German mathematician, named Theodor Kaluza suggested a very bold and, in some ways, a very bizarre idea.
He proposed that our universe might actually have more than the three dimensions that we are all aware of.
That is in addition to left, right, back, forth and up, down, Kaluza proposed that there might be additional dimensions of space that for some reason we don't yet see.
Now, when someone makes a bold and bizarre idea, sometimes that's all it is -- bold and bizarre, but it has nothing to do with the world around us.
This particular idea, however -- although we don't yet know whether it's right or wrong, and at the end I'll discuss experiments which, in the next few years, may tell us whether it's right or wrong -- this idea has had a major impact on physics in the last century and continues to inform a lot of cutting-edge research.
So, I'd like to tell you something about the story of these extra dimensions.
So where do we go?
To begin we need a little bit of back story. Go to 1907.
This is a year when Einstein is basking in the glow of having discovered the special theory of relativity and decides to take on a new project, to try to understand fully the grand, pervasive force of gravity.
And in that moment, there are many people around who thought that that project had already been resolved.
Newton had given the world a theory of gravity in the late 1600s that works well, describes the motion of planets, the motion of the moon and so forth, the motion of apocryphal of apples falling from trees, hitting people on the head.
All of that could be described using Newton's work.
But Einstein realized that Newton had left something out of the story, because even Newton had written that although he understood how to calculate the effect of gravity, he'd been unable to figure out how it really works.
How is it that the Sun, 93 million miles away, [that] somehow it affects the motion of the Earth?
How does the Sun reach out across empty inert space and exert influence?
And that is a task to which Einstein set himself -- to figure out how gravity works.
And let me show you what it is that he found.
So Einstein found that the medium that transmits gravity is space itself.
The idea goes like this: imagine space is a substrate of all there is.
Einstein said space is nice and flat, if there's no matter present.
But if there is matter in the environment, such as the Sun, it causes the fabric of space to warp, to curve.
And that communicates the force of gravity.
Even the Earth warps space around it.
Now look at the Moon.
The Moon is kept in orbit, according to these ideas, because it rolls along a valley in the curved environment that the Sun and the Moon and the Earth can all create by virtue of their presence.
We go to a full-frame view of this.
The Earth itself is kept in orbit because it rolls along a valley in the environment that's curved because of the Sun's presence.
That is this new idea about how gravity actually works.
Now, this idea was tested in 1919 through astronomical observations.
It really works. It describes the data.
And this gained Einstein prominence around the world.
And that is what got Kaluza thinking.
He, like Einstein, was in search of what we call a unified theory.
That's one theory that might be able to describe all of nature's forces from one set of ideas, one set of principles, one master equation, if you will.
So Kaluza said to himself, Einstein has been able to describe gravity in terms of warps and curves in space -- in fact, space and time, to be more precise.
Maybe I can play the same game with the other known force, which was, at that time, known as the electromagnetic force -- we know of others today, but at that time that was the only other one people were thinking about.
You know, the force responsible for electricity and magnetic attraction and so forth.
So Kaluza says, maybe I can play the same game and describe electromagnetic force in terms of warps and curves.
That raised a question: warps and curves in what?
Einstein had already used up space and time, warps and curves, to describe gravity.
There didn't seem to be anything else to warp or curve.
So Kaluza said, well, maybe there are more dimensions of space.
He said, if I want to describe one more force, maybe I need one more dimension.
So he imagined that the world had four dimensions of space, not three, and imagined that electromagnetism was warps and curves in that fourth dimension. Now here's the thing: when he wrote down the equations describing warps and curves in a universe with four space dimensions, not three, he found the old equations that Einstein had already derived in three dimensions -- those were for gravity -- but he found one more equation because of the one more dimension.
And when he looked at that equation, it was none other than the equation that scientists had long known to describe the electromagnetic force.
Amazing -- it just popped out.
He was so excited by this realization that he ran around his house screaming, "Victory!" -- that he had found the unified theory.
Now clearly, Kaluza was a man who took theory very seriously.
He, in fact -- there is a story that when he wanted to learn how to swim, he read a book, a treatise on swimming -- (Laughter) -- then dove into the ocean.
This is a man who would risk his life on theory.
Now, but for those of us who are a little bit more practically minded, two questions immediately arise from his observation.
Number one: if there are more dimensions in space, where are they?
We don't seem to see them.
And number two: does this theory really work in detail, when you try to apply it to the world around us?
Now, the first question was answered in 1926 by a fellow named Oskar Klein.
He suggested that dimensions might come in two varieties -- there might be big, easy-to-see dimensions, but there might also be tiny, curled-up dimensions, curled up so small, even though they're all around us, that we don't see them.
Let me show you that one visually.
So, imagine you're looking at something like a cable supporting a traffic light.
It's in Manhattan. You're in Central Park -- it's kind of irrelevant -- but the cable looks one-dimensional from a distant viewpoint, but you and I all know that it does have some thickness.
It's very hard to see it, though, from far away.
But if we zoom in and take the perspective of, say, a little ant walking around -- little ants are so small that they can access all of the dimensions -- the long dimension, but also this clockwise, counter-clockwise direction.
And I hope you appreciate this.
It took so long to get these ants to do this.
(Laughter) But this illustrates the fact that dimensions can be of two sorts: big and small. And the idea that maybe the big dimensions around us are the ones that we can easily see, but there might be additional dimensions curled up, sort of like the circular part of that cable, so small that they have so far remained invisible.
Let me show you what that would look like.
So, if we take a look, say, at space itself -- I can only show, of course, two dimensions on a screen.
Some of you guys will fix that one day, but anything that's not flat on a screen is a new dimension, goes smaller, smaller, smaller, and way down in the microscopic depths of space itself, this is the idea, you could have additional curled up dimensions -- here is a little shape of a circle -- so small that we don't see them.
But if you were a little ultra microscopic ant walking around, you could walk in the big dimensions that we all know about -- that's like the grid part -- but you could also access the tiny curled-up dimension that's so small that we can't see it with the naked eye or even with any of our most refined equipment.
But deeply tucked into the fabric of space itself, the idea is there could be more dimensions, as we see there.
Now that's an explanation about how the universe could have more dimensions than the ones that we see.
But what about the second question that I asked: does the theory actually work when you try to apply it to the real world?
Well, it turns out that Einstein and Kaluza and many others worked on trying to refine this framework and apply it to the physics of the universe as was understood at the time, and, in detail, it didn't work.
In detail, for instance, they couldn't get the mass of the electron to work out correctly in this theory.
So many people worked on it, but by the '40s, certainly by the '50s, this strange but very compelling idea of how to unify the laws of physics had gone away.
Until something wonderful happened in our age.
In our era, a new approach to unify the laws of physics is being pursued by physicists such as myself, many others around the world, it's called superstring theory, as you were indicating.
And the wonderful thing is that superstring theory has nothing to do at first sight with this idea of extra dimensions, but when we study superstring theory, we find that it resurrects the idea in a sparkling, new form.
So, let me just tell you how that goes.
Superstring theory -- what is it?
Well, it's a theory that tries to answer the question: what are the basic, fundamental, indivisible, uncuttable constituents making up everything in the world around us?
The idea is like this.
So, imagine we look at a familiar object, just a candle in a holder, and imagine that we want to figure out what it is made of.
So we go on a journey deep inside the object and examine the constituents.
So deep inside -- we all know, you go sufficiently far down, you have atoms.
We also all know that atoms are not the end of the story.
They have little electrons that swarm around a central nucleus with neutrons and protons.
Even the neutrons and protons have smaller particles inside of them known as quarks.
That is where conventional ideas stop.
Here is the new idea of string theory.
Deep inside any of these particles, there is something else.
This something else is this dancing filament of energy.
It looks like a vibrating string -- that's where the idea, string theory comes from.
And just like the vibrating strings that you just saw in a cello can vibrate in different patterns, these can also vibrate in different patterns.
They don't produce different musical notes.
Rather, they produce the different particles making up the world around us.
So if these ideas are correct, this is what the ultra-microscopic landscape of the universe looks like.
It's built up of a huge number of these little tiny filaments of vibrating energy, vibrating in different frequencies.
The different frequencies produce the different particles.
The different particles are responsible for all the richness in the world around us.
And there you see unification, because matter particles, electrons and quarks, radiation particles, photons, gravitons, are all built up from one entity.
So matter and the forces of nature all are put together under the rubric of vibrating strings.
And that's what we mean by a unified theory.
Now here is the catch.
When you study the mathematics of string theory, you find that it doesn't work in a universe that just has three dimensions of space.
It doesn't work in a universe with four dimensions of space, nor five, nor six.
Finally, you can study the equations, and show that it works only in a universe that has 10 dimensions of space and one dimension of time.
It leads us right back to this idea of Kaluza and Klein -- that our world, when appropriately described, has more dimensions than the ones that we see.
Now you might think about that and say, well, OK, you know, if you have extra dimensions, and they're really tightly curled up, yeah, perhaps we won't see them, if they're small enough.
But if there's a little tiny civilization of green people walking around down there, and you make them small enough, and we won't see them either. That is true.
One of the other predictions of string theory -- no, that's not one of the other predictions of string theory.
(Laughter) But it raises the question: are we just trying to hide away these extra dimensions, or do they tell us something about the world?
In the remaining time, I'd like to tell you two features of them.
First is, many of us believe that these extra dimensions hold the answer to what perhaps is the deepest question in theoretical physics, theoretical science.
And that question is this: when we look around the world, as scientists have done for the last hundred years, there appear to be about 20 numbers that really describe our universe.
These are numbers like the mass of the particles, like electrons and quarks, the strength of gravity, the strength of the electromagnetic force -- a list of about 20 numbers that have been measured with incredible precision, but nobody has an explanation for why the numbers have the particular values that they do.
Now, does string theory offer an answer?
Not yet.
But we believe the answer for why those numbers have the values they do may rely on the form of the extra dimensions.
And the wonderful thing is, if those numbers had any other values than the known ones, the universe, as we know it, wouldn't exist.
This is a deep question.
Why are those numbers so finely tuned to allow stars to shine and planets to form, when we recognize that if you fiddle with those numbers -- if I had 20 dials up here and I let you come up and fiddle with those numbers, almost any fiddling makes the universe disappear.
So can we explain those 20 numbers?
And string theory suggests that those 20 numbers have to do with the extra dimensions.
Let me show you how.
So when we talk about the extra dimensions in string theory, it's not one extra dimension, as in the older ideas of Kaluza and Klein.
This is what string theory says about the extra dimensions.
They have a very rich, intertwined geometry.
This is an example of something known as a Calabi-Yau shape -- name isn't all that important.
But, as you can see, the extra dimensions fold in on themselves and intertwine in a very interesting shape, interesting structure.
And the idea is that if this is what the extra dimensions look like, then the microscopic landscape of our universe all around us would look like this on the tiniest of scales.
When you swing your hand, you'd be moving around these extra dimensions over and over again, but they're so small that we wouldn't know it.
So what is the physical implication, though, relevant to those 20 numbers?
Consider this. If you look at the instrument, a French horn, notice that the vibrations of the airstreams are affected by the shape of the instrument.
Now in string theory, all the numbers are reflections of the way strings can vibrate.
So just as those airstreams are affected by the twists and turns in the instrument, strings themselves will be affected by the vibrational patterns in the geometry within which they are moving.
So let me bring some strings into the story.
And if you watch these little fellows vibrating around -- they'll be there in a second -- right there, notice that they way they vibrate is affected by the geometry of the extra dimensions.
So, if we knew exactly what the extra dimensions look like -- we don't yet, but if we did -- we should be able to calculate the allowed notes, the allowed vibrational patterns.
And if we could calculate the allowed vibrational patterns, we should be able to calculate those 20 numbers.
And if the answer that we get from our calculations agrees with the values of those numbers that have been determined through detailed and precise experimentation, this in many ways would be the first fundamental explanation for why the structure of the universe is the way it is.
Now, the second issue that I want to finish up with is: how might we test for these extra dimensions more directly?
Is this just an interesting mathematical structure that might be able to explain some previously unexplained features of the world, or can we actually test for these extra dimensions?
And we think -- and this is, I think, very exciting -- that in the next five years or so we may be able to test for the existence of these extra dimensions.
Here's how it goes. In CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, a machine is being built called the Large Hadron Collider.
It's a machine that will send particles around a tunnel, opposite directions, near the speed of light.
Every so often those particles will be aimed at each other, so there's a head-on collision.
The hope is that if the collision has enough energy, it may eject some of the debris from the collision from our dimensions, forcing it to enter into the other dimensions.
How would we know it?
Well, we'll measure the amount of energy after the collision, compare it to the amount of energy before, and if there's less energy after the collision than before, this will be evidence that the energy has drifted away.
And if it drifts away in the right pattern that we can calculate, this will be evidence that the extra dimensions are there.
Let me show you that idea visually.
So, imagine we have a certain kind of particle called a graviton -- that's the kind of debris we expect to be ejected out, if the extra dimensions are real.
But here's how the experiment will go.
You take these particles. You slam them together.
You slam them together, and if we are right, some of the energy of that collision will go into debris that flies off into these extra dimensions.
So this is the kind of experiment that we'll be looking at in the next five, seven to 10 years or so.
And if this experiment bears fruit, if we see that kind of particle ejected by noticing that there's less energy in our dimensions than when we began, this will show that the extra dimensions are real.
And to me this is a really remarkable story, and a remarkable opportunity. Going back to Newton with absolute space -- didn't provide anything but an arena, a stage in which the events of the universe take place.
Einstein comes along and says, well, space and time can warp and curve -- that's what gravity is.
And now string theory comes along and says, yes, gravity, quantum mechanics, electromagnetism, all together in one package, but only if the universe has more dimensions than the ones that we see.
And this is an experiment that may test for them in our lifetime.
Amazing possibility.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
We have historical records that allow us to know how the ancient Greeks dressed, how they lived, how they fought ...
but how did they think?
One natural idea is that the deepest aspects of human thought -- our ability to imagine, to be conscious, to dream -- have always been the same.
Another possibility is that the social transformations that have shaped our culture may have also changed the structural columns of human thought.
We may all have different opinions about this.
Actually, it's a long-standing philosophical debate.
But is this question even amenable to science?
Here I'd like to propose that in the same way we can reconstruct how the ancient Greek cities looked just based on a few bricks, that the writings of a culture are the archaeological records, the fossils, of human thought.
And in fact, doing some form of psychological analysis of some of the most ancient books of human culture, Julian Jaynes came up in the '70s with a very wild and radical hypothesis: that only 3,000 years ago, humans were what today we would call schizophrenics.
And he made this claim based on the fact that the first humans described in these books behaved consistently, in different traditions and in different places of the world, as if they were hearing and obeying voices that they perceived as coming from the Gods, or from the muses ...
what today we would call hallucinations.
And only then, as time went on, they began to recognize that they were the creators, the owners of these inner voices.
And with this, they gained introspection: the ability to think about their own thoughts.
So Jaynes's theory is that consciousness, at least in the way we perceive it today, where we feel that we are the pilots of our own existence -- is a quite recent cultural development.
And this theory is quite spectacular, but it has an obvious problem which is that it's built on just a few and very specific examples.
So the question is whether the theory that introspection built up in human history only about 3,000 years ago can be examined in a quantitative and objective manner.
And the problem of how to go about this is quite obvious.
It's not like Plato woke up one day and then he wrote, "Hello, I'm Plato, and as of today, I have a fully introspective consciousness."
(Laughter) And this tells us actually what is the essence of the problem.
We need to find the emergence of a concept that's never said.
The word introspection does not appear a single time in the books we want to analyze.
So our way to solve this is to build the space of words.
This is a huge space that contains all words in such a way that the distance between any two of them is indicative of how closely related they are.
So for instance, you want the words "dog" and "cat" to be very close together, but the words "grapefruit" and "logarithm" to be very far away.
And this has to be true for any two words within the space.
And there are different ways that we can construct the space of words.
One is just asking the experts, a bit like we do with dictionaries.
Another possibility is following the simple assumption that when two words are related, they tend to appear in the same sentences, in the same paragraphs, in the same documents, more often than would be expected just by pure chance.
And this simple hypothesis, this simple method, with some computational tricks that have to do with the fact that this is a very complex and high-dimensional space, turns out to be quite effective.
And just to give you a flavor of how well this works, this is the result we get when we analyze this for some familiar words.
And you can see first that words automatically organize into semantic neighborhoods.
So you get the fruits, the body parts, the computer parts, the scientific terms and so on.
The algorithm also identifies that we organize concepts in a hierarchy.
So for instance, you can see that the scientific terms break down into two subcategories of the astronomic and the physics terms.
And then there are very fine things.
For instance, the word astronomy, which seems a bit bizarre where it is, is actually exactly where it should be, between what it is, an actual science, and between what it describes, the astronomical terms.
And we could go on and on with this.
Actually, if you stare at this for a while, and you just build random trajectories, you will see that it actually feels a bit like doing poetry.
And this is because, in a way, walking in this space is like walking in the mind.
And the last thing is that this algorithm also identifies what are our intuitions, of which words should lead in the neighborhood of introspection.
So for instance, words such as "self," "guilt," "reason," "emotion," are very close to "introspection," but other words, such as "red," "football," "candle," "banana," are just very far away.
And so once we've built the space, the question of the history of introspection, or of the history of any concept which before could seem abstract and somehow vague, becomes concrete -- becomes amenable to quantitative science.
All that we have to do is take the books, we digitize them, and we take this stream of words as a trajectory and project them into the space, and then we ask whether this trajectory spends significant time circling closely to the concept of introspection.
And with this, we could analyze the history of introspection in the ancient Greek tradition, for which we have the best available written record.
So what we did is we took all the books -- we just ordered them by time -- for each book we take the words and we project them to the space, and then we ask for each word how close it is to introspection, and we just average that.
And then we ask whether, as time goes on and on, these books get closer, and closer and closer to the concept of introspection.
And this is exactly what happens in the ancient Greek tradition.
So you can see that for the oldest books in the Homeric tradition, there is a small increase with books getting closer to introspection.
But about four centuries before Christ, this starts ramping up very rapidly to an almost five-fold increase of books getting closer, and closer and closer to the concept of introspection.
And one of the nice things about this is that now we can ask whether this is also true in a different, independent tradition.
So we just ran this same analysis on the Judeo-Christian tradition, and we got virtually the same pattern.
Again, you see a small increase for the oldest books in the Old Testament, and then it increases much more rapidly in the new books of the New Testament.
And then we get the peak of introspection in "The Confessions of Saint Augustine," about four centuries after Christ.
And this was very important, because Saint Augustine had been recognized by scholars, philologists, historians, as one of the founders of introspection.
Actually, some believe him to be the father of modern psychology.
So our algorithm, which has the virtue of being quantitative, of being objective, and of course of being extremely fast -- it just runs in a fraction of a second -- can capture some of the most important conclusions of this long tradition of investigation.
And this is in a way one of the beauties of science, which is that now this idea can be translated and generalized to a whole lot of different domains.
So in the same way that we asked about the past of human consciousness, maybe the most challenging question we can pose to ourselves is whether this can tell us something about the future of our own consciousness.
To put it more precisely, whether the words we say today can tell us something of where our minds will be in a few days, in a few months or a few years from now.
And in the same way many of us are now wearing sensors that detect our heart rate, our respiration, our genes, on the hopes that this may help us prevent diseases, we can ask whether monitoring and analyzing the words we speak, we tweet, we email, we write, can tell us ahead of time whether something may go wrong with our minds.
And with Guillermo Cecchi, who has been my brother in this adventure, we took on this task.
And we did so by analyzing the recorded speech of 34 young people who were at a high risk of developing schizophrenia.
And so what we did is, we measured speech at day one, and then we asked whether the properties of the speech could predict, within a window of almost three years, the future development of psychosis.
But despite our hopes, we got failure after failure.
There was just not enough information in semantics to predict the future organization of the mind.
It was good enough to distinguish between a group of schizophrenics and a control group, a bit like we had done for the ancient texts, but not to predict the future onset of psychosis.
But then we realized that maybe the most important thing was not so much what they were saying, but how they were saying it.
More specifically, it was not in which semantic neighborhoods the words were, but how far and fast they jumped from one semantic neighborhood to the other one.
And so we came up with this measure, which we termed semantic coherence, which essentially measures the persistence of speech within one semantic topic, within one semantic category.
And it turned out to be that for this group of 34 people, the algorithm based on semantic coherence could predict, with 100 percent accuracy, who developed psychosis and who will not.
And this was something that could not be achieved -- not even close -- with all the other existing clinical measures.
And I remember vividly, while I was working on this, I was sitting at my computer and I saw a bunch of tweets by Polo -- Polo had been my first student back in Buenos Aires, and at the time he was living in New York.
And there was something in this tweets -- I could not tell exactly what because nothing was said explicitly -- but I got this strong hunch, this strong intuition, that something was going wrong.
So I picked up the phone, and I called Polo, and in fact he was not feeling well.
And this simple fact, that reading in between the lines, I could sense, through words, his feelings, was a simple, but very effective way to help.
What I tell you today is that we're getting close to understanding how we can convert this intuition that we all have, that we all share, into an algorithm.
And in doing so, we may be seeing in the future a very different form of mental health, based on objective, quantitative and automated analysis of the words we write, of the words we say.
Gracias.
(Applause)
Just between your chest and abdomen is where you’ll find one of the most important muscles you probably didn't know you had: the lower esophageal sphincter, or LES.
When functioning properly, this ring of tissue plays a crucial role in helping us eat.
But when the LES malfunctions, it becomes the main player in heartburn --a searing, sometimes sour-tasting chest-spasm that many people will experience at some point in their lives.
We know that humans have been battling heartburn for hundreds, if not thousands of years.
But recently the incidence has risen, making it a common stomach complaint worldwide.
When the symptoms of heartburn become more more regular and intense —such as twice a week or more-- it’s diagnosed as Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease, or GERD.
But what causes this problem, and how can it be stopped?
Heartburn starts in an area called the gastroesophageal junction, where the LES resides.
This smooth, muscular ring of the LES is moderated by an intricate tree of nerve roots that connect to the brain, the heart, and the lungs.
After food enters the stomach from the esophagus, the muscle’s task is to stop it from surging back up again.
The LES contracts, squeezing the stomach entrance and creating a high pressure zone that prevents digestive acids from seeping out.
But if the LES relaxes at the wrong moment or gradually weakens, it becomes like a faulty, ill-fitting lid, causing the area to depressurize.
That allows burning stomach acid-- and even chunks of food--to spurt into the esophagus, sometimes going as far up as the mouth.
The cause of all this internal drama has long been put down to diet.
Foods like caffeine and peppermint contain ingredients that may have a relaxing affect on the LES, which makes it incapable of doing its job.
Other acidic foods, like citrus and tomatoes, can worsen irritation of the esophagus when they leach out with stomach acid.
Carbonated beverages can similarly bubble up in the stomach, forcing open the valve.
But researchers have discovered that food isn’t the only trigger.
Smoking poses a risk, because the nicotine in cigarettes relaxes the LES.
Consuming excessive amounts of alcohol may have a similar effect.
Pregnant women often experience more heartburn due to the pressure of a growing baby on their stomachs.
and the levels of certain hormones in their bodies.
Obesity can cause hernias that disrupt the anti-reflux barrier of the gastroesophageal junction that normally protects against heartburn.
Numerous medications, including those for asthma, high blood pressure, birth control, and depression can also have unintended effects on the LES.
An occasional bout of heartburn isn't necessarily something to worry about.
But, if heartburn starts happening regularly, it can weaken the LES muscle over time, letting more and more acid escape.
And if it goes untreated, this can cause bigger problems.
Over time, constant acid leakage from heartburn may form scar tissue which narrows the esophageal tube, making it harder to swallow food.
Ongoing reflux can also damage the cells lining the esophagus--a rare condition called Barrett’s esophagus, which can elevate the risk of esophageal cancer.
Luckily, heartburn is often treatable with a range of medicines that can help neutralize or reduce stomach acid.
In extreme cases, some people have surgery to tighten the LES to minimize their distress.
But we can often stop heartburn before it reaches that point.
Reducing the consumption of certain foods, not smoking, and maintaining a healthy weight can all dramatically reduce reflux.
With proper care we can help our LES’s keep the chemical fountain of our stomachs in proper order and avoid having to feel the burn.
I consider it my life's mission to convey the urgency of climate change through my work.
I've traveled north to the Arctic to the capture the unfolding story of polar melt, and south to the Equator to document the subsequent rising seas.
Most recently, I visited the icy coast of Greenland and the low-lying islands of the Maldives, connecting two seemingly disparate but equally endangered parts of our planet.
My drawings explore moments of transition, turbulence and tranquility in the landscape, allowing viewers to emotionally connect with a place you might never have the chance to visit.
I choose to convey the beauty as opposed to the devastation.
If you can experience the sublimity of these landscapes, perhaps you'll be inspired to protect and preserve them.
Behavioral psychology tells us that we take action and make decisions based on our emotions above all else.
And studies have shown that art impacts our emotions more effectively than a scary news report.
Experts predict ice-free Arctic summers as early as 2020.
And sea levels are likely to rise between two and ten feet by century's end.
I have dedicated my career to illuminating these projections with an accessible medium, one that moves us in a way that statistics may not.
My process begins with traveling to the places at the forefront of climate change.
On-site, I take thousands of photographs.
Back in the studio, I work from both my memory of the experience and the photographs to create very large-scale compositions, sometimes over 10 feet wide.
I draw with soft pastel, which is dry like charcoal, but colors.
I consider my work drawings but others call them painting.
I cringe, though, when I'm referred to as a "finger painter."
(Laughter) But I don't use any tools and I have always used my fingers and palms to manipulate the pigment on the paper.
Drawing is a form of meditation for me.
It quiets my mind.
I don't perceive what I'm drawing as ice or water.
Instead, the image is stripped down to its most basic form of color and shape.
Once the piece is complete, I can finally experience the composition as a whole, as an iceberg floating through glassy water, or a wave cresting with foam.
On average, a piece this size takes me about, as you can see, 10 seconds.
(Laughter) (Applause) Really, more like 200 hours, 250 hours for something that size.
But I've been drawing ever since I could hold a crayon, really.
My mom was an artist, and growing up, we always had art supplies all over the house.
My mother's love of photography propelled her to the most remote regions of the earth, and my family and I were fortunate enough to join and support her on these adventures.
We rode camels in Northern Africa and mushed on dog sleds near the North Pole.
In August of 2012, I led my first expedition, taking a group of artists and scholars up the northwest coast of Greenland.
My mother was originally supposed to lead this trip.
She and I were in the early stages of planning, as we had intended to go together, when she fell victim to a brain tumor.
The cancer quickly took over her body and mind, and she passed away six months later.
During the months of her illness, though, her dedication to the expedition never wavered, and I made a promise to carry out her final journey.
My mother's passion for the Arctic echoed through my experience in Greenland, and I felt the power and the fragility of the landscape.
The sheer size of the icebergs is humbling.
The ice fields are alive with movement and sound in a way that I never expected.
I expanded the scale of my compositions to give you that same sense of awe that I experienced.
Yet, while the grandeur of the ice is evident, so, too, is its vulnerability.
From our boat, I could see the ice sweating under the unseasonably warm sun.
We had a chance to visit many of the Inuit communities in Greenland that now face huge challenges.
The locals spoke to me of vast areas of sea ice that are no longer freezing over as they once did.
And without ice, their hunting and harvesting grounds are severely diminished, threatening their way of life and survival.
The melting glaciers in Greenland are one of the largest contributing factors to rising sea levels, which have already begun to drown some of our world's lowest-lying islands.
One year after my trip to Greenland, I visited the Maldives, the lowest and flattest country in the entire world.
While I was there, I collected images and inspiration for a new body of work: drawings of waves lapping on the coast of a nation that could be entirely underwater within this century.
Devastating events happen every day on scales both global and personal.
When I was in Greenland, I scattered my mother's ashes amidst the melting ice.
Now she remains a part of the landscape she loved so much, even as it, too, passes and takes on new form.
Among the many gifts my mother gave me was the ability to focus on the positive, rather than the negative.
My drawings celebrate the beauty of what we all stand to lose.
I hope they can serve as records of sublime landscapes in flux, documenting the transition and inspiring our global community to take action for the future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What do you see?
Most of you see a barbershop, but I see an opportunity: an opportunity for health, an opportunity for health equity.
For black men, the barbershop is not just a place where you get your hair cut or your beard trimmed.
No, it's much more than that.
Historically, the barbershop has been a safe haven for black men.
It's a place where we go for friendship, solidarity and solace.
It's a place where we go to get away from the stress of the grind of work and sometimes home life.
It's a place where we don't have to worry about how we're being perceived by the outside world.
It's a place where we don't feel threatened, or threatening.
It's a place of loyalty and trust.
For that reason, it's one of the few places where we can fearlessly be ourselves and just ... talk.
The talk, the shop talk, the conversation, that is the essence of the black barbershop.
I can remember going to the barbershop with my dad as a kid.
We went to Mr. Mike's barbershop every other Saturday.
And like clockwork, the same group of men would be there every time we went, either waiting on their favorite barber or just soaking up the atmosphere.
I can remember the jovial greeting that warmly welcomed us every time we went.
"Hey Rev," they would say to my dad.
He's a local pastor, and they treated him like a celebrity.
"Hey young fella, how you doing?"
they would say to me, making me feel just as special.
I remember the range of the conversations was immense.
The men would talk about politics and sports and music and world news, national news, neighborhood news.
There was some talk about women and what it was like to be a black man in America.
But many times they also talked about health.
The conversations about health were lengthy and deep.
The men often recounted their doctor's recommendations to cut salt in their diet or to eat less fried foods or to stop smoking or to reduce stress.
They talked about the different ways you could reduce stress, like simplifying one's love life -- (Laughter) all ways to treat high blood pressure.
There's a lot of talk about high blood pressure in the barbershop.
That's because almost 40 percent of black men have it.
That means that almost every single black man either has high blood pressure or knows a black man who has it.
Sometimes, those conversations in the barbershop would be about what happens when high blood pressure is not adequately addressed.
"Say, did you hear about Jimmy? He had a stroke."
"Did you hear about Eddie? He died last week.
Massive heart attack.
He was 50."
More black men die from high blood pressure than from anything else, even though decades of medical wisdom and science have demonstrated that death from high blood pressure can be prevented with timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
So why is high blood pressure so differentially deadly for black men?
Because too often, high blood pressure is either untreated or under-treated in black men, in part because of our lower engagement with the primary healthcare system.
Black men, in particular those with high blood pressure, are less likely to have a primary care doctor than other groups.
But why?
Some of our earliest research on black men's health revealed that for many, the doctor's office is associated with fear, mistrust, disrespect, and unnecessary unpleasantness.
The doctor's office is only a place that you go when you don't feel well.
And when you do go, you might wait for hours only to get the run-around and to be evaluated by a stoic figure in a white coat who only has 10 minutes to give you and who doesn't value the talk.
So it's no wonder that some men don't want to be bothered and skip going to the doctor altogether, especially if they feel fine.
But herein lies the problem.
You can feel just fine while high blood pressure ravages your most vital organs.
This is Denny Moe, owner of Denny Moe's Superstar Barbershop in Harlem.
I've been lucky enough to have Denny as my barber for the last eight years.
He said to me once, "Hey Doc, you know, lots of black men trust their barbers more than they trust their doctors."
This was stunning to me, at first, but not so much when you think about it.
Black men have been with their current barbers on average as long as I've been with Denny, about eight years.
And black men see their barbers about every two weeks.
Not only do you trust your barber with your look and with your style, but you also trust him with your secrets and sometimes your life.
Denny, like many barbers, is more than just an artist, a businessman and confidant.
He's a leader and a passionate advocate for the well-being of his community.
The very first time I walked into Denny Moe's shop, he wasn't just cutting hair.
He was also orchestrating a voter registration drive to give a voice to his customers and his community.
With this kind of activism, and community investment that typifies the black barbershop, of course the barbershop is a perfect place to talk about high blood pressure and other health concerns in the community.
First, the barbershop is not a medical setting, and so it doesn't have all the negative psychological baggage that comes along with that.
When you're in a barbershop, you're in your territory, and you're among friends who share your history, your struggle and your health risks.
Second, because the barbershop is a place of connection, loyalty and trust, it's a place where you're more open to have a conversation about health and especially about high blood pressure.
After all, conversations about high blood pressure have all the elements of great shop talk: stress and high blood pressure, food and high blood pressure, relationships and high blood pressure, and yes, what it's like to be a black man in America and high blood pressure.
But you can do more than just talk about high blood pressure in the barbershop.
You can concretely take action.
Here we have an opportunity to partner with the Denny Moe's of the world and empower communities to address the health inequities that uniquely affect it.
When high blood pressure screening expanded from clinics and hospitals to communities in the 1960s and '70s, black physicians like Dr. Eli Saunders in Baltimore and Dr. Keith Ferdinand in New Orleans were at the forefront of bringing health promotion to community hubs in urban black neighborhoods.
These pioneers paved the way for my professional journey with barbershops and health, which began in Chicago in medical school.
The very first research project that I worked on as a medical student was to help design healthcare interventions that would appeal to black men.
We conducted about a dozen focus groups with a broad cross-section of black men, and we learned that for them, being healthy was as much about being perceived as healthy as it was about feeling healthy, and that feeling good went hand in hand with looking good.
This work led to the development of Project Brotherhood, a community clinic founded by Dr. Eric Whitaker that provided tailored healthcare to black men.
Part of this tailored care involved having a barber on the premises to reward the men who came for needed healthcare with a free haircut, to let the men know that we, too, valued how they looked as well as how they felt, and that what was important to them was also important to us.
But while there's only one Project Brotherhood, there are thousands of black barbershops where the intersection of health and haircuts can be cultivated.
The next stop on my journey was Dallas, Texas, where we learned that barbers were not only willing but fully able to roll up their sleeves and participate in delivering needed health services to improve the health of their customers and their community.
We teamed up with an amazing cadre of black barbers and taught them how to measure blood pressure and how to counsel their customers and refer them to doctors to help manage high blood pressure.
The barbers were not only willing to do it but they were damn good at it.
Over a three-year period, the barbers measured thousands of blood pressures resulting in hundreds of black men being referred to doctors for medical care of their high blood pressure.
These barber-doctor partnerships resulted in a 20 percent increase in the number of men who were able to achieve target blood pressure levels and a three-point drop, on average, in the blood pressure of each participant.
If we were to extrapolate that three point drop to every single black man with high blood pressure in America, we would prevent 800 heart attacks, 500 strokes and 900 deaths from high blood pressure in just one year.
And our experience with barbershops has been no different in New York City, where my journey has currently led me.
With an incredible team of diverse research assistants, community health workers and volunteers, we've been able to partner with over 200 barbershops and other trusted community venues to reach over 7,000 older black men.
And we've offered high blood pressure screening and counseling to each and every one of them.
Thanks to Denny Moe and the myriad other barbers and community leaders who shared the vision of opportunity and empowerment to make a difference in their communities, we've been able to not only lower blood pressure in our participants, but we've also been able to impact other health indicators.
So what do you see?
What is your barbershop?
Where is that place for you where people who are affected by a unique problem can meet a unique solution?
When you find that place, see the opportunity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was a Marine with 1/1 Weapons Company, 81's platoon, out in Camp Pendleton, California.
Oorah!
Audience: Oorah!
(Laughter) I joined a few months after September 11, feeling like I think most people in the country did at the time, filled with a sense of patriotism and retribution and the desire to do something -- that, coupled with that fact that I wasn't doing anything.
I was 17, just graduated from high school that past summer, living in the back room of my parents' house paying rent, in the small town I was raised in in Northern Indiana, called Mishawaka.
I can spell that later for people who are interested -- (Laughter) Mishawaka is many good things but cultural hub of the world it is not, so my only exposure to theater and film was limited to the plays I did in high school and Blockbuster Video, may she rest in peace.
(Laughter) I was serious enough about acting that I auditioned for Juilliard when I was a senior in high school, didn't get in, determined college wasn't for me and applied nowhere else, which was a genius move.
I also did that Hail Mary LA acting odyssey that I always heard stories about, of actors moving to LA with, like, seven dollars and finding work and successful careers.
I got as far as Amarillo, Texas, before my car broke down.
I spent all my money repairing it, finally made it to Santa Monica -- not even LA -- stayed for 48 hours wandering the beach, basically, got in my car, drove home, thus ending my acting career, so -- (Laughter) Seventeen, Mishawaka ...
parents' house, paying rent, selling vacuums ...
telemarketing, cutting grass at the local 4-H fairgrounds.
This was my world going into September, 2001.
So after the 11th, and feeling an overwhelming sense of duty, and just being pissed off in general -- at myself, my parents, the government; not having confidence, not having a respectable job, my shitty mini-fridge that I just drove to California and back -- I joined the Marine Corps and loved it. I loved being a Marine.
It's one of the things I'm most proud of having done in my life.
Firing weapons was cool, driving and detonating expensive things was great.
But I found I loved the Marine Corps the most for the thing I was looking for the least when I joined, which was the people: these weird dudes -- a motley crew of characters from a cross section of the United States -- that on the surface I had nothing in common with.
And over time, all the political and personal bravado that led me to the military dissolved, and for me, the Marine Corps became synonymous with my friends.
And then, a few years into my service and months away from deploying to Iraq, I dislocated my sternum in a mountain-biking accident, and had to be medically separated.
Those never in the military may find this hard to understand, but being told I wasn't getting deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan was very devastating for me.
I have a very clear image of leaving the base hospital on a stretcher and my entire platoon is waiting outside to see if I was OK.
And then, suddenly, I was a civilian again.
I knew I wanted to give acting another shot, because -- again, this is me -- I thought all civilian problems are small compared to the military.
I mean, what can you really bitch about now, you know?
"It's hot.
Someone should turn on the air conditioner."
"This coffee line is too long."
I was a Marine, I knew how to survive.
I'd go to New York and become an actor.
If things didn't work out, I'd live in Central Park and dumpster-dive behind Panera Bread.
(Laughter) I re-auditioned for Juilliard and this time I was lucky, I got in.
But I was surprised by how complex the transition was from military to civilian.
And I was relatively healthy; I can't imagine going through that process on top of a mental or physical injury.
But regardless, it was difficult.
In part, because I was in acting school -- I couldn't justify going to voice and speech class, throwing imaginary balls of energy at the back of the room, doing acting exercises where I gave birth to myself -- (Laughter) while my friends were serving without me overseas.
But also, because I didn't know how to apply the things I learned in the military to a civilian context.
I mean that both practically and emotionally.
Practically, I had to get a job.
And I was an Infantry Marine, where you're shooting machine guns and firing mortars.
There's not a lot of places you can put those skills in the civilian world.
(Laughter) Emotionally, I struggled to find meaning.
In the military, everything has meaning.
Everything you do is either steeped in tradition or has a practical purpose.
You can't smoke in the field because you don't want to give away your position.
You don't touch your face -- you have to maintain a personal level of health and hygiene.
You face this way when "Colors" plays, out of respect for people who went before you.
Walk this way, talk this way because of this.
Your uniform is maintained to the inch.
How diligently you followed those rules spoke volumes about the kind of Marine you were.
Your rank said something about your history and the respect you had earned.
In the civilian world there's no rank.
Here you're just another body, and I felt like I constantly had to prove my worth all over again.
And the respect civilians were giving me while I was in uniform didn't exist when I was out of it.
There didn't seem to be a ...
a sense of community, whereas in the military, I felt this sense of community.
How often in the civilian world are you put in a life-or-death situation with your closest friends and they constantly demonstrate that they're not going to abandon you?
And meanwhile, at acting school ...
(Laughter) I was really, for the first time, discovering playwrights and characters and plays that had nothing to do with the military, but were somehow describing my military experience in a way that before to me was indescribable.
And I felt myself becoming less aggressive as I was able to put words to feelings for the first time and realizing what a valuable tool that was.
And when I was reflecting on my time in the military, I wasn't first thinking on the stereotypical drills and discipline and pain of it; but rather, the small, intimate human moments, moments of great feeling: friends going AWOL because they missed their families, friends getting divorced, grieving together, celebrating together, all within the backdrop of the military.
I saw my friends battling these circumstances, and I watched the anxiety it produced in them and me, not being able to express our feelings about it.
The military and theater communities are actually very similar.
You have a group of people trying to accomplish a mission greater than themselves; it's not about you.
You have a role, you have to know your role within that team.
Every team has a leader or director; sometimes they're smart, sometimes they're not.
You're forced to be intimate with complete strangers in a short amount of time; the self-discipline, the self-maintenance.
I thought, how great would it be to create a space that combined these two seemingly dissimilar communities, that brought entertainment to a group of people that, considering their occupation, could handle something a bit more thought-provoking than the typical mandatory-fun events that I remember being "volun-told" to go to in the military -- (Laughter) all well-intended but slightly offensive events, like "Win a Date with a San Diego Chargers Cheerleader," where you answer a question about pop culture, and if you get it right you win a date, which was a chaperoned walk around the parade deck with this already married, pregnant cheerleader -- (Laughter) Nothing against cheerleaders, I love cheerleaders.
The point is more, how great would it be to have theater presented through characters that were accessible without being condescending.
So we started this nonprofit called Arts in the Armed Forces, where we tried to do that, tried to join these two seemingly dissimilar communities.
We pick a play or select monologues from contemporary American plays that are diverse in age and race like a military audience is, grab a group of incredible theater-trained actors, arm them with incredible material, keep production value as minimal as possible -- no sets, no costumes, no lights, just reading it -- to throw all the emphasis on the language and to show that theater can be created at any setting.
It's a powerful thing, getting in a room with complete strangers and reminding ourselves of our humanity, and that self-expression is just as valuable a tool as a rifle on your shoulder.
And for an organization like the military, that prides itself on having acronyms for acronyms, you can get lost in the sauce when it comes to explaining a collective experience.
And I can think of no better community to arm with a new means of self-expression than those protecting our country.
We've gone all over the United States and the world, from Walter Reed in Bethesda, Maryland, to Camp Pendleton, to Camp Arifjan in Kuwait, to USAG Bavaria, on- and off-Broadway theaters in New York.
And for the performing artists we bring, it's a window into a culture they otherwise would not have had exposure to.
And for the military, it's the exact same.
And in doing this for the past six years, I'm always reminded that acting is many things.
It's a craft, it's a political act, it's a business, it's -- whatever adjective is most applicable to you.
But it's also a service.
I didn't get to finish mine, so whenever I get to be of service to this ultimate service industry, the military, for me, again -- there's not many things better than that.
Thank you.
(Applause) We're going to be doing a piece from Marco Ramirez, called "I am not Batman."
An incredible actor and good friend of mine, Jesse Perez, is going to be reading, and Matt Johnson, who I just met a couple hours ago.
They're doing it together for the first time, so we'll see how it goes.
Jesse Perez and Matt Johnson.
(Applause) Jesse Perez: It's the middle of the night and the sky is glowing like mad, radioactive red.
And if you squint, you can maybe see the moon through a thick layer of cigarette smoke and airplane exhaust that covers the whole city, like a mosquito net that won't let the angels in.
(Drum beat) And if you look up high enough, you can see me standing on the edge of an 87-story building.
And up there, a place for gargoyles and broken clock towers that have stayed still and dead for maybe like 100 years, up there is me.
(Beat) And I'm frickin' Batman.
(Beat) And I gots Batmobiles and batarangs and frickin' bat caves, like, for real.
And all it takes is a broom closet or a back room or a fire escape, and Danny's hand-me-down jeans are gone.
And my navy blue polo shirt, the one that looks kinda good on me but has that hole on it near the butt from when it got snagged on the chain-link fence behind Arturo's but it isn't even a big deal because I tuck that part in and it's, like, all good.
And I get like, like ... transformational.
(Beat) And nobody pulls out a belt and whips Batman for talkin' back.
(Beat) Or for not talkin' back.
And nobody calls Batman simple or stupid or skinny.
And nobody fires Batman's brother from the Eastern Taxi Company 'cause they was making cutbacks, neither.
'Cause they got nothing but respect.
And not like afraid-respect, just, like, respect-respect.
(Laughter) 'Cause nobody's afraid of you.
'Cause Batman doesn't mean nobody no harm.
(Beat) Ever. (Double beat) 'Cause all Batman really wants to do is save people and maybe pay abuela's bills one day and die happy.
And maybe get, like, mad-famous for real.
(Laughter) Oh -- and kill the Joker.
(Drum roll) Tonight, like most nights, I'm all alone.
And I'm watchin' and I'm waitin' like a eagle or like a -- no, yeah, like a eagle.
(Laughter) And my cape is flapping in the wind cause it's frickin' long and my pointy ears are on, and that mask that covers like half my face is on, too, and I got, like, bulletproof stuff all in my chest so no one can hurt me.
And nobody -- nobody! -- is gonna come between Batman ...
and justice.
(Drums) (Laughter) From where I am, I can hear everything.
(Silence) Somewhere in the city, there's a old lady picking Styrofoam leftovers up out of a trash can and she's putting a piece of sesame chicken someone spit out into her own mouth.
And somewhere there's a doctor with a wack haircut in a black lab coat trying to find a cure for the diseases that are gonna make us all extinct for real one day.
And somewhere there's a man, a man in a janitor's uniform, stumbling home drunk and dizzy after spending half his paycheck on 40-ounce bottles of twist-off beer, and the other half on a four-hour visit to some lady's house on a street where the lights have all been shot out by people who'd rather do what they do in this city in the dark.
And half a block away from janitor man, there's a group of good-for-nothings who don't know no better, waiting for janitor man with rusted bicycle chains and imitation Louisville Sluggers, and if they don't find a cent on him, which they won't, they'll just pound at him till the muscles in their arms start burning, till there's no more teeth to crack out.
But they don't count on me.
They don't count on no Dark Knight, with a stomach full of grocery-store brand macaroni and cheese and cut-up Vienna sausages.
(Laughter) 'Cause they'd rather believe I don't exist.
And from 87 stories up, I can hear one of the good-for-nothings say, "Gimme the cash!" -- real fast like that, just, "Gimme me the fuckin' cash!"
And I see janitor man mumble something in drunk language and turn pale, and from 87 stories up, I can hear his stomach trying to hurl its way out his Dickies.
So I swoop down, like, mad-fast and I'm like darkness, I'm like, "Swoosh!"
And I throw a batarang at the one naked lightbulb.
(Cymbal) And they're all like, "Whoa, muthafucker!
Who just turned out the lights?"
(Laughter) "What's that over there?" "What?"
"Gimme me what you got, old man!"
"Did anybody hear that?"
"Hear what? There ain't nothing. No, really -- there ain't no bat!"
But then ...
one out of the three good-for-nothings gets it to the head -- pow!
And number two swings blindly into the dark cape before him, but before his fist hits anything, I grab a trash can lid and -- right in the gut!
And number one comes back with the jump kick, but I know judo karate, too, so I'm like -- (Drums) Twice!
(Drums) (Laughter) (Drums) But before I can do any more damage, suddenly we all hear a "click-click."
And suddenly everything gets quiet.
And the one good-for-nothing left standing grips a handgun and aims it straight up, like he's holding Jesus hostage, like he's threatening maybe to blow a hole in the moon.
And the good-for-nothing who got it to the head, who tried to jump-kick me, and the other good-for-nothing who got it in the gut, is both scrambling back away from the dark figure before 'em.
And the drunk man, the janitor man, is huddled in a corner, praying to Saint Anthony 'cause that's the only one he could remember.
(Double beat) And there's me: eyes glowing white, cape blowing softly in the wind.
(Beat) Bulletproof chest heaving, my heart beating right through it in a Morse code for: "Fuck with me just once come on just try."
And the one good-for-nothing left standing, the one with the handgun -- yeah, he laughs.
And he lowers his arm.
And he points it at me and gives the moon a break.
And he aims it right between my pointy ears, like goal posts and he's special teams.
And janitor man is still calling Saint Anthony, but he ain't pickin' up.
And for a second, it seems like ...
maybe I'm gonna lose.
Nah!
(Drums) Shoot! Shoot! Fwa-ka-ka!
"Don't kill me, man!"
Snap! Wrist crack! Neck! Slash!
Skin meets acid: "Ahhhhhhh!"
And he's on the floor and I'm standing over him and I got the gun in my hands now and I hate guns, I hate holding 'em 'cause I'm Batman.
And, asterisk: Batman don't like guns 'cause his parents got iced by guns a long time ago.
But for just a second, my eyes glow white, and I hold this thing for I could speak to the good-for-nothing in a language he maybe understands.
Click-click!
(Beat) And the good-for-nothings become good-for-disappearing into whatever toxic waste, chemical sludge shithole they crawled out of.
And it's just me and janitor man.
And I pick him up, and I wipe sweat and cheap perfume off his forehead.
And he begs me not to hurt him and I grab him tight by his janitor-man shirt collar, and I pull him to my face and he's taller than me but the cape helps, so he listens when I look him straight in the eyes.
And I say two words to him: "Go home."
And he does, checking behind his shoulder every 10 feet.
And I swoosh from building to building on his way there 'cause I know where he lives.
And I watch his hands tremble as he pulls out his key chain and opens the door to his building.
And I'm back in bed before he even walks in through the front door.
And I hear him turn on the faucet and pour himself a glass of warm tap water.
And he puts the glass back in the sink.
And I hear his footsteps.
And they get slower as they get to my room.
And he creaks my door open, like, mad-slow.
And he takes a step in, which he never does.
(Beat) And he's staring off into nowhere, his face, the color of sidewalks in summer.
And I act like I'm just waking up and I say, "Ah, what's up, Pop?"
And janitor man says nothing to me.
But I see in the dark, I see his arms go limp and his head turns back, like, towards me.
And he lifts it for I can see his face, for I could see his eyes.
And his cheeks is drippin', but not with sweat.
And he just stands there breathing, like he remembers my eyes glowing white, like he remembers my bulletproof chest, like he remembers he's my pop.
And for a long time I don't say nothin'.
And he turns around, hand on the doorknob.
And he ain't looking my way, but I hear him mumble two words to me: "I'm sorry."
And I lean over, and I open my window just a crack.
If you look up high enough, you could see me.
And from where I am -- (Cymbals) I could hear everything.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
Mounting his skinny steed, the protagonist of Don Quixote charges an army of giants.
In his eyes, it is his duty to vanquish these behemoths in the name of his beloved lady, Dulcinea.
However, this act of valor is ill conceived.
As his squire Sancho Panza explains to him time and again, these aren’t giants; they are merely windmills.
Don Quixote is undeterred, but his piercing lance is soon caught in their sails.
Never discouraged, the knight stands proudly, and becomes even more convinced of his mission.
This sequence encapsulates much of what is loved about Don Quixote, the epic, illogical, and soulful tale of Alonso Quijano, who becomes the clumsy but valiant Don Quixote of la Mancha, known as the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.
Originally published in two volumes, the narrative follows Don Quixote as he travels through central and northern Spain fighting the forces of evil.
Despite Don Quixote’s lofty imagination, his creator, Miguel de Cervantes, could never have imagined his book would become the best-selling novel of all time.
Barring 5 years as a soldier, and 5 more enslaved by pirates, Cervantes spent most of his life as a struggling poet and playwright.
It wasn’t until his late 50’s that he published his greatest creation: an epic satire of chivalry novels.
At this time, medieval books chronicling the adventures of knights and their moral code dominated European culture.
While Cervantes was a fan, he was weary of these repetitive tomes, which focused more on listing heroic feats than character development.
To challenge them, he wrote Don Quixote, the story of a hidalgo, or idle nobleman, who spends his days and nights reading chivalry novels.
Driven mad by these stories, he fashions himself a champion for the downtrodden.
Everyone in his village tries to convince him to give up his lunacy, going so far as to burn some of the lurid books in his personal library.
But Don Quixote is unstoppable.
He dresses up in old shining armor, mounts his skinny horse, and leaves his village in search of glory.
Cervantes’ novel unfolds as a collection of episodes detailing the mishaps of the valiant knight.
Yet unlike the chivalry books and perhaps all other prior fiction, Cervantes’ story deeply investigates the protagonist’s inner life.
Don Quixote matures as the narrative develops, undergoing a noticeable transformation.
This literary revelation has led many scholars to call Don Quixote the first modern novel.
And this character development doesn’t happen in isolation.
Early on, Don Quixote is joined by a villager-turned-squire named Sancho Panza.
Sancho and Don Quixote are a study in opposites: with one as the grounded realist to the other’s idealism.
Their lively, evolving friendship is often credited as the original hero and sidekick duo, inspiring centuries of fictional partnerships.
Don Quixote was a huge success.
Numerous editions were published across Europe in the seventeenth century.
Even in the Americas, where the Church banned all novels for being sinful distractions, audiences were known to enjoy pirated editions.
The book was so well received that readers clamored for more.
After a rival author attempted to cash in on a fake follow-up, Cervantes released the official sequel in response.
Now published alongside the first volume as a completed text, this second volume picks up where the original left off, only now Don Quixote and Sancho have become folk heroes.
Just as in real-life, Cervantes included his novel’s success in the world of his characters.
This unconventional meta-awareness created philosophical complexity, as the knight and his squire ponder the meaning of their story.
Unfortunately, Cervantes had sold the book’s publishing rights for very little.
He died rich in fame alone.
But his treatise on the power of creativity and individualism has inspired art, literature, popular culture, and even political revolution.
Don Quixote argues that our imagination greatly informs our actions, making us capable of change, and, indeed, making us human.
The vast majority of people who’ve lost a limb can still feel it— not as a memory or vague shape, but in complete lifelike detail.
They can flex their phantom fingers and sometimes even feel the chafe of a watchband or the throb of an ingrown toenail.
And astonishingly enough, occasionally even people born without a limb can feel a phantom.
So what causes phantom limb sensations?
The accuracy of these apparitions suggests that we have a map of the body in our brains.
And the fact that it’s possible for someone who’s never had a limb to feel one implies we are born with at least the beginnings of this map.
But one thing sets the phantoms that appear after amputation apart from their flesh and blood predecessors: the vast majority of them are painful.
To fully understand phantom limbs and phantom pain, we have to consider the entire pathway from limb to brain.
Our limbs are full of sensory neurons responsible for everything from the textures we feel with our fingertips to our understanding of where our bodies are in space.
Neural pathways carry this sensory input through the spinal cord and up to the brain.
Since so much of this path lies outside the limb itself, most of it remains behind after an amputation.
But the loss of a limb alters the way signals travel at every step of the pathway.
At the site of an amputation, severed nerve endings can thicken and become more sensitive, transmitting distress signals even in response to mild pressure.
Under normal circumstances, these signals would be curtailed in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
For reasons we don’t fully understand, after an amputation, there is a loss of this inhibitory control in the dorsal horn, and signals can intensify.
Once they pass through the spinal cord, sensory signals reach the brain.
There, the somatosensory cortex processes them.
The entire body is mapped in this cortex.
Sensitive body parts with many nerve endings, like the lips and hands, are represented by the largest areas.
The cortical homunculus is a model of the human body with proportions based on the size of each body part’s representation in the cortex, The amount of cortex devoted to a specific body part can grow or shrink based on how much sensory input the brain receives from that body part.
For example, representation of the left hand is larger in violinists than in non-violinists.
The brain also increases cortical representation when a body part is injured in order to heighten sensations that alert us to danger.
This increased representation can lead to phantom pain.
The cortical map is also most likely responsible for the feeling of body parts that are no longer there, because they still have representation in the brain.
Over time, this representation may shrink and the phantom limb may shrink with it.
But phantom limb sensations don’t necessarily disappear on their own.
Treatment for phantom pain usually requires a combination of physical therapy, medications for pain management, prosthetics, and time.
A technique called mirror box therapy can be very helpful in developing the range of motion and reducing pain in the phantom limb.
The patient places the phantom limb into a box behind a mirror and the intact limb in front of the mirror.
This tricks the brain into seeing the phantom rather than just feeling it.
Scientists are developing virtual reality treatments that make the experience of mirror box therapy even more lifelike.
Prosthetics can also create a similar effect— many patients report pain primarily when they remove their prosthetics at night.
And phantom limbs may in turn help patients conceptualize prosthetics as extensions of their bodies and manipulate them intuitively.
There are still many questions about phantom limbs.
We don’t know why some amputees escape the pain typically associated with these apparitions, or why some don’t have phantoms at all.
And further research into phantom limbs isn’t just applicable to the people who experience them.
A deeper understanding of these apparitions will give us insight into the work our brains do every day to build the world as we perceive it.
They’re an important reminder that the realities we experience are, in fact, subjective.
OK, first, some introductions.
My mom, Jennie, took this picture.
That's my dad, Frank, in the middle.
And on his left, my sisters: Mary Catherine, Judith Ann, Theresa Marie.
John Patrick's sitting on his lap and Kevin Michael's on his right.
And in the pale-blue windbreaker, Susan Diane. Me.
I loved growing up in a big family.
And one of my favorite things was picking names.
But by the time child number seven came along, we had nearly run out of middle names.
It was a long deliberation before we finally settled on Jennifer Bridget.
Every parent in this audience knows the joy and excitement of picking a new baby's name.
And I was excited and thrilled to help my mom in that special ceremonial moment.
But it's not like that everywhere.
I travel a lot and I see a lot.
But it took me by surprise to learn in an area of Ethiopia, parents delay picking the names for their new babies by a month or more.
Why delay?
Why not take advantage of this special ceremonial time?
Well, they delay because they're afraid.
They're afraid their baby will die.
And this loss might be a little more bearable without a name.
A face without a name might help them feel just a little less attached.
So here we are in one part of the world -- a time of joy, excitement, dreaming of the future of that child -- while in another world, parents are filled with dread, not daring to dream of a future for their child beyond a few precious weeks.
How can that be?
How can it be that 2.6 million babies die around the world before they're even one month old?
2.6 million.
That's the population of Vancouver.
And the shocking thing is: Why?
In too many cases, we simply don't know.
Now, I remember recently seeing an updated pie chart.
And the pie chart was labeled, "Causes of death in children under five worldwide."
And there was a pretty big section of that pie chart, about 40 percent -- 40 percent was labeled "neonatal."
Now, "neonatal" is not a cause of death.
Neonatal is simply an adjective, an adjective that means that the child is less than one month old.
For me, "neonatal" said: "We have no idea."
Now, I'm a scientist. I'm a doctor.
I want to fix things.
But you can't fix what you can't define.
So our first step in restoring the dreams of those parents is to answer the question: Why are babies dying?
So today, I want to talk about a new approach, an approach that I feel will not only help us know why babies are dying, but is beginning to completely transform the whole field of global health.
It's called "Precision Public Health."
For me, precision medicine comes from a very special place.
I trained as a cancer doctor, an oncologist.
I got into it because I wanted to help people feel better.
But too often my treatments made them feel worse.
I still remember young women being driven to my clinic by their moms -- adults, who had to be helped into my exam room by their mothers.
They were so weak from the treatment I had given them.
But at the time, in those front lines in the war on cancer, we had few tools.
And the tools we did have couldn't differentiate between the cancer cells that we wanted to hit hard and those healthy cells that we wanted to preserve.
And so the side effects that you're all very familiar with -- hair loss, being sick to your stomach, having a suppressed immune system, so infection was a constant threat -- were always surrounding us.
And then I moved to the biotechnology industry.
And I got to work on a new approach for breast cancer patients that could do a better job of telling the healthy cells from the unhealthy or cancer cells.
It's a drug called Herceptin.
And what Herceptin allowed us to do is to precisely target HER2-positive breast cancer, at the time, the scariest form of breast cancer.
And that precision let us hit hard the cancer cells, while sparing and being more gentle on the normal cells.
A huge breakthrough.
It felt like a miracle, so much so that today, we're harnessing all those tools -- big data, consumer monitoring, gene sequencing and more -- to tackle a broad variety of diseases.
That's allowing us to target individuals with the right remedies at the right time.
Precision medicine revolutionized cancer therapy.
Everything changed.
And I want everything to change again.
So I've been asking myself: Why should we limit this smarter, more precise, better way to tackle diseases to the rich world?
Now, don't misunderstand me -- I'm not talking about bringing expensive medicines like Herceptin to the developing world, although I'd actually kind of like that.
What I am talking about is moving from this precise targeting for individuals to tackle public health problems in populations.
Now, OK, I know probably you're thinking, "She's crazy.
You can't do that. That's too ambitious."
But here's the thing: we're already doing this in a limited way, and it's already starting to make a big difference.
So here's what's happening.
Now, I told you I trained as a cancer doctor.
But like many, many doctors who trained in San Francisco in the '80s, I also trained as an AIDS doctor.
It was a terrible time.
AIDS was a death sentence.
All my patients died.
Now, things are better, but HIV/AIDS remains a terrible global challenge.
Worldwide, about 17 million women are living with HIV.
We know that when these women become pregnant, they can transfer the virus to their baby.
We also know in the absence of therapy, half those babies will not survive until the age of two.
But we know that antiretroviral therapy can virtually guarantee that she will not transmit the virus to the baby.
So what do we do?
Well, a one-size-fits-all approach, kind of like that blast of chemo, would mean we test and treat every pregnant woman in the world.
That would do the job.
But it's just not practical.
So instead, we target those areas where HIV rates are the highest.
We know in certain countries in sub-Saharan Africa we can test and treat pregnant women where rates are highest.
This precision approach to a public health problem has cut by nearly half HIV transmission from mothers to baby in the last five years.
(Applause) Screening pregnant women in certain areas in the developing world is a powerful example of how precision public health can change things on a big scale.
So ...
How do we do that?
We can do that because we know.
We know who to target, what to target, where to target and how to target.
And that, for me, are the important elements of precision public health: who, what, where and how.
But let's go back to the 2.6 million babies who die before they're one month old.
Here's the problem: we just don't know.
It may seem unbelievable, but the way we figure out the causes of infant mortality in those countries with the highest infant mortality is a conversation with mom.
A health worker asks a mom who has just lost her child, "Was the baby vomiting? Did they have a fever?"
And that conversation may take place as long as three months after the baby has died.
Now, put yourself in the shoes of that mom.
It's a heartbreaking, excruciating conversation.
And even worse -- it's not that helpful, because we might know there was a fever or vomiting, but we don't know why.
So in the absence of knowing that knowledge, we cannot prevent that mom, that family, or other families in that community from suffering the same tragedy.
But what if we applied a precision public health approach?
Let's say, for example, we find out in certain areas of Africa that babies are dying because of a bacterial infection transferred from the mother to the baby, known as Group B streptococcus.
In the absence of treatment, mom has a seven times higher chance that her next baby will die.
Once we define the problem, we can prevent that death with something as cheap and safe as penicillin.
We can do that because then we'll know.
And that's the point: once we know, we can bring the right interventions to the right population in the right places to save lives.
With this approach, and with these interventions and others like them, I have no doubt that a precision public health approach can help our world achieve our 15-year goal.
And that would translate into a million babies' lives saved every single year.
One million babies every single year.
And why would we stop there?
A much more powerful approach to public health -- imagine what might be possible.
Why couldn't we more effectively tackle malnutrition?
Why wouldn't we prevent cervical cancer in women?
And why not eradicate malaria?
(Applause) Yes, clap for that!
(Applause) So, you know, I live in two different worlds, one world populated by scientists, and another world populated by public health professionals.
The promise of precision public health is to bring these two worlds together.
But you know, we all live in two worlds: the rich world and the poor world.
And what I'm most excited about about precision public health is bridging these two worlds.
Every day in the rich world, we're bringing incredible talent and tools -- everything at our disposal -- to precisely target diseases in ways I never imagined would be possible.
Surely, we can tap into that kind of talent and tools to stop babies dying in the poor world.
If we did, then every parent would have the confidence to name their child the moment that child is born, daring to dream that that child's life will be measured in decades, not days.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Thank you very much. Good evening.
Some of you may have noticed that my last name is Nutt.
And if you did, you are forgiven for wondering how a Nutt managed to end up in a war zone.
I actually was offered, right out of medical school, and accepted a volunteer contract to work with UNICEF in war-torn Somalia, that was worth one dollar.
And, you see, I had to be paid this dollar in the event that the UN needed to issue an evacuation order, so that I would be covered.
I was, after all, heading into one of the world's most dangerous places.
And by now, some of you may be asking yourselves, and I just want to reassure you, that I did get half the money up front.
(Laughter) But you see, this is how, with 50 cents in my pocket, I ended up in Baidoa, Somalia.
Journalists called it the "city of death."
And they called it the city of death because 300,000 people had lost their lives there -- 300,000 people, mostly as a result of war-related famine and disease.
I was part of a team that was tasked with trying to figure out how best to respond to this humanitarian catastrophe.
It was right on the heels of the Rwandan genocide, and aid money to the region was drying up.
Many aid organizations, unfortunately, had been forced to close their doors.
And so the question that I was asked to specifically help answer, which is one that aid workers ask themselves in war zones the world over, is: What the hell do we do now?
You know, the security environment in Somalia at that moment in time -- and nothing has really changed too much -- can best be described as "Mad Max" by way of "A Clockwork Orange."
And I remember very distinctly a couple of days after my arrival, I went up to a feeding clinic.
There were dozens of women who were standing in line, and they were clutching their infants very close.
About 20 minutes into this conversation I was having with this one young woman, I leaned forward and tried to put my finger in the palm of her baby's hand.
And when I did this, I discovered that her baby was already in rigor.
She was stiff, and her little, lifeless hand was curled into itself.
She had died hours before of malnutrition and dehydration.
I later learned that as her baby was dying, this young woman had been held for two days by some teenage boys who were armed with Kalashnikov rifles, and they were trying to shake her down for more money, money she very clearly did not have.
And this is a scene that I have confronted in war zones the world over; places where kids, some as young as eight -- they are this big -- and those kids, they have never been to school.
But they have fought and they have killed with automatic rifles.
Is this just the way the world is?
Some will you tell you that war is unavoidably human.
After all, it is as old as existence itself.
We say never again, and yet it happens again and again and again.
But I will tell you that I have seen the absolute worst of what we as human beings are capable of doing to one another, and yet I still believe a different outcome is possible.
Do you want to know why?
Because over 20 years of doing this work, going in and out of war zones around the world, I have come to understand that there are aspects of this problem that we, all of us, as people occupying this shared space, that we can change -- not through force or coercion or invasion, but by simply looking at all of the options available to us and choosing the ones that favor peace at the expense of war, instead of war at the expense of peace.
How so?
Well, I want you to consider this: there are at least 800 million small arms and light weapons in circulation in the world today.
The vast majority of civilians, like that young baby, who are dying in war zones around the world, are dying at the hands of various armed groups who rely on a near-infinite supply of cheap, easy and efficient weapons to rape, threaten, intimidate and brutalize those civilians at every turn.
How cheap?
Well, in some parts of the world, you can buy an AK-47 for as little as 10 dollars.
In many places in which I have worked, it is easier to get access to an automatic rifle than it is to get access to clean drinking water.
And so now the important part: Can anything be done about this?
To answer that question, let's take a look at this map of the world.
And now, let's add in all of the countries that are currently at war, and the number of people who have either died or have been displaced as a result of that violence.
It is a staggering number -- more than 40 million people.
But you will also notice something else about this map.
You will notice that most of those countries are in the Global South.
Now, let's look at the countries that are the world's top 20 exporters of small arms in the world.
And what do we notice?
Well, you see them in green.
You will notice that those are mostly countries in the Global North, primarily Western countries.
What does this tell us?
This tells us that most of the people who are dying in war are living in poor countries, and yet most of the people who are profiting from war are living in rich countries -- people like you and me.
And then what if we go beyond small arms for a second.
What if we look at all weapons in circulation in the world?
Who does the biggest business?
Well, roughly 80 percent of those weapons come from none other than the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, plus Germany.
It's shocking, isn't it?
Now, some of you might be saying at this moment in time, "Oh yeah, but OK, hang on a second there ... Nutt."
(Laughter) Grade school was spectacular for me.
It was, really, a wonderful experience.
(Laughter) But you might be saying to yourselves, You know, all of these weapons in war zones -- they're not a cause, but an effect of the violence that plagues them each and every single day.
You know, places like Iraq and Afghanistan, where they need these weapons to be able to maintain law and order, promote peace and security, to combat terror groups -- surely this is a good thing.
Let's take a look at that assumption for just one moment, because you see there has been a boom in the small-arms trade since the start of the War on Terror.
In fact, it is a business that has grown threefold over the past 15 years.
And now let's compare that to the number of people who have directly died in armed conflict around the world in that same period.
What do you notice?
Well, you notice that, in fact, that also goes up roughly three- to fourfold.
They basically go up and end at the same point.
Now, we can have a circular argument here about whether this increase in fatalities is a response to the increase of small arms, or the other way around.
But here's what we should really take away from this.
What we should take away from this is that this is a relationship worth scrutinizing, especially when you consider that small arms that were shipped to Iraq for use by the Iraqi Army, or to Syria for so-called moderate opposition fighters, that those arms, many of them, are now in the hands of ISIS; or when you consider that arms that were shipped to Libya are now actively drifting across the Sahel, and ending up with groups like Boko Haram and al Qaeda and other militant groups.
And therein lies the problem.
Because, you see, small arms anywhere are a menace everywhere, because their first stop is rarely their last.
Spending on war per person per year now amounts to about 249 dollars -- 249 dollars per person, which is roughly 12 times what we spend on foreign aid, money that is used to educate and vaccinate children and combat malnutrition in the Global South.
But we can shift that balance.
How do we do this?
Well, it is essentially a problem of both supply and demand, so we can tackle it from both sides.
On the supply side, we can push our governments to adopt international arms transparency mechanisms like the Arms Trade Treaty, which makes it so that rich countries have to be more accountable for where their arms are going and what their arms might be used for.
Here in the United States, the largest arms-exporting country in the world by far, President Obama has rightly signed the Arms Trade Treaty, but none of it takes effect, it isn't binding, until it is approved and ratified by the Senate.
This is where we need to make our voices heard.
You know, the curbing of small arms -- it's not going to solve the problem of war.
Increased control mechanisms won't solve that problem.
But it's an important step in the right direction.
And it's up to all of us who live in those rich countries to make change here.
What about on the demand side?
You know, there are generations around the world who are being lost to war.
It is possible to disrupt that cycle of violence with investments in education, in strengthening the rule of law and in economic development, especially for women.
I have personally seen just how incredibly powerful those kinds of efforts can be around the world.
But here's the thing: they take time, which means for you as individuals, if you want to give, please, by all means do it.
But know that how you give is just as important as how much you give.
Regular contributions like monthly contributions are a far more effective way of giving, because they allow humanitarian organizations to properly plan and be invested over the long term, and to be present in the lives of families who have been affected by war, wars that many of us, frankly, all too quickly forget.
When I first got on that plane for Somalia as a young doctor, I had no idea what it meant to live with war.
But I can tell you that I know what it means now.
And I know what it means to lie in bed in the pitch-black night and listen to that haunting "pop-pop-pop-pop-pop!"
of automatic gunfire, and wonder with absolute dread how many minutes I have left until it will be right on top of me.
I can tell you that it is a terrifying and agonizing fear, one that millions of people around the world are forced to confront each and every single day, especially children.
Over the years of doing this work, unfortunately, war has killed far too many people close to me.
And on at least a couple of occasions, war has very nearly killed me as well.
But I firmly believe, which is why I get up and do what I do every single day, that we can make different choices here.
Because you see, war is ours, as human beings.
We buy it, sell it, spread it and wage it.
We are therefore not powerless to solve it.
On the contrary, we are the only ones who can.
Thank you very much, and I want to wish you the greatest success.
(Applause)
Eric Hirshberg: So I assume that Norman doesn't need much of an introduction, but TED's audience is global, it's diverse, so I've been tasked with starting with his bio, which could easily take up the entire 18 minutes.
So instead we're going to do 93 years in 93 seconds or less.
(Laughter) You were born in New Hampshire.
Norman Lear: New Haven, Connecticut.
EH: New Haven, Connecticut.
(Laughter) NL: There goes seven more seconds.
EH: Nailed it.
(Laughter) You were born in New Haven, Connecticut.
Your father was a con man -- I got that right.
He was taken away to prison when you were nine years old.
You flew 52 missions as a fighter pilot in World War II.
You came back to -- NL: Radio operator.
EH: You came to LA to break into Hollywood, first in publicity, then in TV.
You had no training as a writer, formally, but you hustled your way in.
Your breakthrough, your debut, was a little show called "All in the Family."
You followed that up with a string of hits that to this day is unmatched in Hollywood: "Sanford and Son," "Maude," "Good Times," "The Jeffersons," "One Day at a Time," "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman," to name literally a fraction of them.
Not only are they all commercially -- (Applause) Not only are they all commercially successful, but many of them push our culture forward by giving the underrepresented members of society their first prime-time voice.
You have seven shows in the top 10 at one time.
At one point, you aggregate an audience of 120 million people per week watching your content.
That's more than the audience for Super Bowl 50, which happens once a year.
NL: Holy shit.
(Laughter) (Applause) EH: And we're not even to the holy shit part.
(Laughter) You land yourself on Richard Nixon's enemies list -- he had one.
That's an applause line, too.
(Applause) You're inducted into the TV Hall of Fame on the first day that it exists.
Then came the movies.
"Fried Green Tomatoes," "The Princess Bride," "Stand By Me," "This Is Spinal Tap."
(Applause) Again, just to name a fraction.
(Applause) Then you wipe the slate clean, start a third act as a political activist focusing on protecting the First Amendment and the separation of church and state.
You start People For The American Way.
You buy the Declaration of Independence and give it back to the people.
You stay active in both entertainment and politics until the ripe old of age of 93, when you write a book and make a documentary about your life story.
And after all that, they finally think you're ready for a TED Talk.
(Laughter) (Applause) NL: I love being here.
And I love you for agreeing to do this.
EH: Thank you for asking. It's my honor.
So here's my first question.
Was your mother proud of you?
(Laughter) NL: My mother ...
what a place to start.
Let me put it this way -- when I came back from the war, she showed me the letters that I had written her from overseas, and they were absolute love letters.
(Laughter) This really sums up my mother.
They were love letters, as if I had written them to -- they were love letters.
A year later I asked my mother if I could have them, because I'd like to keep them all the years of my life ...
She had thrown them away.
(Laughter) That's my mother.
(Laughter) The best way I can sum it up in more recent times is -- this is also more recent times -- a number of years ago, when they started the Hall of Fame to which you referred.
It was a Sunday morning, when I got a call from the fellow who ran the TV Academy of Arts &amp; Sciences.
He was calling me to tell me they had met all day yesterday and he was confidentially telling me they were going to start a hall of fame and these were the inductees.
I started to say "Richard Nixon," because Richard Nixon -- EH: I don't think he was on their list.
NL: William Paley, who started CBS, David Sarnoff, who started NBC, Edward R. Murrow, the greatest of the foreign correspondents, Paddy Chayefsky -- I think the best writer that ever came out of television -- Milton Berle, Lucille Ball and me.
EH: Not bad.
NL: I call my mother immediately in Hartford, Connecticut.
"Mom, this is what's happened, they're starting a hall of fame."
I tell her the list of names and me, and she says, "Listen, if that's what they want to do, who am I to say?"
(Laughter) (Applause) That's my Ma.
I think it earns that kind of a laugh because everybody has a piece of that mother.
(Laughter) EH: And the sitcom Jewish mother is born, right there.
So your father also played a large role in your life, mostly by his absence.
NL: Yeah.
EH: Tell us what happened when you were nine years old.
NL: He was flying to Oklahoma with three guys that my mother said, "I don't want you to have anything to do with them, I don't trust those men."
That's when I heard, maybe not for the first time, "Stifle yourself, Jeanette, I'm going."
And he went.
It turns out he was picking up some fake bonds, which he was flying across the country to sell.
But the fact that he was going to Oklahoma in a plane, and he was going to bring me back a 10-gallon hat, just like Ken Maynard, my favorite cowboy wore.
You know, this was a few years after Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic.
I mean, it was exotic that my father was going there.
But when he came back, they arrested him as he got off the plane.
That night newspapers were all over the house, my father was with his hat in front of his face, manacled to a detective.
And my mother was selling the furniture, because we were leaving -- she didn't want to stay in that state of shame, in Chelsea, Massachusetts.
And selling the furniture -- the house was loaded with people.
And in the middle of all of that, some strange horse's ass put his hand on my shoulder and said, "Well, you're the man of the house now."
I'm crying, and this asshole says, "You're the man of the house now."
And I think that was the moment I began to understand the foolishness of the human condition.
So ...
it took a lot of years to look back at it and feel it was a benefit.
But -- EH: It's interesting you call it a benefit.
NL: Benefit in that it gave me that springboard.
I mean that I could think how foolish it was to say to this crying nine-year-old boy, "You're the man of the house now."
And then I was crying, and then he said, "And men of the house don't cry."
And I ...
(Laughter) So ...
I look back, and I think that's when I learned the foolishness of the human condition, and it's been that gift that I've used.
EH: So you have a father who's absent, you have a mother for whom apparently nothing is good enough.
Do you think that starting out as a kid who maybe never felt heard started you down a journey that ended with you being an adult with a weekly audience of 120 million people?
NL: I love the way you put that question, because I guess I've spent my life wanting -- if anything, wanting to be heard.
I think -- It's a simple answer, yes, that was what sparked -- well, there were other things, too.
When my father was away, I was fooling with a crystal radio set that we had made together, and I caught a signal that turned out to be Father Coughlin.
(Laughter) Yeah, somebody laughed.
(Laughter) But not funny, this was a horse's -- another horse's ass -- who was very vocal about hating the New Deal and Roosevelt and Jews.
The first time I ran into an understanding that there were people in this world that hated me because I was born to Jewish parents.
And that had an enormous effect on my life.
EH: So you had a childhood with little in the way of strong male role models, except for your grandfather.
Tell us about him.
NL: Oh, my grandfather.
Well here's the way I always talked about that grandfather.
There were parades, lots of parades when I was a kid.
There were parades on Veteran's Day -- there wasn't a President's Day.
There was Abraham Lincoln's birthday, George Washington's birthday and Flag Day ...
And lots of little parades.
My grandfather used to take me and we'd stand on the street corner, he'd hold my hand, and I'd look up and I'd see a tear running down his eye.
And he meant a great deal to me.
And he used to write presidents of the United States.
Every letter started, "My dearest, darling Mr. President," and he'd tell him something wonderful about what he did.
But when he disagreed with the President, he also wrote, "My dearest, darling Mr. President, Didn't I tell you last week ...?"
(Laughter) And I would run down the stairs every now and then and pick up the mail.
We were three flights up, 74 York Street, New Haven, Connecticut.
And I'd pick up a little white envelope reading, "Shya C. called at this address."
And that's the story I have told about my grandfather -- EH: They wrote him back on the envelopes -- NL: They wrote back.
But I have shown them myself, going way back to Phil Donahue and others before him, literally dozens of interviews in which I told that story.
This will be the second time I have said the whole story was a lie.
The truth was my grandfather took me to parades, we had lots of those.
The truth is a tear came down his eye.
The truth is he would write an occasional letter, and I did pick up those little envelopes.
But "My dearest darling Mr. President," all the rest of it, is a story I borrowed from a good friend whose grandfather was that grandfather who wrote those letters.
And, I mean, I stole Arthur Marshall's grandfather and made him my own.
Always.
When I started to write my memoir -- "Even this --" How about that?
"Even This I Get to Experience."
When I started to write the memoir and I started to think about it, and then I -- I -- I did a reasonable amount of crying, and I realized how much I needed the father.
So much so that I appropriated Arthur Marshall's grandfather.
So much so, the word "father" -- I have six kids by the way.
My favorite role in life.
It and husband to my wife Lyn.
But I stole the man's identity because I needed the father.
Now I've gone through a whole lot of shit and come out on the other side, and I forgive my father -- the best thing I -- the worst thing I -- The word I'd like to use about him and think about him is -- he was a rascal.
The fact that he lied and stole and cheated and went to prison ...
I submerge that in the word "rascal."
EH: Well there's a saying that amateurs borrow and professionals steal.
NL: I'm a pro.
EH: You're a pro.
(Laughter) And that quote is widely attributed to John Lennon, but it turns out he stole it from T.S. Eliot.
So you're in good company.
(Laughter) EH: I want to talk about your work.
Obviously the impact of your work has been written about and I'm sure you've heard about it all your life: what it meant to people, what it meant to our culture, you heard the applause when I just named the names of the shows, you raised half the people in the room through your work.
But have there ever been any stories about the impact of your work that surprised you?
NL: Oh, god -- surprised me and delighted me from head to toe.
There was "An Evening with Norman Lear" within the last year that a group of hip-hop impresarios, performers and the Academy put together.
The subtext of "An Evening with ..."
was: What do a 92-year-old Jew -- then 92 -- and the world of hip-hop have in common?
Russell Simmons was among seven on the stage.
And when he talked about the shows, he wasn't talking about the Hollywood, George Jefferson in "The Jeffersons," or the show that was a number five show.
He was talking about a simple thing that made a big -- EH: Impact on him?
NL: An impact on him -- I was hesitating over the word, "change."
It's hard for me to imagine, you know, changing somebody's life, but that's the way he put it.
He saw George Jefferson write a check on "The Jeffersons," and he never knew that a black man could write a check.
And he says it just impacted his life so -- it changed his life.
And when I hear things like that -- little things -- because I know that there isn't anybody in this audience that wasn't likely responsible today for some little thing they did for somebody, whether it's as little as a smile or an unexpected "Hello," that's how little this thing was.
It could have been the dresser of the set who put the checkbook on the thing, and George had nothing to do while he was speaking, so he wrote it, I don't know.
But -- EH: So in addition to the long list I shared in the beginning, I should have also mentioned that you invented hip-hop.
(Laughter) NL: Well ...
EH: I want to talk about -- NL: Well, then do it.
(Laughter) EH: You've lead a life of accomplishment, but you've also built a life of meaning.
And all of us strive to do both of those things -- not all of us manage to.
But even those of us who do manage to accomplish both of those, very rarely do we figure out how to do them together.
You managed to push culture forward through your art while also achieving world-beating commercial success.
How did you do both?
NL: Here's where my mind goes when I hear that recitation of all I accomplished.
This planet is one of a billion, they tell us, in a universe of which there are billions -- billions of universes, billions of planets ...
which we're trying to save and it requires saving.
But ...
anything I may have accomplished is -- my sister once asked me what she does about something that was going on in Newington, Connecticut.
And I said, "Write your alderman or your mayor or something."
She said, "Well I'm not Norman Lear, I'm Claire Lear."
And that was the first time I said what I'm saying, I said, "Claire. With everything you think about what I may have done and everything you've done," -- she never left Newington -- "can you get your fingers close enough when you consider the size of the planet and so forth, to measure anything I may have done to anything you may have done?"
So ...
I am convinced we're all responsible for doing as much as I may have accomplished.
And I understand what you're saying -- EH: It's an articulate deflection -- NL: But you have to really buy into the size and scope of the creator's enterprise, here.
EH: But here on this planet you have really mattered.
NL: I'm a son of a gun.
(Laughter) EH: So I have one more question for you.
How old do you feel?
NL: I am the peer of whoever I'm talking to.
EH: Well, I feel 93.
(Applause) NL: We out of here?
EH: Well, I feel 93 years old, but I hope to one day feel as young as the person I'm sitting across from.
Ladies and gentlemen, the incomparable Norman Lear.
(Applause) NL: Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm driven by pure passion to create photographs that tell stories.
Photography can be described as the recording of a single moment frozen within a fraction of time.
Each moment or photograph represents a tangible piece of our memories as time passes.
But what if you could capture more than one moment in a photograph?
What if a photograph could actually collapse time, compressing the best moments of the day and the night seamlessly into one single image?
I've created a concept called "Day to Night" and I believe it's going to change the way you look at the world.
I know it has for me.
My process begins by photographing iconic locations, places that are part of what I call our collective memory.
I photograph from a fixed vantage point, and I never move.
I capture the fleeting moments of humanity and light as time passes.
Photographing for anywhere from 15 to 30 hours and shooting over 1,500 images, I then choose the best moments of the day and night.
Using time as a guide, I seamlessly blend those best moments into one single photograph, visualizing our conscious journey with time.
I can take you to Paris for a view from the Tournelle Bridge.
And I can show you the early morning rowers along the River Seine.
And simultaneously, I can show you Notre Dame aglow at night.
And in between, I can show you the romance of the City of Light.
I am essentially a street photographer from 50 feet in the air, and every single thing you see in this photograph actually happened on this day.
Day to Night is a global project, and my work has always been about history.
I'm fascinated by the concept of going to a place like Venice and actually seeing it during a specific event.
And I decided I wanted to see the historical Regata, an event that's actually been taking place since 1498.
The boats and the costumes look exactly as they did then.
And an important element that I really want you guys to understand is: this is not a timelapse, this is me photographing throughout the day and the night.
I am a relentless collector of magical moments.
And the thing that drives me is the fear of just missing one of them.
The entire concept came about in 1996.
LIFE Magazine commissioned me to create a panoramic photograph of the cast and crew of Baz Luhrmann's film Romeo + Juliet.
I got to the set and realized: it's a square.
So the only way I could actually create a panoramic was to shoot a collage of 250 single images.
So I had DiCaprio and Claire Danes embracing.
And as I pan my camera to the right, I noticed there was a mirror on the wall and I saw they were actually reflecting in it.
And for that one moment, that one image I asked them, "Would you guys just kiss for this one picture?"
And then I came back to my studio in New York, and I hand-glued these 250 images together and stood back and went, "Wow, this is so cool!
I'm changing time in a photograph."
And that concept actually stayed with me for 13 years until technology finally has caught up to my dreams.
This is an image I created of the Santa Monica Pier, Day to Night.
And I'm going to show you a little video that gives you an idea of what it's like being with me when I do these pictures.
To start with, you have to understand that to get views like this, most of my time is spent up high, and I'm usually in a cherry picker or a crane.
So this is a typical day, 12-18 hours, non-stop capturing the entire day unfold.
One of the things that's great is I love to people-watch.
And trust me when I tell you, this is the greatest seat in the house to have.
But this is really how I go about creating these photographs.
So once I decide on my view and the location, I have to decide where day begins and night ends.
And that's what I call the time vector.
Einstein described time as a fabric.
Think of the surface of a trampoline: it warps and stretches with gravity.
I see time as a fabric as well, except I take that fabric and flatten it, compress it into single plane.
One of the unique aspects of this work is also, if you look at all my pictures, the time vector changes: sometimes I'll go left to right, sometimes front to back, up or down, even diagonally.
I am exploring the space-time continuum within a two-dimensional still photograph.
Now when I do these pictures, it's literally like a real-time puzzle going on in my mind.
I build a photograph based on time, and this is what I call the master plate.
This can take us several months to complete.
The fun thing about this work is I have absolutely zero control when I get up there on any given day and capture photographs.
So I never know who's going to be in the picture, if it's going to be a great sunrise or sunset -- no control.
It's at the end of the process, if I've had a really great day and everything remained the same, that I then decide who's in and who's out, and it's all based on time.
I'll take those best moments that I pick over a month of editing and they get seamlessly blended into the master plate.
I'm compressing the day and night as I saw it, creating a unique harmony between these two very discordant worlds.
Painting has always been a really important influence in all my work and I've always been a huge fan of Albert Bierstadt, the great Hudson River School painter.
He inspired a recent series that I did on the National Parks.
This is Bierstadt's Yosemite Valley.
So this is the photograph I created of Yosemite.
This is actually the cover story of the 2016 January issue of National Geographic.
I photographed for over 30 hours in this picture.
I was literally on the side of a cliff, capturing the stars and the moonlight as it transitions, the moonlight lighting El Capitan.
And I also captured this transition of time throughout the landscape.
The best part is obviously seeing the magical moments of humanity as time changed -- from day into night.
And on a personal note, I actually had a photocopy of Bierstadt's painting in my pocket.
And when that sun started to rise in the valley, I started to literally shake with excitement because I looked at the painting and I go, "Oh my god, I'm getting Bierstadt's exact same lighting 100 years earlier."
Day to Night is about all the things, it's like a compilation of all the things I love about the medium of photography.
It's about landscape, it's about street photography, it's about color, it's about architecture, perspective, scale -- and, especially, history.
This is one of the most historical moments I've been able to photograph, the 2013 Presidential Inauguration of Barack Obama.
And if you look closely in this picture, you can actually see time changing in those large television sets.
You can see Michelle waiting with the children, the president now greets the crowd, he takes his oath, and now he's speaking to the people.
There's so many challenging aspects when I create photographs like this.
For this particular photograph, I was in a 50-foot scissor lift up in the air and it was not very stable.
So every time my assistant and I shifted our weight, our horizon line shifted.
So for every picture you see, and there were about 1,800 in this picture, we both had to tape our feet into position every time I clicked the shutter.
(Applause) I've learned so many extraordinary things doing this work.
I think the two most important are patience and the power of observation.
When you photograph a city like New York from above, I discovered that those people in cars that I sort of live with everyday, they don't look like people in cars anymore.
They feel like a giant school of fish, it was a form of emergent behavior.
And when people describe the energy of New York, I think this photograph begins to really capture that.
When you look closer in my work, you can see there's stories going on.
You realize that Times Square is a canyon, it's shadow and it's sunlight.
So I decided, in this photograph, I would checkerboard time.
So wherever the shadows are, it's night and wherever the sun is, it's actually day.
Time is this extraordinary thing that we never can really wrap our heads around.
But in a very unique and special way, I believe these photographs begin to put a face on time.
They embody a new metaphysical visual reality.
When you spend 15 hours looking at a place, you're going to see things a little differently than if you or I walked up with our camera, took a picture, and then walked away.
This was a perfect example.
I call it "Sacré-Coeur Selfie."
I watched over 15 hours all these people not even look at Sacré-Coeur.
They were more interested in using it as a backdrop.
They would walk up, take a picture, and then walk away.
And I found this to be an absolutely extraordinary example, a powerful disconnect between what we think the human experience is versus what the human experience is evolving into.
The act of sharing has suddenly become more important than the experience itself.
(Applause) And finally, my most recent image, which has such a special meaning for me personally: this is the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania.
And this is photographed in the middle of the Seronera, this is not a reserve.
I went specifically during the peak migration to hopefully capture the most diverse range of animals.
Unfortunately, when we got there, there was a drought going on during the peak migration, a five-week drought.
So all the animals were drawn to the water.
I found this one watering hole, and felt if everything remained the same way it was behaving, I had a real opportunity to capture something unique.
We spent three days studying it, and nothing could have prepared me for what I witnessed during our shoot day.
I photographed for 26 hours in a sealed crocodile blind, 18 feet in the air.
What I witnessed was unimaginable.
Frankly, it was Biblical.
We saw, for 26 hours, all these competitive species share a single resource called water.
The same resource that humanity is supposed to have wars over during the next 50 years.
The animals never even grunted at each other.
They seem to understand something that we humans don't.
That this precious resource called water is something we all have to share.
When I created this picture, I realized that Day to Night is really a new way of seeing, compressing time, exploring the space-time continuum within a photograph.
As technology evolves along with photography, photographs will not only communicate a deeper meaning of time and memory, but they will compose a new narrative of untold stories, creating a timeless window into our world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What is it that French people do better than all the others?
If you would take polls, the top three answers might be: love, wine and whining.
(Laughter) Maybe.
But let me suggest a fourth one: mathematics.
Did you know that Paris has more mathematicians than any other city in the world?
And more streets with mathematicians' names, too.
And if you look at the statistics of the Fields Medal, often called the Nobel Prize for mathematics, and always awarded to mathematicians below the age of 40, you will find that France has more Fields medalists per inhabitant than any other country.
What is it that we find so sexy in math?
After all, it seems to be dull and abstract, just numbers and computations and rules to apply.
Mathematics may be abstract, but it's not dull and it's not about computing.
It is about reasoning and proving our core activity.
It is about imagination, the talent which we most praise.
It is about finding the truth.
There's nothing like the feeling which invades you when after months of hard thinking, you finally understand the right reasoning to solve your problem.
The great mathematician André Weil likened this -- no kidding -- to sexual pleasure.
But noted that this feeling can last for hours, or even days.
The reward may be big.
Hidden mathematical truths permeate our whole physical world.
They are inaccessible to our senses but can be seen through mathematical lenses.
Close your eyes for moment and think of what is occurring right now around you.
Invisible particles from the air around are bumping on you by the billions and billions at each second, all in complete chaos.
And still, their statistics can be accurately predicted by mathematical physics.
And open your eyes now to the statistics of the velocities of these particles.
The famous bell-shaped Gauss Curve, or the Law of Errors -- of deviations with respect to the mean behavior.
This curve tells about the statistics of velocities of particles in the same way as a demographic curve would tell about the statistics of ages of individuals.
It's one of the most important curves ever.
It keeps on occurring again and again, from many theories and many experiments, as a great example of the universality which is so dear to us mathematicians.
Of this curve, the famous scientist Francis Galton said, "It would have been deified by the Greeks if they had known it.
It is the supreme law of unreason."
And there's no better way to materialize that supreme goddess than Galton's Board.
Inside this board are narrow tunnels through which tiny balls will fall down randomly, going right or left, or left, etc.
All in complete randomness and chaos.
Let's see what happens when we look at all these random trajectories together.
(Board shaking) This is a bit of a sport, because we need to resolve some traffic jams in there.
Aha.
We think that randomness is going to play me a trick on stage.
There it is.
Our supreme goddess of unreason.
the Gauss Curve, trapped here inside this transparent box as Dream in "The Sandman" comics.
For you I have shown it, but to my students I explain why it could not be any other curve.
And this is touching the mystery of that goddess, replacing a beautiful coincidence by a beautiful explanation.
All of science is like this.
And beautiful mathematical explanations are not only for our pleasure.
They also change our vision of the world.
For instance, Einstein, Perrin, Smoluchowski, they used the mathematical analysis of random trajectories and the Gauss Curve to explain and prove that our world is made of atoms.
It was not the first time that mathematics was revolutionizing our view of the world.
More than 2,000 years ago, at the time of the ancient Greeks, it already occurred.
In those days, only a small fraction of the world had been explored, and the Earth might have seemed infinite.
But clever Eratosthenes, using mathematics, was able to measure the Earth with an amazing accuracy of two percent.
Here's another example.
In 1673, Jean Richer noticed that a pendulum swings slightly slower in Cayenne than in Paris.
From this observation alone, and clever mathematics, Newton rightly deduced that the Earth is a wee bit flattened at the poles, like 0.3 percent -- so tiny that you wouldn't even notice it on the real view of the Earth.
These stories show that mathematics is able to make us go out of our intuition measure the Earth which seems infinite, see atoms which are invisible or detect an imperceptible variation of shape.
And if there is just one thing that you should take home from this talk, it is this: mathematics allows us to go beyond the intuition and explore territories which do not fit within our grasp.
Here's a modern example you will all relate to: searching the Internet.
The World Wide Web, more than one billion web pages -- do you want to go through them all?
Computing power helps, but it would be useless without the mathematical modeling to find the information hidden in the data.
Let's work out a baby problem.
Imagine that you're a detective working on a crime case, and there are many people who have their version of the facts.
Who do you want to interview first?
Sensible answer: prime witnesses.
You see, suppose that there is person number seven, tells you a story, but when you ask where he got if from, he points to person number three as a source.
And maybe person number three, in turn, points at person number one as the primary source.
Now number one is a prime witness, so I definitely want to interview him -- priority.
And from the graph we also see that person number four is a prime witness.
And maybe I even want to interview him first, because there are more people who refer to him.
OK, that was easy, but now what about if you have a big bunch of people who will testify?
And this graph, I may think of it as all people who testify in a complicated crime case, but it may just as well be web pages pointing to each other, referring to each other for contents.
Which ones are the most authoritative?
Not so clear.
Enter PageRank, one of the early cornerstones of Google.
This algorithm uses the laws of mathematical randomness to determine automatically the most relevant web pages, in the same way as we used randomness in the Galton Board experiment.
So let's send into this graph a bunch of tiny, digital marbles and let them go randomly through the graph.
Each time they arrive at some site, they will go out through some link chosen at random to the next one.
And again, and again, and again.
And with small, growing piles, we'll keep the record of how many times each site has been visited by these digital marbles.
Here we go.
Randomness, randomness.
And from time to time, also let's make jumps completely randomly to increase the fun.
And look at this: from the chaos will emerge the solution.
The highest piles correspond to those sites which somehow are better connected than the others, more pointed at than the others.
And here we see clearly which are the web pages we want to first try.
Once again, the solution emerges from the randomness.
Of course, since that time, Google has come up with much more sophisticated algorithms, but already this was beautiful.
And still, just one problem in a million.
With the advent of digital area, more and more problems lend themselves to mathematical analysis, making the job of mathematician a more and more useful one, to the extent that a few years ago, it was ranked number one among hundreds of jobs in a study about the best and worst jobs published by the Wall Street Journal in 2009.
Mathematician -- best job in the world.
That's because of the applications: communication theory, information theory, game theory, compressed sensing, machine learning, graph analysis, harmonic analysis.
And why not stochastic processes, linear programming, or fluid simulation?
Each of these fields have monster industrial applications.
And through them, there is big money in mathematics.
And let me concede that when it comes to making money from the math, the Americans are by a long shot the world champions, with clever, emblematic billionaires and amazing, giant companies, all resting, ultimately, on good algorithm.
Now with all this beauty, usefulness and wealth, mathematics does look more sexy.
But don't you think that the life a mathematical researcher is an easy one.
It is filled with perplexity, frustration, a desperate fight for understanding.
Let me evoke for you one of the most striking days in my mathematician's life.
Or should I say, one of the most striking nights.
At that time, I was staying at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton -- for many years, the home of Albert Einstein and arguably the most holy place for mathematical research in the world.
And that night I was working and working on an elusive proof, which was incomplete.
It was all about understanding the paradoxical stability property of plasmas, which are a crowd of electrons.
In the perfect world of plasma, there are no collisions and no friction to provide the stability like we are used to.
But still, if you slightly perturb a plasma equilibrium, you will find that the resulting electric field spontaneously vanishes, or damps out, as if by some mysterious friction force.
This paradoxical effect, called the Landau damping, is one of the most important in plasma physics, and it was discovered through mathematical ideas.
But still, a full mathematical understanding of this phenomenon was missing.
And together with my former student and main collaborator Clément Mouhot, in Paris at the time, we had been working for months and months on such a proof.
Actually, I had already announced by mistake that we could solve it.
But the truth is, the proof was just not working.
In spite of more than 100 pages of complicated, mathematical arguments, and a bunch discoveries, and huge calculation, it was not working.
And that night in Princeton, a certain gap in the chain of arguments was driving me crazy.
I was putting in there all my energy and experience and tricks, and still nothing was working.
1 a.m., 2 a.m., 3 a.m., not working.
Around 4 a.m., I go to bed in low spirits.
Then a few hours later, waking up and go, "Ah, it's time to get the kids to school --" What is this?
There was this voice in my head, I swear.
"Take the second term to the other side, Fourier transform and invert in L2."
(Laughter) Damn it, that was the start of the solution!
You see, I thought I had taken some rest, but really my brain had continued to work on it.
In those moments, you don't think of your career or your colleagues, it's just a complete battle between the problem and you.
That being said, it does not harm when you do get a promotion in reward for your hard work.
And after we completed our huge analysis of the Landau damping, I was lucky enough to get the most coveted Fields Medal from the hands of the President of India, in Hyderabad on 19 August, 2010 -- an honor that mathematicians never dare to dream, a day that I will remember until I live.
What do you think, on such an occasion?
Pride, yes?
And gratitude to the many collaborators who made this possible.
And because it was a collective adventure, you need to share it, not just with your collaborators.
I believe that everybody can appreciate the thrill of mathematical research, and share the passionate stories of humans and ideas behind it.
And I've been working with my staff at Institut Henri Poincaré, together with partners and artists of mathematical communication worldwide, so that we can found our own, very special museum of mathematics there.
So in a few years, when you come to Paris, after tasting the great, crispy baguette and macaroon, please come and visit us at Institut Henri Poincaré, and share the mathematical dream with us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The world is filled with incredible objects and rich cultural heritage.
And when we get access to them, we are blown away, we fall in love.
But most of the time, the world's population is living without real access to arts and culture.
What might the connections be when we start exploring our heritage, the beautiful locations and the art in this world?
Before we get started in this presentation, I just want to take care of a few housekeeping points.
First, I am no expert in art or culture.
I fell into this by mistake, but I'm loving it.
Secondly, all of what I'm going to show you belongs to the amazing museums, archives and foundations that we partner with.
None of this belongs to Google.
And finally, what you see behind me is available right now on your mobile phones, on your laptops.
This is our current platform, where you can explore thousands of museums and objects at your fingertips, in extremely high-definition detail.
The diversity of the content is what's amazing.
If we just had European paintings, if we just had modern art, I think it gets a bit boring.
For example, this month, we launched the "Black History" channel with 82 curated exhibitions, which talk about arts and culture in that community.
We also have some amazing objects from Japan, centered around craftsmanship, called "Made in Japan."
And one of my favorite exhibitions, which actually is the idea of my talk, is -- I didn't expect to become a fan of Japanese dolls.
But I am, thanks to this exhibition, that has really taught me about the craftsmanship behind the soul of a Japanese doll.
Trust me, it's very exciting.
Take my word for it.
So, moving on swiftly.
One quick thing I wanted to showcase in this platform, which you can share with your kids and your friends right now, is you can travel to all these amazing institutions virtually, as well.
One of our recent ideas was with The Guggenheim Museum in New York, where you can get a taste of what it might feel like to actually be there.
You can go to the ground floor and obviously, most of you, I assume, have been there.
And you can see the architectural masterpiece that it is.
But imagine this accessibility for a kid in Bombay who's studying architecture, who hasn't had a chance to go to The Guggenheim as yet.
You can obviously look at objects in the Guggenheim Museum, you can obviously get into them and so on and so forth.
There's a lot of information here.
But this is not the purpose of my talk today.
This exists right now.
What we now have are the building blocks to a very exciting future, when it comes to arts and culture and accessibility to arts and culture.
So I am joined today onstage by my good friend and artist in residence at our office in Paris, Cyril Diagne, who is the professor of interactive design at ECAL University in Lausanne, Switzerland.
What Cyril and our team of engineers have been doing is trying to find these connections and visualize a few of these.
So I'm going to go quite quick now.
This object you see behind me -- oh, just clarification: Always, seeing the real thing is better.
In case people think I'm trying to replicate the real thing.
So, moving on.
This object you see behind me is the Venus of Berekhat Ram.
It's one of the oldest objects in the world, found in the Golan Heights around 233,000 years ago, and currently residing at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.
It is also one of the oldest objects on our platform.
So let's zoom.
We start from this one object.
What if we zoomed out and actually tried to experience our own cultural big bang?
What might that look like?
This is what we deal with on a daily basis at the Cultural Institute -- over six million cultural artifacts curated and given to us by institutions, to actually make these connections.
You can travel through time, you can understand more about our society through these.
You can look at it from the perspective of our planet, and try to see how it might look without borders, if we just organized art and culture.
We can also then plot it by time, which obviously, for the data geek in me, is very fascinating.
You can spend hours looking at every decade and the contributions in that decade and in those years for art, history and cultures.
We would love to spend hours showing you each and every decade, but we don't have the time right now.
So you can go on your phone and actually do it yourself.
(Applause) But if you don't mind and can hold your applause till later, I don't want to run out of time, because I want to show you a lot of cool stuff.
So, just very quickly: you can move on from here to another very interesting idea.
Beyond the pretty picture, beyond the nice visualization, what is the purpose, how is this useful?
This next idea comes from discussions with curators that we've been having at museums, who, by the way, I've fallen in love with, because they dedicate their whole life to try to tell these stories.
One of the curators told me, "Amit, what would it be like if you could create a virtual curator's table where all these six million objects are displayed in a way for us to look at the connections between them?"
You can spend a lot of time, trust me, looking at different objects and understanding where they come from.
It's a crazy Matrix experience.
(Laughter) Just moving on, let's take the world-famous Vincent Van Gogh, who is very well-represented on this platform.
Thanks to the diversity of the institutions we have, we have over 211 high-definition, amazing artworks by this artist, now organized in one beautiful view.
And as it resolves, and as Cyril goes deeper, you can see all the self-portraits, you can see still life.
But I just wanted to highlight one very quick example, which is very timely: "The Bedroom."
This is an artwork where three copies exist -- one at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, one at the Orsay in Paris and one at the Art Institute of Chicago, which, actually, currently is hosting a reunion of all three artworks physically, I think only for the second time ever.
But, it is united digitally and virtually for anybody to look at in a very different way, and you won't get pushed in the line in the crowd.
So let's take you and let's travel through "The Bedroom" very quickly, so you can experience what we are doing for every single object.
We want the image to speak as much as it can on a digital platform.
And all you need is an internet connection and a computer (Applause) And, Cyril, if you can go deeper, quickly.
I'm sorry, this is all live, so you have to give Cyril a little bit of -- and this is available for every object: modern art, contemporary art, Renaissance -- you name it, even sculpture.
Sometimes, you don't know what can attract you to an artwork or to a museum or to a cultural discovery.
So for me, personally, it was quite a challenge because when I decided to make this my full-time job at Google, my mother was not very supportive.
I love my mother, but she thought I was wasting my life with this museum stuff.
And for her, a museum is what you do when you go on vacation and you tick-mark and it's over, right?
And it took around four and a half years for me to convince my lovely Indian mother that actually, this is worthwhile.
And the way I did it was, I realized one day that she loves gold.
So I started showing her all objects that have the material gold in them.
And the first thing my mom asks me is, "How can we buy these?"
(Laughter) And obviously, my salary is not that high, so I was like, "We can't actually do that, mom.
But you can explore them virtually."
And so now my mom -- every time I meet her, she asks me, "Any more gold, any more silver in your project? Can you show me?"
And that's the idea I'm trying to illustrate.
It does not matter how you get in, as long as you get in.
Once you get in, you're hooked.
Moving on from here very quickly, there is kind of a playful idea, actually, to illustrate the point of access, and I'm going to go quite quickly on this one.
We all know that seeing the artwork in person is amazing.
But we also know that most of us can't do it, and the ones that can afford to do it, it's complicated.
So -- Cyril, can we load up our art trip, what do we call it?
We don't have a good name for this.
But essentially, we have around 1,000 amazing institutions, 68 countries.
But let's start with Rembrandt.
We might have time for only one example.
But thanks to the diversity, we've got around 500 amazing Rembrandt object artworks from 46 institutions and 17 countries.
Let's say that on your next vacation, you want to go see every single one of them.
That is your itinerary, you will probably travel 53,000 kilometers, visit around, I think, 46 institutions, and just FYI, you might release 10 tons of CO2 emissions.
(Laughter) But remember, it's art, so you can justify it, perhaps, in some way.
Moving on swiftly from here, is something a little bit more technical and more interesting.
All that we've shown you so far uses metadata to make the connections.
But obviously we have something cool nowadays that everyone likes to talk about, which is machine learning.
So what we thought is, let's strip out all the metadata, let's look at what machine learning can do based purely on visual recognition of this entire collection.
What we ended up with is this very interesting map, these clusters that have no reference point information, but has just used visuals to cluster things together.
Each cluster is an art to us by itself of discovery.
But one of the clusters we want to show you very quickly is this amazing cluster of portraits that we found from museums around the world.
If you could zoom in a little bit more, Cyril.
Just to show you, you can just travel through portraits.
And essentially, you can do nature, you can do horses and clusters galore.
When we saw all these portraits, we were like, "Hey, can we do something fun for kids, or can we do something playful to get people interested in portraits?"
Because I haven't really seen young kids really excited to go to a portrait gallery.
I wanted to try to figure something out.
So we created something called the portrait matcher.
It's quite self-explanatory, so I'm just going to let Cyril show his beautiful face.
And essentially what's happening is, with the movement of his head, we are matching different portraits around the world from museums.
(Applause) And I don't know about you, but I've shown it to my nephew and sister, and the reaction is just phenomenal.
All they ask me is, "When can we go see this?"
And by the way, if we're nice, maybe, Cyril, you can smile and find a happy one?
Oh, perfect.
By the way, this is not rehearsed.
Congrats, Cyril. Great stuff. Oh wow.
OK, let's move on; otherwise, this will just take the whole time.
(Applause) So, art and culture can be fun also, right?
For our last quick experiment -- we call all of these "experiments" -- our last quick experiment comes back to machine learning.
We show you clusters, visual clusters, but what if we could ask the machine to also name these clusters?
What if it could automatically tag them, using no actual metadata?
So what we have is this kind of explorer, where we have managed to match, I think, around 4,000 labels.
And we haven't really done anything special here, just fed the collection.
And we found interesting categories.
We can start with horses, a very straightforward category.
You would expect to see that the machine has put images of horses, right?
And it has, but you also notice, right over there, that it has a very abstract image that it has still managed to recognize and cluster as horses.
We also have an amazing head in terms of a horse.
And each one has the tags as to why it got categorized in this.
So let's move to another one which I found very funny and interesting, because I don't understand how this category came up.
It's called "Lady in Waiting."
If, Cyril, you do it very quickly, you will see that we have these amazing images of ladies, I guess, in waiting or posing.
I don't really understand it.
But I've been trying to ask my museum contacts, you know, "What is this? What's going on here?"
And it's fascinating.
Coming back to gold very quickly, I wanted to search for gold and see how the machine tagged all the gold.
But, actually, it doesn't tag it as gold.
We are living in popular times.
It tags it as "bling-bling."
(Laughter) I'm being hard on Cyril, because I'm moving too fast.
Essentially, here you have all the bling-bling of the world's museums organized for you.
And finally, to end this talk and these experiments, what I hope you feel after this talk is happiness and emotion.
And what would we see when we see happiness?
If we actually look at all the objects that have been tagged under "happiness," you would expect happiness, I guess.
But there was one that came up that was very fascinating and interesting, which was this artwork by Douglas Coupland, our friend and artist in residence as well, called, "I Miss My Pre-Internet Brain."
I don't know why the machine feels like it misses its pre-Internet brain and it's been tagged here, but it's a very interesting thought.
I sometimes do miss my pre-Internet brain, but not when it comes to exploring arts and culture online.
So take out your phones, take out your computers, go visit museums.
And just a quick call-out to all the amazing archivists, historians, curators, who are sitting in museums, preserving all this culture.
And the least we can do is get our daily dose of art and culture for ourselves and our kids.
Thank you.
(Applause)
One way to change our genes is to make new ones, as Craig Venter has so elegantly shown.
Another is to change our lifestyles.
And what we're learning is how powerful and dynamic these changes can be, that you don't have to wait very long to see the benefits.
When you eat healthier, manage stress, exercise and love more, your brain actually gets more blood flow and more oxygen.
But more than that, your brain gets measurably bigger.
Things that were thought impossible just a few years ago can actually be measured now.
This was figured out by Robin Williams a few years before the rest of us.
Now, there's some things that you can do to make your brain grow new brain cells.
Some of my favorite things, like chocolate and tea, blueberries, alcohol in moderation, stress management and cannabinoids found in marijuana.
I'm just the messenger.
(Laughter) What were we just talking about?
(Laughter) And other things that can make it worse, that can cause you to lose brain cells.
The usual suspects, like saturated fat and sugar, nicotine, opiates, cocaine, too much alcohol and chronic stress.
Your skin gets more blood flow when you change your lifestyle, so you age less quickly. Your skin doesn't wrinkle as much.
Your heart gets more blood flow.
We've shown that you can actually reverse heart disease.
That these clogged arteries that you see on the upper left, after only a year become measurably less clogged.
And the cardiac PET scan shown on the lower left, the blue means no blood flow.
A year later -- orange and white is maximum blood flow.
We've shown you may be able to stop and reverse the progression of early prostate cancer and, by extension, breast cancer, simply by making these changes.
We've found that tumor growth in vitro was inhibited 70 percent in the group that made these changes, whereas only nine percent in the comparison group.
These differences were highly significant.
Even your sexual organs get more blood flow, so you increase sexual potency.
One of the most effective anti-smoking ads was done by the Department of Health Services, showing that nicotine, which constricts your arteries, can cause a heart attack or a stroke, but it also causes impotence.
Half of guys who smoke are impotent.
How sexy is that?
Now we're also about to publish a study -- the first study showing you can change gene expression in men with prostate cancer.
This is what's called a heat map -- and the different colors -- and along the side, on the right, are different genes.
And we found that over 500 genes were favorably changed -- in effect, turning on the good genes, the disease-preventing genes, turning off the disease-promoting genes.
And so these findings I think are really very powerful, giving many people new hope and new choices.
And companies like Navigenics and DNA Direct and 23andMe, that are giving you your genetic profiles, are giving some people a sense of, "Gosh, well, what can I do about it?"
Well, our genes are not our fate, and if we make these changes -- they're a predisposition -- but if we make bigger changes than we might have made otherwise, we can actually change how our genes are expressed.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Have you ever been asked by your Chinese friend, "What is your zodiac sign?"
Don't think they are making small talk.
If you say, "I'm a Monkey," they immediately know you are either 24, 36, 48 or 60 years old.
(Laughter) Asking a zodiac sign is a polite way of asking your age.
By revealing your zodiac sign, you are also being evaluated.
Judgments are being made about your fortune or misfortune, your personality, career prospects and how you will do in a given year.
If you share you and your partner's animal signs, they will paint a picture in their mind about your private life.
Maybe you don't believe in the Chinese zodiac.
As a quarter of the world population is influenced by it, you'd be wise to do something about that.
So what is the Chinese zodiac, exactly?
Most Westerners think of Greco-Roman zodiac, the signs divided into 12 months.
The Chinese zodiac is different.
It's a 12-year cycle labeled with animals, starting with a Rat and ending with a Pig, and has no association with constellations.
For example, if you were born in 1975, you are a Rabbit.
Can you see your zodiac sign there?
Our Chinese ancestors constructed a very complicated theoretical framework based on yin and yang, the five elements and the 12 zodiac animals.
Over thousands of years, this popular culture has affected people's major decisions, such as naming, marriage, giving birth and attitude towards each other.
And some of the implications are quite amazing.
The Chinese believe certain animals get on better than the others.
So parents choose specific years to give birth to babies, because they believe the team effort by the right combination of animals can give prosperity to families.
We even refer to the zodiac when entering into romantic relations.
I'm a Pig; I should have perfect romance with Tigers, Goats and Rabbits.
Chinese people believe some animals are natural enemies.
As a Pig, I need to be careful with a Snake.
Raise your hand if you are a Snake.
Let's have a chat later.
(Laughter) We believe some animals are luckier than the others, such as the Dragon.
Unlike the Western tradition, the Chinese Dragon is a symbol for power, strength and wealth.
It's everyone's dream to have a Dragon baby.
Jack Ma's parents must have been very proud.
And they are not the only ones.
In 2012, the Year of the Dragon, the birthrate in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan increased by five percent.
That means another one million more babies.
With a traditional preference to baby boys, the boy-girl ratio that year was 120 to 100.
When those Dragon boys grow up, they will face much more severe competition in love and job markets.
According to the BBC and the Chinese government's press release, January 2015 saw a peak of Cesarean sections.
Why?
That was the last month for the Year of the Horse.
It's not because they like horses so much, it's because they try to avoid having unlucky Goat babies.
(Laughter) If you are a Goat, please don't feel bad.
Those are Goat babies.
They don't look like losers to me.
(Laughter) Tiger is another undesirable animal, due to its volatile temperament.
Many Chinese regions saw a sharp decline of birthrate during those years.
Perhaps one should consider zodiac in reverse, as those Tiger and Goat babies will face much less competition.
Maybe they are the lucky ones.
I went through the Forbes top 300 richest people in the world, and it's interesting to see the most undesirable two animals, the Goat and Tiger, are at the top of the chart, even higher than the Dragon.
So maybe we should consider, maybe it's much better to have less competition.
One last but interesting point: many Chinese people make their investment decisions based on the zodiac sign index.
Although the belief and tradition of the zodiac sign has been over thousands of years, the trend of using it in making major decisions did not really happen until the past few decades.
Our ancestors were very busy surviving poverty, drought, famine, riot, disease and civil war.
And finally, Chinese people have the time, wealth and technology to create an ideal life they've always wanted.
The collective decision made by 1.3 billion people has caused the fluctuation in economics and demand on everything, from health care and education to property and consumer goods.
As China plays such an important role in the global economy and geopolitics, the decisions made based on the zodiac and other Chinese traditions end up impacting everyone around the world.
Are there any Monkeys here?
2016 is the Year of the Monkey.
Monkeys are clever, curious, creative and mischievous.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm an Iranian-American Muslim female, like all of you.
And I'm also a social justice comedian, something that I insist is an actual job.
To explain what that is, let me tell you how I got here.
I've performed all over the country.
And let me tell you, America is majestic, right?
It's got breathtaking nature, waffle houses and diabetes as far as the eye can see.
It is really something.
Now, the American population can be broken up into three main categories: there's mostly wonderful people, haters and Florida.
(Laughter) Besides Florida, the most troubling category here are the Haters.
They are a minority, but they overcompensate by being extra loud.
They have the Napoleon complex of demographics, and yes, some of the men do wear heels.
As a social justice comedian, it's my goal to convert these haters, because they hate a lot of things, which leads to negative outcomes, like racism, violence and Ted Nugent.
This is not an exhaustive list; I'm probably missing 3-7 items.
But the point is, we have to reckon with the haters.
But there's variance within this group and it's not efficient to go after all of them, right?
So what I've done is created a highly scientific Taxonomy of Haters.
I basically took all of the haters, I put them in a petri dish, like a scientist, and this is what I found.
(Laughter) First off, we have the trolls.
These are your garden-variety digital haters.
They're the people who quit their jobs so they can post on YouTube videos all day long.
There's also the drive-by haters.
Now, these people will be at a stoplight, they'll wait for the light to turn green and when it does, they yell, "Go back to your own country!"
Now back in the day, they would've actually gotten out of their cars and hated you to your face.
But they just don't make them like they used to -- which is another sign of the decline in America.
(Laughter) The next category is the mission-oriented-bigot- whose-group-affiliation- gives-them-cover-for-hating hater.
These guys like to hate via a seemingly nice organization, like a church or a nonprofit, and they oftentimes like to speak in an old-timey voice.
But the group I'm most interested in is the swing hater.
The swing hater is sister to the swing voter -- they just can't decide!
They're like ideological sluts who move from hating to not hating.
And they do it because they don't have enough information.
This is the group I like to target with social justice comedy.
Why comedy?
Because on a scale of comedy to brochure, the average American prefers comedy, as you can see from this graph.
(Laughter) Comedy is very popular.
And by the way, this is a mathematically accurate graph, generated from fake numbers.
(Laughter) Now, the question is: Why does social justice comedy work?
Because, first off, it makes you laugh.
And when you're laughing, you enter into a state of openness.
And in that moment of openness, a good social justice comedian can stick in a whole bunch of information, and if they're really skilled, a rectal exam.
(Laughter) Here are some ground rules for social justice comedy: first off, it's not partisan.
This isn't political comedy, this is about justice, and no one is against justice.
Two, it's inviting and warm, it makes you feel like you're sitting inside of a burrito.
Three, it's funny but sneaky, like you could be hearing an interesting treatise on income inequality, that's encased in a really sophisticated poop joke.
(Laughter) Here's how I see social justice comedy working.
A few years ago, I rounded up a bunch of Muslim-American comedians -- in a non-violent way -- (Laughter) And we went around the country to places like Alabama, Arizona, Tennessee, Georgia -- places where they love the Muzzies -- and we did stand-up shows.
We called the tour "The Muslims Are Coming!"
(Laughter) We turned this into a movie, and then after the movie came out, a known hate group spent 300,000 dollars on an anti-Muslim poster campaign with the MTA -- that's the New York City subway system.
Now, the posters were truly offensive, not to mentioned poorly designed -- I mean, if you're going to be bigoted, you might as well use a better font.
(Laughter) But we decided, why not launch our own poster campaign that says nice things about Muslims, while promoting the movie.
So myself and fellow comedian Dean Obeidallah decided to launch the fighting-bigotry- with-delightful-posters campaign.
We raised the money, worked with the MTA for over 5 months, got the posters approved, and two days after they were supposed to go up, the MTA decided to ban the posters, citing political content.
Let's take a look at a couple of those posters.
Here's one.
Facts about Muslims: Muslims invented the concept of a hospital.
OK.
Fact: Grown-up Muslims can do more push-ups than baby Muslims.
(Laughter) Fact: Muslims invented Justin Timberlake.
(Laughter) Let's take a look at another one.
The ugly truth about Muslims: they have great frittata recipes.
Now clearly, frittatas are considered political by the MTA.
Either that, or the mere mention of Muslims in a positive light was considered political -- but it isn't.
It's about justice.
So we decided to change our fighting-bigortry- with-delightful-posters campaign and turn it into the fighting-bigotry- with-a-delightful-lawsuit campaign.
(Laughter) So basically, what I'm saying is a couple of dirt-bag comedians took on a major New York City agency and the comedians won.
(Applause and cheers) Thank you.
Victory was a very weird feeling.
I was like, "Is this what blonde girls feel like all the time?
'Cause this is amazing!"
(Laughter) Here's another example.
I'm asked everywhere I go: "Why don't Muslims denounce terrorism?"
We do. But OK, I'll take the bait.
So I decided to launch thedailydenouncer.com.
It's a website that denounces terrorism every day of the week, while taking the weekends off.
Let's take a look at an example.
They generally appear as single-panel cartoons, "I denounce terrorism! I also denounce people who never fill the paper tray!"
The point of the website is that it denounces terrorism while recognizing that it's ridiculous that we have to constantly denounce terrorism.
But if bigotry isn't your thing, social justice comedy is useful for all sorts of issues.
For example, myself and fellow comedian Lee Camp went to the Cayman Islands to investigate offshore banking.
Now, the United States loses something like 300 billion dollars a year in these offshore tax havens.
Not to brag, but at the end of every month, I have something like 5-15 dollars in disposable income.
So we walked into these banks in the Cayman Islands and asked if we could open up a bank account with eight dollars and 27 cents.
(Laughter) The bank managers would indulge us for 30-45 seconds before calling security.
Security would come out, brandish their weapons, and then we would squeal with fear and run away, because -- and this is the last rule of social justice comedy -- sometimes it makes you want to take a dump in your pants.
Most of my work is meant to be fun.
It's meant to generate a connection and laughter.
But yes, sometimes I get run off the grounds by security.
Sometimes I get mean tweets and hate mail.
Sometimes I get voice mails saying that if I continue telling my jokes, they'll kill me and they'll kill my family.
And those death threats are definitely not funny.
But despite the occasional danger, I still think that social justice comedy is one of our best weapons.
I mean, we've tried a lot of approaches to social justice, like war and competitive ice dancing.
But still, a lot of things are still kind of awful.
So I think it's time we try and tell a really good poop joke.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I've been living in rural East Africa for about 10 years, and I want to share a field perspective with you on global poverty.
I believe that the greatest failure of the human race is the fact that we've left more than one billion of our members behind.
Hungry, extreme poverty: these often seem like gigantic, insurmountable problems, too big to solve.
But as a field practitioner, I believe these are actually very solvable problems if we just take the right strategies.
Archimedes was an ancient Greek thinker, and he taught us that if we lean on the right levers, we can move the world.
In the fight against extreme poverty, I believe there are three powerful levers that we can lean on.
This talk is all about those levers, and why they make poverty a winnable fight in our lifetimes.
What is extreme poverty?
When I first moved to rural East Africa, I stayed overnight with a farm family.
They were wonderful people.
They invited me into their home. We sang songs together and ate a simple dinner.
They gave me a blanket to sleep on the floor.
In the morning, however, there was nothing to eat.
And then at lunchtime, I watched with an increasingly sick feeling as the eldest girl in the family cooked porridge as a substitute for lunch.
For that meal, every child drank one cup to survive.
And I cannot tell you how ashamed I felt when they handed one of those cups to me, and I knew I had to accept their hospitality.
Children need food not only to survive but also to grow physically and mentally.
Every day they fail to eat, they lose a little bit of their future.
Amongst the extreme poor, one in three children are permanently stunted from a lifetime of not eating enough.
When that's combined with poor access to health care, one in 10 extremely poor children die before they reach age five.
And only one quarter of children complete high school because they lack school fees.
Hunger and extreme poverty curb human potential in every possible way.
We see ourselves as a thinking, feeling and moral human race, but until we solve these problems for all of our members, we fail that standard, because every person on this planet matters.
This child matters.
These children matter.
This girl matters.
You know, we see things like this, and we're upset by them, but they seem like such big problems.
We don't know how to take effective action.
But remember our friend Archimedes.
Global poverty has powerful levers.
It's a problem like any other.
I live and work in the field, and as a practitioner, I believe these are very solvable problems.
So for the next 10 minutes, let's not be sad about the state of the world.
Let's engage our brains.
Let's engage our collective passion for problem-solving and figure out what those levers are.
Lever number one: most of the world's poor are farmers.
Think about how extraordinary this is.
If this picture represents the world's poor, then more than half engage in farming as a major source of income.
This gets me really excited.
All of these people, one profession.
Think how powerful this is.
When farmers become more productive, then more than half the world's poor earn more money and climb out of poverty.
And it gets better.
The product of farming is, of course, food.
So when farmers become more productive, they earn more food, and they don't just help themselves, but they help to feed healthy communities and thriving economies.
And when farmers become more productive, they reduce environmental pressure.
We only have two ways we can feed the world: we can either make our existing farmland a lot more productive, or we can clear cut forest and savannah to make more farmland, which would be environmentally disastrous.
Farmers are basically a really important leverage point.
When farmers become more productive, they earn more income, they climb out of poverty, they feed their communities and they reduce environmental land pressure.
Farmers stand at the center of the world.
And not a farmer like this one, but rather this lady.
Most of the farmers I know are actually women.
Look at the strength and the will radiating from this woman.
She is physically strong, mentally tough, and she will do whatever it takes to earn a better life for her children.
If we're going to put the future of humanity in one person's hands, then I'm really glad it's her.
(Applause) There's just one problem: many smallholder farmers lack access to basic tools and knowledge.
Currently, they take a little bit of saved food grain from the prior year, they plant it in the ground and they till it with a manual hand hoe.
These are tools and techniques that date to the Bronze Age, and it's why many farmers are still very poor.
But good news, again.
Lever number two: humanity actually solved the problem of agricultural poverty a century ago.
Let me walk you through the three most basic factors in farming.
First, hybrid seed is created when you cross two seeds together.
If you naturally pollinate a high-yielding variety together with a drought-resistant variety, you get a hybrid that inherits positive traits from both of its parents.
Next, conventional fertilizer, if used responsibly, is environmentally sustainable.
If you micro-dose just a pinch of fertilizer to a plant that's taller than I am, you unlock enormous yield gain.
These are known as farm inputs.
Farm inputs need to be combined with good practice.
When you space your seeds and plant with massive amounts of compost, farmers multiply their harvests.
These proven tools and practices have more than tripled agricultural productivity in every major region of the world, moving mass numbers of people out of poverty.
We just haven't finished delivering these things to everybody just yet, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
So overall, this is amazing news.
Humanity actually solved agricultural poverty a century ago, in theory.
We just haven't delivered these things to everybody just yet.
In this century, the reason that people remain poor is because maybe they live in remote places.
They lack access to these things.
Therefore, ending poverty is simply a matter of delivering proven goods and services to people.
We don't need more genius types right now.
The humble delivery guy is going to end global poverty in our lifetime.
So these are the three levers, and the most powerful lever is simply delivery.
Wherever the world's companies, governments and nonprofits set up delivery networks for life-improving goods, we eliminate poverty.
OK, so that sounds really nice in theory, but what about in practice?
What do these delivery networks look like?
I want to share the concrete example that I know best, my organization, One Acre Fund.
We only serve the farmer, and our job is to provide her with the tools that she needs to succeed.
We start off by delivering farm inputs to really rural places.
Now, this may appear initially very challenging, but it's pretty possible. Let me show you.
We buy farm inputs with the combined power of our farmer network, and store it in 20 warehouses like this.
Then, during input delivery, we rent hundreds of 10-ton trucks and send them out to where farmers are waiting in the field.
They then get their individual orders and walk it home to their farms.
It's kind of like Amazon for rural farmers.
Importantly, realistic delivery also includes finance, a way to pay.
Farmers pay us little by little over time, covering most of our expenses.
And then we surround all that with training.
Our rural field officers deliver practical, hands-on training to farmers in the field every two weeks.
Wherever we deliver our services, farmers use these tools to climb out of poverty.
This is a farmer in our program, Consolata.
Look at the pride on her face.
She has achieved a modest prosperity that I believe is the human right of every hardworking person on the planet.
Today, I'm proud to say that we're serving about 400,000 farmers like Consolata.
(Applause) The key to doing this is scalable delivery.
In any given area, we hire a rural field officer who delivers our services to 200 farmers, on average, with more than 1,000 people living in those families.
Today, we have 2,000 of these rural field officers growing very quickly.
This is our delivery army, and we're just one organization.
There are many companies, governments and nonprofits that have delivery armies just like this.
And I believe we stand at a moment in time where collectively, we are capable of delivering farm services to all farmers.
Let me show you how possible this is.
This is a map of Sub-Saharan Africa, with a map of the United States for scale.
I chose Sub-Saharan Africa because this is a huge delivery territory.
It's very challenging.
But we analyzed every 50-mile by 50-mile block on the continent, and we found that half of farmers live in just these shaded regions.
That's a remarkably small area overall.
If you were to lay these boxes next to each other within a map of the United States, they would only cover the Eastern United States.
You can order pizza anywhere in this territory and it'll arrive to your house hot, fresh and delicious.
If America can deliver pizza to an area of this size, then Africa's companies, governments and non-profits can deliver farm services to all of her farmers.
This is possible.
I'm going to wrap up by generalizing beyond just farming.
In every field of human development, humanity has already invented effective tools to end poverty.
We just need to deliver them.
So again, in every area of human development, super-smart people a long time ago invented inexpensive, highly effective tools.
Humanity is armed to the teeth with simple, effective solutions to poverty.
We just need to deliver these to a pretty small area.
Again using the map of Sub-Saharan Africa as an example, remember that rural poverty is concentrated in these blue shaded areas.
Urban poverty is even more concentrated, in these green little dots.
Again, using a map of the United States for scale, this is what I would call a highly achievable delivery zone.
In fact, for the first time in human history, we have a vast amount of delivery infrastructure available to us.
The world's companies, governments and non-profits have delivery armies that are fully capable of covering this relatively small area.
We just lack the will.
If we are willing, every one of us has a role to play.
We first need more people to pursue careers in human development, especially if you live in a developing nation.
We need more front line health workers, teachers, farmer trainers, sales agents for life-improving goods.
These are the delivery people that dedicate their careers to improving the lives of others.
But we also need a lot of support roles.
These are roles available at just my organization alone, and we're just one out of many.
This may surprise you, but no matter what your technical specialty, there is a role for you in this fight.
And no matter how logistically possible it is to end poverty, we need a lot more resources.
This is our number one constraint.
For private investors, we need a big expansion of venture capital, private equity, working capital, available in emerging markets.
But there are also limits to what private business can accomplish.
Private businesses often struggle to profitably serve the extreme poor, so philanthropy still has a major role to play.
Anybody can give, but we need more leadership.
We need more visionary philanthropists and global leaders who will take problems in human development and lead humanity to wipe them off the face of the planet.
If you're interested in these ideas, check out this website.
We need more leaders.
Humanity has put people on the moon.
We've invented supercomputers that fit into our pockets and connect us with anybody on the planet.
We've run marathons at a five-minute mile pace.
We are an exceptional people.
But we've left more than one billion of our members behind.
Until every girl like this one has an opportunity to earn her full human potential, we have failed to become a truly moral and just human race.
Logistically speaking, it's incredibly possible to end extreme poverty.
We just need to deliver proven goods and services to everybody.
If we have the will, every one of us has a role to play.
Let's deploy our time, our careers, our collective wealth.
Let us deliver an end to extreme poverty in this lifetime.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today 40 million Americans are indebted for their passage to the new economy.
Too poor to pay their way through college, they now owe lenders more than one trillion US dollars.
They do find what jobs they can get to pay off a debt that is secured on their person.
In America, even a bankrupt gambler gets a second chance.
But it is nearly impossible for an American to get discharged their student loan debts.
Once upon a time in America, going to college did not mean graduating with debt.
My friend Paul's father graduated from Colorado State University on the GI Bill.
For his generation, higher education was free or almost free, because it was thought of as a public good.
Not anymore.
When Paul also graduated from Colorado State University, he paid for his English degree by working part-time.
30 years ago, higher education tuition was affordable, reasonable, and what debts you accumulated, you paid off by graduation date.
Not anymore.
Paul's daughter followed in his footsteps, but with one difference: when she graduated five years ago, it was with a whopping debt.
Students like Kate have to take on a loan because the cost of higher education has become unaffordable for many if not most American families.
But so what?
Getting into debt to buy an expensive education is not all bad if you could pay it off with the increased income that you earned from it.
But that's where the rubber meets the road.
Even a college grad earned 10 percent more in 2001 than she did in 2013.
So ...
tuition costs up, public funding down, family incomes diminished, personal incomes weak.
Is it any wonder that more than a quarter of those who must cannot make their student loan payments?
The worst of times can be the best of times, because certain truths flash up in ways that you can't ignore.
I want to speak of three of them today.
1.2 trillion dollars of debts for diplomas make it abundantly obvious that higher education is a consumer product you can buy.
All of us talk about education just as the economists do now, as an investment that you make to improve the human stock by training them for work.
As an investment you make to sort and classify people so that employers can hire them more easily.
The U.S. News &amp; World Report ranks colleges just as the consumer report rates washing machines.
The language is peppered with barbarisms.
Teachers are called "service providers," students are called "consumers."
Sociology and Shakespeare and soccer and science, all of these are "content."
Student debt is profitable.
Only not on you.
Your debt fattens the profit of the student loan industry.
The two 800-pound gorillas of which -- Sallie Mae and Navient -- posted last year a combined profit of 1.2 billion dollars.
And just like home mortgages, student loans can be bundled and packaged and sliced and diced, and sold on Wall Street.
And colleges and universities that invest in these securitized loans profit twice.
Once from your tuition, and then again from the interest on debt.
With all that money to be made, are we surprised that some in the higher education business have begun to engage in false advertising, in bait and switch ...
in exploiting the very ignorance that they pretend to educate?
Third: diplomas are a brand.
Many years ago my teacher wrote, "When students are treated as consumers, they're made prisoners of addiction and envy."
Just as consumers can be sold and resold upgraded versions of an iPhone, so also people can be sold more and more education.
College is the new high school, we already say that.
But why stop there?
People can be upsold on certifications and recertifications, master's degrees, doctoral degrees.
Higher education is also marketed as a status object.
Buy a degree, much like you do a Lexus of a Louis Vuitton bag, to distinguish yourself from others.
So you can be the object of envy of others.
Diplomas are a brand.
But these truths are often times hidden by a very noisy sales pitch.
There is not a day that goes by without some policy guy on television telling us, "A college degree is absolutely essential to get on that up escalator to a middle-class life."
And the usual evidence offered is the college premium: a college grad who makes on average 56 percent more than a high school grad.
Let's look at that number more carefully, because on the face of it, it seems to belie the stories we all hear about college grads working as baristas and cashiers.
Of 100 people who enroll in any form of post-secondary education, 45 do not complete it in a timely fashion, for a number of reasons, including financial.
Of the 55 that do graduate, two will remain unemployed, and another 18 are underemployed.
So, college grads earn more than high school grads, but does it pay for the exorbitant tuition and the lost wages while at college?
Now even economists admit going to college pays off for only those who complete it.
But that's only because high school wages have been cut to the bone, for decades now.
For decades, workers with a high school degree have been denied a fair share of what they have produced.
And had they received as they should have, then going to college would have been a bad investment for many.
College premium?
I think it's a high school discount.
Two out of three people who enroll are not going to find an adequate job.
And the future, for them, doesn't look particularly promising -- in fact, it's downright bleak.
And it is they who are going to suffer the most punishing forms of student debt.
And it is they, curiously and sadly, who are marketed most loudly about this college premium thing.
That's not just cynical marketing, that's cruel.
So what do we do?
What if students and parents treated higher education as a consumer product?
Everybody else seems to.
Then, like any other consumer product, you would demand to know what you're paying for.
When you buy medicines, you get a list of side effects.
When you buy a higher educational product, you should have a warning label that allows consumers to choose, make informed choices.
When you buy a car, it tells you how many miles per gallon to expect.
Who knows what to expect from a degree say, in Canadian Studies.
There is such a thing, by the way.
What if there was an app for that?
One that linked up the cost of a major to the expected income.
Let's call it Income-Based Tuition or IBT.
One of you make this.
(Laughter) Discover your reality.
(Laughter) There are three advantages, three benefits to Income-Based Tuition.
Any user can figure out how much money he or she will make from a given college and major.
Such informed users are unlikely to fall victim to the huckster's ploy, to the sales pitch.
But also to choose wisely.
Why would anybody pay more for college than let's say, 15 percent of the additional income they earn?
There's a second benefit to Income-Based Tuition.
By tying the cost to the income, college administrators would be forced to manage costs better, to find innovative ways to do so.
For instance, all of you students here pay roughly the same tuition for every major.
That is manifestly unfair, and should change.
An engineering student uses more resources and facilities and labs and faculty than a philosophy student.
But the philosophy student, as a consequence, is subsidizing the engineering student.
Who then, by the way, goes on and earns more money.
Why should two people buy the same product, pay the same, but one person receive half or a third of the service.
In fact, college grads, some majors, pay 25 percent of their income servicing their student debt, while others pay five percent.
That kind if inequity would end when majors are priced more correctly.
Now of course, all this data -- and one of you is going to do this, right?
All this data has to be well designed, maybe audited by public accounting firms to avoid statistical lies.
We know about statistics, right?
But be that as it may, the third and biggest benefit of Income-Based Tuition, is it would free Americans from the fear and the fact of financial ruin because they bought a defective product.
Perhaps, in time, young and old Americans may rediscover, as the gentleman said earlier, their curiosity, their love of learning -- begin to study what they love, love what they study, follow their passion ...
getting stimulated by their intelligence, follow paths of inquiry that they really want to.
After all, it was Eric and Kevin, two years ago, just exactly these kinds of young men, who prompted me and worked with me, and still do, in the study of indebted students in America.
Thank you for your attention.
(Applause)
War has been a part of my life since I can remember.
I was born in Afghanistan, just six months after the Soviets invaded, and even though I was too young to understand what was happening, I had a deep sense of the suffering and the fear around me.
Those early experiences had a major impact on how I now think about war and conflict.
I learned that when people have a fundamental issue at stake, for most of them, giving in is not an option.
For these types conflicts -- when people's rights are violated, when their countries are occupied, when they're oppressed and humiliated -- they need a powerful way to resist and to fight back.
Which means that no matter how destructive and terrible violence is, if people see it as their only choice, they will use it.
Most of us are concerned with the level of violence in the world.
But we're not going to end war by telling people that violence is morally wrong.
Instead, we must offer them a tool that's at least as powerful and as effective as violence.
This is the work I do.
For the past 13 years, I've been teaching people in some of the most difficult situations around the world how they can use nonviolent struggle to conduct conflict.
Most people associate this type of action with Gandhi and Martin Luther King.
But people have been using nonviolent action for thousands of years.
In fact, most of the rights that we have today in this country -- as women, as minorities, as workers, as people of different sexual orientations and citizens concerned with the environment -- these rights weren't handed to us.
They were won by people who fought for them and who sacrificed for them.
But because we haven't learned from this history, nonviolent struggle as a technique is widely misunderstood.
I met recently with a group of Ethiopian activists, and they told me something that I hear a lot.
They said they'd already tried nonviolent action, and it hadn't worked.
Years ago they held a protest.
The government arrested everyone, and that was the end of that.
The idea that nonviolent struggle is equivalent to street protests is a real problem.
Because although protests can be a great way to show that people want change, on their own, they don't actually create change -- at least change that is fundamental.
(Laughter) Powerful opponents are not going to give people what they want just because they asked nicely ...
or even not so nicely.
(Laughter) Nonviolent struggle works by destroying an opponent, not physically, but by identifying the institutions that an opponent needs to survive, and then denying them those sources of power.
Nonviolent activists can neutralize the military by causing soldiers to defect.
They can disrupt the economy through strikes and boycotts.
And they can challenge government propaganda by creating alternative media.
There are a variety of methods that can be used to do this.
My colleague and mentor, Gene Sharp, has identified 198 methods of nonviolent action.
And protest is only one.
Let me give you a recent example.
Until a few months ago, Guatemala was ruled by corrupt former military officials with ties to organized crime.
People were generally aware of this, but most of them felt powerless to do anything about it -- until one group of citizens, just 12 regular people, put out a call on Facebook to their friends to meet in the central plaza, holding signs with a message: "Renuncia YA" -- resign already.
To their surprise, 30,000 people showed up.
They stayed there for months as protests spread throughout the country.
At one point, the organizers delivered hundreds of eggs to various government buildings with a message: "If you don't have the huevos" -- the balls -- "to stop corrupt candidates from running for office, you can borrow ours."
(Laughter) (Applause) President Molina responded by vowing that he would never step down.
And the activists realized that they couldn't just keep protesting and ask the president to resign.
They needed to leave him no choice.
So they organized a general strike, in which people throughout the country refused to work.
In Guatemala City alone, over 400 businesses and schools shut their doors.
Meanwhile, farmers throughout the country blocked major roads.
Within five days, the president, along with dozens of other government officials, resigned already.
(Applause) I've been greatly inspired by the creativity and bravery of people using nonviolent action in nearly every country in the world.
For example, recently a group of activists in Uganda released a crate of pigs in the streets.
You can see here that the police are confused about what to do with them.
(Laughter) The pigs were painted the color of the ruling party.
One pig was even wearing a hat, a hat that people recognized.
(Laughter) Activists around the world are getting better at grabbing headlines, but these isolated actions do very little if they're not part of a larger strategy.
A general wouldn't march his troops into battle unless he had a plan to win the war.
Yet this is how most of the world's nonviolent movements operate.
Nonviolent struggle is just as complex as military warfare, if not more.
Its participants must be well-trained and have clear objectives, and its leaders must have a strategy of how to achieve those objectives.
The technique of war has been developed over thousands of years with massive resources and some of our best minds dedicated to understanding and improving how it works.
Meanwhile, nonviolent struggle is rarely systematically studied, and even though the number is growing, there are still only a few dozen people in the world who are teaching it.
This is dangerous, because we now know that our old approaches of dealing with conflict are not adequate for the new challenges that we're facing.
The US government recently admitted that it's in a stalemate in its war against ISIS.
But what most people don't know is that people have stood up to ISIS using nonviolent action.
When ISIS captured Mosul in June 2014, they announced that they were putting in place a new public school curriculum, based on their own extremist ideology.
But on the first day of school, not a single child showed up.
Parents simply refused to send them.
They told journalists they would rather homeschool their children than to have them brainwashed.
This is an example of just one act of defiance in just one city.
But what if it was coordinated with the dozens of other acts of nonviolent resistance that have taken place against ISIS?
What if the parents' boycott was part of a larger strategy to identify and cut off the resources that ISIS needs to function; the skilled labor needed to produce food; the engineers needed to extract and refine oil; the media infrastructure and communications networks and transportation systems, and the local businesses that ISIS relies on?
It may be difficult to imagine defeating ISIS with action that is nonviolent.
But it's time we challenge the way we think about conflict and the choices we have in facing it.
Here's an idea worth spreading: let's learn more about where nonviolent action has worked and how we can make it more powerful, just like we do with other systems and technologies that are constantly being refined to better meet human needs.
It may be that we can improve nonviolent action to a point where it is increasingly used in place of war.
Violence as a tool of conflict could then be abandoned in the same way that bows and arrows were, because we have replaced them with weapons that are more effective.
With human innovation, we can make nonviolent struggle more powerful than the newest and latest technologies of war.
The greatest hope for humanity lies not in condemning violence but in making violence obsolete.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What does it mean to spend our time well?
I spend a lot of my time thinking about how to spend my time.
Probably too much -- I probably obsess over it.
My friends think I do.
But I feel like I kind of have to, because these days, it feels like little bits of my time kind of slip away from me, and when that happens, it feels like parts of my life are slipping away.
