And I recall how bold and hopeful it felt, even as some of her therapists said that my expectations were way too high, that she would never be able to hit those tiny targets.
And I recall watching in awe as she gradually learned to flex her little thumb and hit the buttons to say words she loved, like "reggae" and "cheese" and a hundred other words she loved that her mouth couldn't yet say.
And then we had to teach her less-fun words, prepositions -- words like "of" and "on" and "in."
And we worked on this for a few weeks.
And then I recall sitting at a dining room table with many relatives, and, apropos of absolutely nothing, Fiona used her iPad app to say, "poop in toilet."
(Laughter) Good or bad, hard to say.
(Laughter) My kid is human, that's all.
And that is a lot.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm Dr. David Hanson, and I build robots with character.
And by that, I mean that I develop robots that are characters, but also robots that will eventually come to empathize with you.
So we're starting with a variety of technologies that have converged into these conversational character robots that can see faces, make eye contact with you, make a full range of facial expressions, understand speech and begin to model how you're feeling and who you are, and build a relationship with you.
I developed a series of technologies that allowed the robots to make more realistic facial expressions than previously achieved, on lower power, which enabled the walking biped robots, the first androids.
So, it's a full range of facial expressions simulating all the major muscles in the human face, running on very small batteries, extremely lightweight.
The materials that allowed the battery-operated facial expressions is a material that we call Frubber, and it actually has three major innovations in the material that allow this to happen.
One is hierarchical pores, and the other is a macro-molecular nanoscale porosity in the material.
There he's starting to walk.
This is at the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.
I built the head. They built the body.
So the goal here is to achieve sentience in machines, and not just sentience, but empathy.
We're working with the Machine Perception Laboratory at the U.C. San Diego.
They have this really remarkable facial expression technology that recognizes facial expressions, what facial expressions you're making.
It also recognizes where you're looking, your head orientation.
We're emulating all the major facial expressions, and then controlling it with the software that we call the Character Engine.
And here is a little bit of the technology that's involved in that.
In fact, right now -- plug it from here, and then plug it in here, and now let's see if it gets my facial expressions.
Okay. So I'm smiling.
(Laughter) Now I'm frowning.
And this is really heavily backlit.
Okay, here we go.
Oh, it's so sad.
Okay, so you smile, frowning.
So his perception of your emotional states is very important for machines to effectively become empathetic.
Machines are becoming devastatingly capable of things like killing. Right?
Those machines have no place for empathy.
And there is billions of dollars being spent on that.
Character robotics could plant the seed for robots that actually have empathy.
So, if they achieve human level intelligence or, quite possibly, greater than human levels of intelligence, this could be the seeds of hope for our future.
So, we've made 20 robots in the last eight years, during the course of getting my Ph.D.
And then I started Hanson Robotics, which has been developing these things for mass manufacturing.
This is one of our robots that we showed at Wired NextFest a couple of years ago.
And it sees multiple people in a scene, remembers where individual people are, and looks from person to person, remembering people.
So, we're involving two things.
One, the perception of people, and two, the natural interface, the natural form of the interface, so that it's more intuitive for you to interact with the robot.
You start to believe that it's alive and aware.
So one of my favorite projects was bringing all this stuff together in an artistic display of an android portrait of science-fiction writer Philip K. Dick, who wrote great works like, "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"
which was the basis of the movie "Bladerunner."
In these stories, robots often think that they're human, and they sort of come to life.
So we put his writings, letters, his interviews, correspondences, into a huge database of thousands of pages, and then used some natural language processing to allow you to actually have a conversation with him.
And it was kind of spooky, because he would say these things that just sounded like they really understood you.
And this is one of the most exciting projects that we're developing, which is a little character that's a spokesbot for friendly artificial intelligence, friendly machine intelligence.
And we're getting this mass-manufactured.
We specked it out to actually be doable with a very, very low-cost bill of materials, so that it can become a childhood companion for kids.
Interfacing with the Internet, it gets smarter over the years.
As artificial intelligence evolves, so does his intelligence.
Chris Anderson: Thank you so much. That's incredible.
(Applause)
This is my first time at TED. Normally, as an advertising man, I actually speak at TED Evil, which is TED's secret sister that pays all the bills.
It's held every two years in Burma.
And I particularly remember a really good speech by Kim Jong Il on how to get teens smoking again.
(Laughter) But, actually, it's suddenly come to me after years working in the business, that what we create in advertising, which is intangible value -- you might call it perceived value, you might call it badge value, subjective value, intangible value of some kind -- gets rather a bad rap.
If you think about it, if you want to live in a world in the future where there are fewer material goods, you basically have two choices.
You can either live in a world which is poorer, which people in general don't like.
Or you can live in a world where actually intangible value constitutes a greater part of overall value, that actually intangible value, in many ways is a very, very fine substitute for using up labor or limited resources in the creation of things.
Here is one example. This is a train which goes from London to Paris.
The question was given to a bunch of engineers, about 15 years ago, "How do we make the journey to Paris better?"
And they came up with a very good engineering solution, which was to spend six billion pounds building completely new tracks from London to the coast, and knocking about 40 minutes off a three-and-half-hour journey time.
Now, call me Mister Picky. I'm just an ad man ...
... but it strikes me as a slightly unimaginative way of improving a train journey merely to make it shorter.
Now what is the hedonic opportunity cost on spending six billion pounds on those railway tracks?
Here is my naive advertising man's suggestion.
What you should in fact do is employ all of the world's top male and female supermodels, pay them to walk the length of the train, handing out free Chateau Petrus for the entire duration of the journey.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, you'll still have about three billion pounds left in change, and people will ask for the trains to be slowed down.
(Laughter) Now, here is another naive advertising man's question again.
And this shows that engineers, medical people, scientific people, have an obsession with solving the problems of reality, when actually most problems, once you reach a basic level of wealth in society, most problems are actually problems of perception.
So I'll ask you another question.
What on earth is wrong with placebos?
They seem fantastic to me. They cost very little to develop.
They work extraordinarily well.
They have no side effects, or if they do, they're imaginary, so you can safely ignore them.
(Laughter) So I was discussing this. And I actually went to the Marginal Revolution blog by Tyler Cowen. I don't know if anybody knows it.
Someone was actually suggesting that you can take this concept further, and actually produce placebo education.
The point is that education doesn't actually work by teaching you things.
It actually works by giving you the impression that you've had a very good education, which gives you an insane sense of unwarranted self-confidence, which then makes you very, very successful in later life.
So, welcome to Oxford, ladies and gentlemen.
(Laughter) (Applause) But, actually, the point of placebo education is interesting.
How many problems of life can be solved actually by tinkering with perception, rather than that tedious, hardworking and messy business of actually trying to change reality?
Here's a great example from history. I've heard this attributed to several other kings, but doing a bit of historical research, it seems to be Fredrick the Great.
Fredrick the Great of Prussia was very, very keen for the Germans to adopt the potato and to eat it, because he realized that if you had two sources of carbohydrate, wheat and potatoes, you get less price volatility in bread.
And you get a far lower risk of famine, because you actually had two crops to fall back on, not one.
The only problem is: potatoes, if you think about it, look pretty disgusting.
And also, 18th century Prussians ate very, very few vegetables -- rather like contemporary Scottish people.
(Laughter) So, actually, he tried making it compulsory.
The Prussian peasantry said, "We can't even get the dogs to eat these damn things.
They are absolutely disgusting and they're good for nothing."
There are even records of people being executed for refusing to grow potatoes.
So he tried plan B.
He tried the marketing solution, which is he declared the potato as a royal vegetable, and none but the royal family could consume it.
And he planted it in a royal potato patch, with guards who had instructions to guard over it, night and day, but with secret instructions not to guard it very well.
(Laughter) Now, 18th century peasants know that there is one pretty safe rule in life, which is if something is worth guarding, it's worth stealing.
Before long, there was a massive underground potato-growing operation in Germany.
What he'd effectively done is he'd re-branded the potato.
It was an absolute masterpiece.
I told this story and a gentleman from Turkey came up to me and said, "Very, very good marketer, Fredrick the Great. But not a patch on Ataturk."
Ataturk, rather like Nicolas Sarkozy, was very keen to discourage the wearing of a veil, in Turkey, to modernize it.
Now, boring people would have just simply banned the veil.
But that would have ended up with a lot of awful kickback and a hell of a lot of resistance.
Ataturk was a lateral thinker.
He made it compulsory for prostitutes to wear the veil.
(Laughter) (Applause) I can't verify that fully, but it does not matter.
There is your environmental problem solved, by the way, guys: All convicted child molesters have to drive a Porsche Cayenne.
(Laughter) What Ataturk realized actually is two very fundamental things.
Which is that, actually, first one, all value is actually relative.
All value is perceived value.
For those of you who don't speak Spanish, jugo de naranja -- it's actually the Spanish for "orange juice."
Because actually it's not the dollar. It's actually the peso in Buenos Aires. Very clever Buenos Aires street vendors decided to practice price discrimination to the detriment of any passing gringo tourists.
As an advertising man, I have to admire that.
But the first thing is that all value is subjective.
Second point is that persuasion is often better than compulsion.
These funny signs that flash your speed at you, some of the new ones, on the bottom right, now actually show a smiley face or a frowny face, to act as an emotional trigger.
What's fascinating about these signs is they cost about 10 percent of the running cost of a conventional speed camera, but they prevent twice as many accidents.
So, the bizarre thing, which is baffling to conventional, classically trained economists, is that a weird little smiley face has a better effect on changing your behavior than the threat of a £60 fine and three penalty points.
Tiny little behavioral economics detail: in Italy, penalty points go backwards.
You start with 12 and they take them away.
Because they found that loss aversion is a more powerful influence on people's behavior.
In Britain we tend to feel, "Whoa! Got another three!"
Not so in Italy.
Another fantastic case of creating intangible value to replace actual or material value, which remember, is what, after all, the environmental movement needs to be about: This again is from Prussia, from, I think, about 1812, 1813.
The wealthy Prussians, to help in the war against the French, were encouraged to give in all their jewelry.
And it was replaced with replica jewelry made of cast iron.
Here's one: "Gold gab ich für Eisen, 1813."
The interesting thing is that for 50 years hence, the highest status jewelry you could wear in Prussia wasn't made of gold or diamonds.
It was made of cast iron.
Because actually, never mind the actual intrinsic value of having gold jewelry. This actually had symbolic value, badge value.
It said that your family had made a great sacrifice in the past.
So, the modern equivalent would of course be this.
(Laughter) But, actually, there is a thing, just as there are Veblen goods, where the value of the good depends on it being expensive and rare -- there are opposite kind of things where actually the value in them depends on them being ubiquitous, classless and minimalistic.
If you think about it, Shakerism was a proto-environmental movement.
Adam Smith talks about 18th century America, where the prohibition against visible displays of wealth was so great, it was almost a block in the economy in New England, because even wealthy farmers could find nothing to spend their money on without incurring the displeasure of their neighbors.
It's perfectly possible to create these social pressures which lead to more egalitarian societies.
What's also interesting, if you look at products that have a high component of what you might call messaging value, a high component of intangible value, versus their intrinsic value: They are often quite egalitarian.
In terms of dress, denim is perhaps the perfect example of something which replaces material value with symbolic value.
Coca-Cola. A bunch of you may be a load of pinkos, and you may not like the Coca-Cola company, but it's worth remembering Andy Warhol's point about Coke.
What Warhol said about Coke is, he said, "What I really like about Coca-Cola is the president of the United States can't get a better Coke than the bum on the corner of the street."
Now, that is, actually, when you think about it -- we take it for granted -- it's actually a remarkable achievement, to produce something that's that democratic.
Now, we basically have to change our views slightly.
There is a basic view that real value involves making things, involves labor. It involves engineering.
It involves limited raw materials.
And that what we add on top is kind of false. It's a fake version.
And there is a reason for some suspicion and uncertainly about it.
It patently veers toward propaganda.
However, what we do have now is a much more variegated media ecosystem in which to kind of create this kind of value, and it's much fairer.
When I grew up, this was basically the media environment of my childhood as translated into food.
You had a monopoly supplier. On the left, you have Rupert Murdoch, or the BBC.
(Laughter) And on your right you have a dependent public which is pathetically grateful for anything you give it.
(Laughter) Nowadays, the user is actually involved.
This is actually what's called, in the digital world, "user-generated content."
Although it's called agriculture in the world of food.
(Laughter) This is actually called a mash-up, where you take content that someone else has produced and you do something new with it.
In the world of food we call it cooking.
This is food 2.0, which is food you produce for the purpose of sharing it with other people.
This is mobile food. British are very good at that.
Fish and chips in newspaper, the Cornish Pasty, the pie, the sandwich.
We invented the whole lot of them.
We're not very good at food in general. Italians do great food, but it's not very portable, generally.
(Laughter) I only learned this the other day. The Earl of Sandwich didn't invent the sandwich.
He actually invented the toasty. But then, the Earl of Toasty would be a ridiculous name.
(Laughter) Finally, we have contextual communication.
Now, the reason I show you Pernod -- it's only one example.
Every country has a contextual alcoholic drink. In France it's Pernod.
It tastes great within the borders of that country, but absolute shite if you take it anywhere else.
(Laughter) Unicum in Hungary, for example.
The Greeks have actually managed to produce something called Retsina, which even tastes shite when you're in Greece.
(Laughter) But so much communication now is contextual that the capacity for actually nudging people, for giving them better information -- B.J. Fogg, at the University of Stanford, makes the point that actually the mobile phone is -- He's invented the phrase, "persuasive technologies."
He believes the mobile phone, by being location-specific, contextual, timely and immediate, is simply the greatest persuasive technology device ever invented.
Now, if we have all these tools at our disposal, we simply have to ask the question, and Thaler and Sunstein have, of how we can use these more intelligently.
I'll give you one example.
If you had a large red button of this kind, on the wall of your home, and every time you pressed it, it saved 50 dollars for you, put 50 dollars into your pension, you would save a lot more.
The reason is that the interface fundamentally determines the behavior. Okay?
Now, marketing has done a very, very good job of creating opportunities for impulse buying.
Yet we've never created the opportunity for impulse saving.
If you did this, more people would save more.
It's simply a question of changing the interface by which people make decisions, and the very nature of the decisions changes.
Obviously, I don't want people to do this, because as an advertising man I tend to regard saving as just consumerism needlessly postponed.
(Laughter) But if anybody did want to do that, that's the kind of thing we need to be thinking about, actually: fundamental opportunities to change human behavior.
Now, I've got an example here from Canada.
There was a young intern at Ogilvy Canada called Hunter Somerville, who was working in improv in Toronto, and got a part-time job in advertising, and was given the job of advertising Shreddies.
Now this is the most perfect case of creating intangible, added value, without changing the product in the slightest.
Shreddies is a strange, square, whole-grain cereal, only available in New Zealand, Canada and Britain.
It's Kraft's peculiar way of rewarding loyalty to the crown.
(Laughter) In working out how you could re-launch Shreddies, he came up with this.
Video: (Buzzer) Man: Shreddies is supposed to be square.
(Laughter) Woman: Have any of these diamond shapes gone out?
(Laughter) Voiceover: New Diamond Shreddies cereal.
Same 100 percent whole-grain wheat in a delicious diamond shape.
(Applause) Rory Sutherland: I'm not sure this isn't the most perfect example of intangible value creation. All it requires is photons, neurons, and a great idea to create this thing.
I would say it's a work of genius.
But, naturally, you can't do this kind of thing without a little bit of market research.
Man: So, Shreddies is actually producing a new product, which is something very exciting for them.
So they are introducing new Diamond Shreddies.
(Laughter) So I just want to get your first impressions when you see that, when you see the Diamond Shreddies box there.
(Laughter) Woman: Weren't they square?
Woman #2: I'm a little bit confused. Woman #3: They look like the squares to me.
Man: They -- Yeah, it's all in the appearance.
But it's kind of like flipping a six or a nine. Like a six, if you flip it over it looks like a nine.
But a six is very different from a nine.
Woman # 3: Or an "M" and a "W". Man: An "M" and a "W", exactly.
Man #2: [unclear] You just looked like you turned it on its end. But when you see it like that it's more interesting looking.
Man: Just try both of them.
Take a square one there, first.
(Laughter) Man: Which one did you prefer? Man #2: The first one.
Man: The first one?
(Laughter) Rory Sutherland: Now, naturally, a debate raged.
There were conservative elements in Canada, unsurprisingly, who actually resented this intrusion.
So, eventually, the manufacturers actually arrived at a compromise, which was the combo pack.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) If you think it's funny, bear in mind there is an organization called the American Institute of Wine Economics, which actually does extensive research into perception of things, and discovers that except for among perhaps five or ten percent of the most knowledgeable people, there is no correlation between quality and enjoyment in wine, except when you tell the people how expensive it is, in which case they tend to enjoy the more expensive stuff more.
So drink your wine blind in the future.
But this is both hysterically funny -- but I think an important philosophical point, which is, going forward, we need more of this kind of value.
We need to spend more time appreciating what already exists, and less time agonizing over what else we can do.
Two quotations to more or less end with.
One of them is, "Poetry is when you make new things familiar and familiar things new."
Which isn't a bad definition of what our job is, to help people appreciate what is unfamiliar, but also to gain a greater appreciation, and place a far higher value on those things which are already existing.
There is some evidence, by the way, that things like social networking help do that.
Because they help people share news.
They give badge value to everyday little trivial activities.
So they actually reduce the need for actually spending great money on display, and increase the kind of third-party enjoyment you can get from the smallest, simplest things in life. Which is magic.
The second one is the second G.K. Chesterton quote of this session, which is, "We are perishing for want of wonder, not for want of wonders," which I think for anybody involved in technology, is perfectly true.
And a final thing: When you place a value on things like health, love, sex and other things, and learn to place a material value on what you've previously discounted for being merely intangible, a thing not seen, you realize you're much, much wealthier than you ever imagined.
Thank you very much indeed.
(Applause)
Our mission is to build a detailed, realistic computer model of the human brain.
And we've done, in the past four years, a proof of concept on a small part of the rodent brain, and with this proof of concept we are now scaling the project up to reach the human brain.
Why are we doing this?
There are three important reasons.
The first is, it's essential for us to understand the human brain if we do want to get along in society, and I think that it is a key step in evolution.
The second reason is, we cannot keep doing animal experimentation forever, and we have to embody all our data and all our knowledge into a working model.
It's like a Noah's Ark. It's like an archive.
And the third reason is that there are two billion people on the planet that are affected by mental disorder, and the drugs that are used today are largely empirical.
I think that we can come up with very concrete solutions on how to treat disorders.
Now, even at this stage, we can use the brain model to explore some fundamental questions about how the brain works.
And here, at TED, for the first time, I'd like to share with you how we're addressing one theory -- there are many theories -- one theory of how the brain works.
So, this theory is that the brain creates, builds, a version of the universe, and projects this version of the universe, like a bubble, all around us.
Now, this is of course a topic of philosophical debate for centuries.
But, for the first time, we can actually address this, with brain simulation, and ask very systematic and rigorous questions, whether this theory could possibly be true.
The reason why the moon is huge on the horizon is simply because our perceptual bubble does not stretch out 380,000 kilometers.
It runs out of space.
And so what we do is we compare the buildings within our perceptual bubble, and we make a decision.
We make a decision it's that big, even though it's not that big.
And what that illustrates is that decisions are the key things that support our perceptual bubble. It keeps it alive.
Without decisions you cannot see, you cannot think, you cannot feel.
And you may think that anesthetics work by sending you into some deep sleep, or by blocking your receptors so that you don't feel pain, but in fact most anesthetics don't work that way.
What they do is they introduce a noise into the brain so that the neurons cannot understand each other.
They are confused, and you cannot make a decision.
So, while you're trying to make up your mind what the doctor, the surgeon, is doing while he's hacking away at your body, he's long gone.
He's at home having tea.
(Laughter) So, when you walk up to a door and you open it, what you compulsively have to do to perceive is to make decisions, thousands of decisions about the size of the room, the walls, the height, the objects in this room.
99 percent of what you see is not what comes in through the eyes.
It is what you infer about that room.
So I can say, with some certainty, "I think, therefore I am."
But I cannot say, "You think, therefore you are," because "you" are within my perceptual bubble.
Now, we can speculate and philosophize this, but we don't actually have to for the next hundred years.
We can ask a very concrete question.
"Can the brain build such a perception?"
Is it capable of doing it?
Does it have the substance to do it?
And that's what I'm going to describe to you today.
So, it took the universe 11 billion years to build the brain.
It had to improve it a little bit.
It had to add to the frontal part, so that you would have instincts, because they had to cope on land.
But the real big step was the neocortex.
It's a new brain. You needed it.
The mammals needed it because they had to cope with parenthood, social interactions, complex cognitive functions.
So, you can think of the neocortex actually as the ultimate solution today, of the universe as we know it.
It's the pinnacle, it's the final product that the universe has produced.
It was so successful in evolution that from mouse to man it expanded about a thousandfold in terms of the numbers of neurons, to produce this almost frightening organ, structure.
And it has not stopped its evolutionary path.
In fact, the neocortex in the human brain is evolving at an enormous speed.
If you zoom into the surface of the neocortex, you discover that it's made up of little modules, G5 processors, like in a computer.
But there are about a million of them.
They were so successful in evolution that what we did was to duplicate them over and over and add more and more of them to the brain until we ran out of space in the skull.
And the brain started to fold in on itself, and that's why the neocortex is so highly convoluted.
We're just packing in columns, so that we'd have more neocortical columns to perform more complex functions.
So you can think of the neocortex actually as a massive grand piano, a million-key grand piano.
Each of these neocortical columns would produce a note.
You stimulate it; it produces a symphony.
But it's not just a symphony of perception.
It's a symphony of your universe, your reality.
Now, of course it takes years to learn how to master a grand piano with a million keys.
That's why you have to send your kids to good schools, hopefully eventually to Oxford.
But it's not only education.
It's also genetics.
You may be born lucky, where you know how to master your neocortical column, and you can play a fantastic symphony.
In fact, there is a new theory of autism called the "intense world" theory, which suggests that the neocortical columns are super-columns.
They are highly reactive, and they are super-plastic, and so the autists are probably capable of building and learning a symphony which is unthinkable for us.
But you can also understand that if you have a disease within one of these columns, the note is going to be off.
The perception, the symphony that you create is going to be corrupted, and you will have symptoms of disease.
So, the Holy Grail for neuroscience is really to understand the design of the neocoritical column -- and it's not just for neuroscience; it's perhaps to understand perception, to understand reality, and perhaps to even also understand physical reality.
So, what we did was, for the past 15 years, was to dissect out the neocortex, systematically.
It's a bit like going and cataloging a piece of the rainforest.
How many trees does it have?
What shapes are the trees?
How many of each type of tree do you have? Where are they positioned?
But it's a bit more than cataloging because you actually have to describe and discover all the rules of communication, the rules of connectivity, because the neurons don't just like to connect with any neuron.
They choose very carefully who they connect with.
It's also more than cataloging because you actually have to build three-dimensional digital models of them.
And we did that for tens of thousands of neurons, built digital models of all the different types of neurons we came across.
And once you have that, you can actually begin to build the neocortical column.
And here we're coiling them up.
But as you do this, what you see is that the branches intersect actually in millions of locations, and at each of these intersections they can form a synapse.
And a synapse is a chemical location where they communicate with each other.
And these synapses together form the network or the circuit of the brain.
Now, the circuit, you could also think of as the fabric of the brain.
And when you think of the fabric of the brain, the structure, how is it built? What is the pattern of the carpet?
You realize that this poses a fundamental challenge to any theory of the brain, and especially to a theory that says that there is some reality that emerges out of this carpet, out of this particular carpet with a particular pattern.
The reason is because the most important design secret of the brain is diversity.
Every neuron is different.
It's the same in the forest. Every pine tree is different.
You may have many different types of trees, but every pine tree is different. And in the brain it's the same.
So there is no neuron in my brain that is the same as another, and there is no neuron in my brain that is the same as in yours.
And your neurons are not going to be oriented and positioned in exactly the same way.
And you may have more or less neurons.
So it's very unlikely that you got the same fabric, the same circuitry.
So, how could we possibly create a reality that we can even understand each other?
Well, we don't have to speculate.
We can look at all 10 million synapses now.
We can look at the fabric. And we can change neurons.
We can use different neurons with different variations.
We can position them in different places, orient them in different places.
We can use less or more of them.
And when we do that what we discovered is that the circuitry does change.
But the pattern of how the circuitry is designed does not.
So, the fabric of the brain, even though your brain may be smaller, bigger, it may have different types of neurons, different morphologies of neurons, we actually do share the same fabric.
And we think this is species-specific, which means that that could explain why we can't communicate across species.
So, let's switch it on. But to do it, what you have to do is you have to make this come alive.
We make it come alive with equations, a lot of mathematics.
And, in fact, the equations that make neurons into electrical generators were discovered by two Cambridge Nobel Laureates.
So, we have the mathematics to make neurons come alive.
We also have the mathematics to describe how neurons collect information, and how they create a little lightning bolt to communicate with each other.
And when they get to the synapse, what they do is they effectively, literally, shock the synapse.
It's like electrical shock that releases the chemicals from these synapses.
And we've got the mathematics to describe this process.
So we can describe the communication between the neurons.
There literally are only a handful of equations that you need to simulate the activity of the neocortex.
But what you do need is a very big computer.
And in fact you need one laptop to do all the calculations just for one neuron.
So you need 10,000 laptops.
So where do you go? You go to IBM, and you get a supercomputer, because they know how to take 10,000 laptops and put it into the size of a refrigerator.
So now we have this Blue Gene supercomputer.
We can load up all the neurons, each one on to its processor, and fire it up, and see what happens.
Take the magic carpet for a ride.
Here we activate it. And this gives the first glimpse of what is happening in your brain when there is a stimulation.
It's the first view.
Now, when you look at that the first time, you think, "My god. How is reality coming out of that?"
But, in fact, you can start, even though we haven't trained this neocortical column to create a specific reality.
But we can ask, "Where is the rose?"
We can ask, "Where is it inside, if we stimulate it with a picture?"
Where is it inside the neocortex?
Ultimately it's got to be there if we stimulated it with it.
So, the way that we can look at that is to ignore the neurons, ignore the synapses, and look just at the raw electrical activity.
Because that is what it's creating.
It's creating electrical patterns.
So when we did this, we indeed, for the first time, saw these ghost-like structures: electrical objects appearing within the neocortical column.
And it's these electrical objects that are holding all the information about whatever stimulated it.
And then when we zoomed into this, it's like a veritable universe.
So the next step is just to take these brain coordinates and to project them into perceptual space.
And if you do that, you will be able to step inside the reality that is created by this machine, by this piece of the brain.
So, in summary, I think that the universe may have -- it's possible -- evolved a brain to see itself, which may be a first step in becoming aware of itself.
There is a lot more to do to test these theories, and to test any other theories.
But I hope that you are at least partly convinced that it is not impossible to build a brain.
We can do it within 10 years, and if we do succeed, we will send to TED, in 10 years, a hologram to talk to you. Thank you.
(Applause)
How many of you are tired of seeing celebrities adopting kids from the African continent?
(Laughter) Well, it's not all that bad.
I was adopted.
I grew up in rural Uganda, lost both my parents when I was very, very young.
And when my parents passed, I experienced all the negative effects of poverty, from homelessness, eating out of trash piles, you name it.
But my life changed when I got accepted into an orphanage.
Through one of those sponsor-an-orphan programs, I was sponsored and given an opportunity to acquire an education.
I started off in Uganda.
I went through school, and the way this particular program worked, you finished high school and after high school, you go learn a trade -- to become a carpenter, a mechanic or something along those lines.
My case was a little different.
The sponsor family that was sending these 25 dollars a month to this orphanage to sponsor me, which -- I had never met them -- said, "Well ...
we would like to send you to college instead."
Oh -- it gets better.
(Laughter) And they said, "If you get the paperwork, we'll send you to school in America instead."
So with their help, I went to the embassy and applied for the visa.
I got the visa.
I remember this day like it was yesterday.
I walked out of the embassy with this piece of paper in my hand, a hop in my step, smile on my face, knowing that my life is about to change.
I went home that night, and I slept with my passport, because I was afraid that someone might steal it.
(Laughter) I couldn't fall asleep.
I kept feeling it.
I had a good idea for security.
I was like, "OK, I'm going to put it in a plastic bag, and take it outside and dig a hole, and put it in there."
I did that, went back in the house.
I could not fall asleep. I was like, "Maybe someone saw me."
I went back -- (Laughter) I pulled it out, and I put it with me the entire night -- all to say that it was an anxiety-filled night.
(Laughter) Going to the US was, just like another speaker said, was my first time to see a plane, be on one, let alone sit on it to fly to another country.
December 15, 2006.
7:08pm.
I sat in seat 7A.
Fly Emirates.
One of the most gorgeous, beautiful women I've ever seen walked up, red little hat with a white veil.
I'm looking terrified, I have no idea what I'm doing.
She hands me this warm towel -- warm, steamy, snow white.
I'm looking at this warm towel; I don't know what to do with my life, let alone with this damn towel -- (Laughter) (Applause) I did one of the -- you know, anything anyone could do in that situation: look around, see what everyone else is doing.
I did the same.
Mind you, I drove about seven hours from my village to the airport that day.
So I grab this warm towel, wipe my face just like everyone else is doing, I look at it -- damn.
(Laughter) It was all dirt brown.
(Laughter) I remember being so embarrassed that when she came by to pick it up, I didn't give mine.
(Laughter) I still have it.
(Laughter) (Applause) Going to America opened doors for me to live up to my full God-given potential.
I remember when I arrived, the sponsor family embraced me, and they literally had to teach me everything from scratch: this is a microwave, that's a refrigerator -- things I'd never seen before.
And it was also the first time I got immersed into a new and different culture.
These strangers showed me true love.
These strangers showed me that I mattered, that my dreams mattered.
(Applause) Thank you.
These individuals had two of their own biological children.
And when I came in, I had needs.
They had to teach me English, teach me literally everything, which resulted in them spending a lot of time with me.
And that created a little bit of jealousy with their children.
So, if you're a parent in this room, and you have those teenager children who don't want anything to do with your love and affection -- in fact, they find it repulsive -- I got a solution: adopt a child.
(Laughter) It will solve the problem.
(Applause) I went on to acquire two engineering degrees from one of the best institutions in the world.
I've got to tell you: talent is universal, but opportunities are not.
And I credit this to the individuals who embrace multiculturalism, love, empathy and compassion for others.
We live in a world filled with hate: building walls, Brexit, xenophobia here on the African continent.
Multiculturalism can be an answer to many of these worst human qualities.
Today, I challenge you to help a young child experience multiculturalism.
I guarantee you that will enrich their life, and in turn, it will enrich yours.
And as a bonus, one of them may even give a TED Talk.
(Laughter) (Applause) We may not be able to solve the bigotry and the racism of this world today, but certainly we can raise children to create a positive, inclusive, connected world full of empathy, love and compassion.
Love wins.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Good morning. How are you?
It's been great, hasn't it?
In fact, I'm leaving.
(Laughter) There have been three themes running through the conference, which are relevant to what I want to talk about.
One is the extraordinary evidence of human creativity in all of the presentations that we've had and in all of the people here; just the variety of it and the range of it.
The second is that it's put us in a place where we have no idea what's going to happen in terms of the future.
No idea how this may play out.
I have an interest in education.
Actually, what I find is, everybody has an interest in education.
Don't you?
I find this very interesting.
If you're at a dinner party, and you say you work in education -- actually, you're not often at dinner parties, frankly.
(Laughter) If you work in education, you're not asked.
(Laughter) And you're never asked back, curiously. That's strange to me.
But if you are, and you say to somebody, you know, they say, "What do you do?"
and you say you work in education, you can see the blood run from their face.
(Laughter) "My one night out all week."
(Laughter) But if you ask about their education, they pin you to the wall, because it's one of those things that goes deep with people, am I right?
Like religion and money and other things.
So I have a big interest in education, and I think we all do.
We have a huge vested interest in it, partly because it's education that's meant to take us into this future that we can't grasp.
If you think of it, children starting school this year will be retiring in 2065.
Nobody has a clue, despite all the expertise that's been on parade for the past four days, what the world will look like in five years' time.
And yet, we're meant to be educating them for it.
So the unpredictability, I think, is extraordinary.
And the third part of this is that we've all agreed, nonetheless, on the really extraordinary capacities that children have -- their capacities for innovation.
I mean, Sirena last night was a marvel, wasn't she?
And she's exceptional, but I think she's not, so to speak, exceptional in the whole of childhood.
What you have there is a person of extraordinary dedication who found a talent.
And my contention is, all kids have tremendous talents, and we squander them, pretty ruthlessly.
So I want to talk about education, and I want to talk about creativity.
My contention is that creativity now is as important in education as literacy, and we should treat it with the same status.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) That was it, by the way. Thank you very much.
(Laughter) So, 15 minutes left.
(Laughter) "Well, I was born ... " (Laughter) I heard a great story recently -- I love telling it -- of a little girl who was in a drawing lesson.
She was six, and she was at the back, drawing, and the teacher said this girl hardly ever paid attention, and in this drawing lesson, she did.
She went over to her, and she said, "What are you drawing?"
And the girl said, "I'm drawing a picture of God."
And the teacher said, "But nobody knows what God looks like."
And the girl said, "They will in a minute."
(Laughter) When my son was four in England -- actually, he was four everywhere, to be honest.
He was in the Nativity play. Do you remember the story?
(Laughter) No, it was big, it was a big story.
(Laughter) "Nativity II."
But James got the part of Joseph, which we were thrilled about.
We considered this to be one of the lead parts.
We had the place crammed full of agents in T-shirts: "James Robinson IS Joseph!"
(Laughter) He didn't have to speak, but you know the bit where the three kings come in?
They come in bearing gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh.
This really happened.
We were sitting there, and I think they just went out of sequence, because we talked to the little boy afterward and said, "You OK with that?" They said, "Yeah, why? Was that wrong?"
They just switched.
The three boys came in, four-year-olds with tea towels on their heads.
They put these boxes down, and the first boy said, "I bring you gold."
And the second boy said, "I bring you myrrh."
And the third boy said, "Frank sent this."
(Laughter) What these things have in common is that kids will take a chance.
If they don't know, they'll have a go.
Am I right? They're not frightened of being wrong.
What we do know is, if you're not prepared to be wrong, you'll never come up with anything original -- if you're not prepared to be wrong.
And by the time they get to be adults, most kids have lost that capacity.
They have become frightened of being wrong.
And we run our companies like this.
We stigmatize mistakes.
And we're now running national education systems where mistakes are the worst thing you can make.
And the result is that we are educating people out of their creative capacities.
Picasso once said this, he said that all children are born artists.
The problem is to remain an artist as we grow up.
I believe this passionately, that we don't grow into creativity, we grow out of it.
Or rather, we get educated out of it.
So why is this?
In fact, we moved from Stratford to Los Angeles.
(Laughter) Actually, we lived in a place called Snitterfield, just outside Stratford, which is where Shakespeare's father was born.
You don't think of Shakespeare having a father, do you?
Do you?
Because you don't think of Shakespeare being a child, do you?
Shakespeare being seven?
I mean, he was seven at some point.
He was in somebody's English class, wasn't he?
(Laughter) How annoying would that be?
(Laughter) Being sent to bed by his dad, to Shakespeare, "Go to bed, now!"
To William Shakespeare.
"And put the pencil down!"
(Laughter) "It's confusing everybody."
(Laughter) Anyway, we moved from Stratford to Los Angeles, and I just want to say a word about the transition.
I've got two kids; he's 21 now, my daughter's 16.
He didn't want to come to Los Angeles.
He loved it, but he had a girlfriend in England.
This was the love of his life, Sarah.
He'd known her for a month.
(Laughter) Mind you, they'd had their fourth anniversary, because it's a long time when you're 16.
He said, "I'll never find another girl like Sarah."
And we were rather pleased about that, frankly -- (Laughter) because she was the main reason we were leaving the country.
(Laughter) But something strikes you when you move to America and travel around the world: every education system on earth has the same hierarchy of subjects.
Every one. Doesn't matter where you go.
You'd think it would be otherwise, but it isn't.
At the top are mathematics and languages, then the humanities.
At the bottom are the arts. Everywhere on earth.
And in pretty much every system, too, there's a hierarchy within the arts.
Art and music are normally given a higher status in schools than drama and dance.
There isn't an education system on the planet that teaches dance every day to children the way we teach them mathematics.
Why?
I think this is rather important.
Children dance all the time if they're allowed to, we all do.
We all have bodies, don't we? Did I miss a meeting?
(Laughter) Truthfully, what happens is, as children grow up, we start to educate them progressively from the waist up.
And then we focus on their heads.
And slightly to one side.
If you were to visit education as an alien and say "What's it for, public education?"
I think you'd have to conclude, if you look at the output, who really succeeds by this, who does everything they should, who gets all the brownie points, who are the winners -- I think you'd have to conclude the whole purpose of public education throughout the world is to produce university professors.
They're the people who come out the top.
And I used to be one, so there.
(Laughter) And I like university professors, but, you know, we shouldn't hold them up as the high-water mark of all human achievement.
They're just a form of life.
Another form of life.
But they're rather curious.
And I say this out of affection for them: there's something curious about professors.
In my experience -- not all of them, but typically -- they live in their heads.
They live up there and slightly to one side.
They look upon their body as a form of transport for their heads.
(Laughter) Don't they?
(Laughter) If you want real evidence of out-of-body experiences, by the way, get yourself along to a residential conference of senior academics and pop into the discotheque on the final night.
(Laughter) And there, you will see it.
Grown men and women writhing uncontrollably, off the beat.
(Laughter) Waiting until it ends, so they can go home and write a paper about it.
(Laughter) Our education system is predicated on the idea of academic ability.
Around the world, there were no public systems of education, really, before the 19th century.
They all came into being to meet the needs of industrialism.
Number one, that the most useful subjects for work are at the top.
So you were probably steered benignly away from things at school when you were a kid, things you liked, on the grounds you would never get a job doing that.
Is that right?
"Don't do music, you're not going to be a musician; don't do art, you won't be an artist."
Benign advice -- now, profoundly mistaken.
The whole world is engulfed in a revolution.
And the second is academic ability, which has really come to dominate our view of intelligence, because the universities design the system in their image.
If you think of it, the whole system of public education around the world is a protracted process of university entrance.
And the consequence is that many highly talented, brilliant, creative people think they're not, because the thing they were good at at school wasn't valued, or was actually stigmatized.
And I think we can't afford to go on that way.
In the next 30 years, according to UNESCO, more people worldwide will be graduating through education than since the beginning of history.
More people.
And it's the combination of all the things we've talked about: technology and its transformational effect on work, and demography and the huge explosion in population.
Suddenly, degrees aren't worth anything.
Isn't that true?
If you didn't have a job, it's because you didn't want one.
And I didn't want one, frankly.
(Laughter) But now kids with degrees are often heading home to carry on playing video games, because you need an MA where the previous job required a BA, and now you need a PhD for the other.
It's a process of academic inflation.
And it indicates the whole structure of education is shifting beneath our feet.
We need to radically rethink our view of intelligence.
We know three things about intelligence.
We think about the world in all the ways that we experience it.
We think visually, we think in sound, we think kinesthetically.
We think in abstract terms, we think in movement.
Secondly, intelligence is dynamic.
If you look at the interactions of a human brain, as we heard yesterday from a number of presentations, intelligence is wonderfully interactive.
The brain isn't divided into compartments.
In fact, creativity -- which I define as the process of having original ideas that have value -- more often than not comes about through the interaction of different disciplinary ways of seeing things.
By the way, there's a shaft of nerves that joins the two halves of the brain, called the corpus callosum.
It's thicker in women.
Following off from Helen yesterday, this is probably why women are better at multitasking.
Because you are, aren't you?
There's a raft of research, but I know it from my personal life.
If my wife is cooking a meal at home, which is not often ...
(Laughter) No, she's good at some things.
But if she's cooking, she's dealing with people on the phone, she's talking to the kids, she's painting the ceiling -- (Laughter) she's doing open-heart surgery over here.
If I'm cooking, the door is shut, the kids are out, the phone's on the hook, if she comes in, I get annoyed.
I say, "Terry, please, I'm trying to fry an egg in here."
(Laughter) Actually, do you know that old philosophical thing, "If a tree falls in a forest, and nobody hears it, did it happen?"
Remember that old chestnut?
I saw a great T-shirt recently, which said, "If a man speaks his mind in a forest, and no woman hears him, is he still wrong?"
(Laughter) And the third thing about intelligence is, it's distinct.
I'm doing a new book at the moment called "Epiphany," which is based on a series of interviews with people about how they discovered their talent.
I'm fascinated by how people got to be there.
It's really prompted by a conversation I had with a wonderful woman who maybe most people have never heard of, Gillian Lynne.
Have you heard of her? Some have.
She's a choreographer, and everybody knows her work.
She did "Cats" and "Phantom of the Opera."
I used to be on the board of The Royal Ballet, as you can see.
(Laughter) Gillian and I had lunch one day. I said, "How did you get to be a dancer?"
It was interesting.
When she was at school, she was really hopeless.
And the school, in the '30s, wrote to her parents and said, "We think Gillian has a learning disorder."
She couldn't concentrate; she was fidgeting.
I think now they'd say she had ADHD.
But this was the 1930s, and ADHD hadn't been invented at this point.
It wasn't an available condition.
(Laughter) People weren't aware they could have that.
(Laughter) Anyway, she went to see this specialist.
So, this oak-paneled room, and she was there with her mother, and she was led and sat on this chair at the end, and she sat on her hands for 20 minutes, while this man talked to her mother about all the problems Gillian was having at school, because she was disturbing people, her homework was always late, and so on.
In the end, the doctor went and sat next to Gillian and said, "I've listened to all these things your mother's told me.
I need to speak to her privately.
Wait here. We'll be back. We won't be very long," and they went and left her.
But as they went out of the room, he turned on the radio that was sitting on his desk.
And when they got out of the room, he said to her mother, "Just stand and watch her."
And the minute they left the room, she was on her feet, moving to the music.
And they watched for a few minutes, and he turned to her mother and said, "Mrs. Lynne, Gillian isn't sick.
She's a dancer.
Take her to a dance school."
She said, "She did. I can't tell you how wonderful it was.
We walked in this room, and it was full of people like me -- people who couldn't sit still, people who had to move to think."
Who had to move to think.
They did ballet, they did tap, jazz; they did modern; they did contemporary.
She was eventually auditioned for the Royal Ballet School.
She became a soloist; she had a wonderful career at the Royal Ballet.
She eventually graduated from the Royal Ballet School, founded the Gillian Lynne Dance Company, met Andrew Lloyd Webber.
She's been responsible for some of the most successful musical theater productions in history, she's given pleasure to millions, and she's a multimillionaire.
Somebody else might have put her on medication and told her to calm down.
(Applause) What I think it comes to is this: Al Gore spoke the other night about ecology and the revolution that was triggered by Rachel Carson.
I believe our only hope for the future is to adopt a new conception of human ecology, one in which we start to reconstitute our conception of the richness of human capacity.
Our education system has mined our minds in the way that we strip-mine the earth for a particular commodity.
And for the future, it won't serve us.
We have to rethink the fundamental principles on which we're educating our children.
There was a wonderful quote by Jonas Salk, who said, "If all the insects were to disappear from the Earth, within 50 years, all life on Earth would end.
If all human beings disappeared from the Earth, within 50 years, all forms of life would flourish."
And he's right.
What TED celebrates is the gift of the human imagination.
We have to be careful now that we use this gift wisely, and that we avert some of the scenarios that we've talked about.
And the only way we'll do it is by seeing our creative capacities for the richness they are and seeing our children for the hope that they are.
And our task is to educate their whole being, so they can face this future.
By the way -- we may not see this future, but they will.
And our job is to help them make something of it.
Over the next five minutes, my intention is to transform your relationship with sound.
Let me start with the observation that most of the sound around us is accidental; much of it is unpleasant. (Traffic noise) We stand on street corners, shouting over noise like this, pretending it doesn't exist.
This habit of suppressing sound has meant that our relationship with sound has become largely unconscious.
There are four major ways sound is affecting you all the time, and I'd like to raise them in your consciousness today.
The first is physiological.
(Alarm clocks ring) Sorry about that.
Sounds are affecting your hormone secretions all the time, but also your breathing, heart rate -- which I just also did -- and your brainwaves.
It's not just unpleasant sounds like that that do it.
This is surf. (Ocean waves) It has the frequency of roughly 12 cycles per minute.
Most people find that very soothing, and, interestingly, 12 cycles per minute is roughly the frequency of the breathing of a sleeping human, so there is a deep resonance with being at rest.
We also associate it with being stress-free and on holiday.
The second way in which sound affects you is psychological.
Music is the most powerful form of sound that we know that affects our emotional state. (Albinoni's Adagio) This is guaranteed to make most of you feel pretty sad if I leave it on.
Music is not the only kind of sound, however, which affects your emotions.
Natural sound can do that, too.
Birdsong, for example, is a sound which most people find reassuring.
There's a reason: over hundreds of thousands of years we've learned that when the birds are singing, things are safe.
It's when they stop you need to be worried.
The third way in which sound affects you is cognitively.
You can't understand two people talking at once (Voice-over) or in this case, one person talking twice.
We have a very small amount of bandwidth for processing auditory input, which is why noise like this ...
If you have to work in an open-plan office like this, your productivity is greatly reduced.
And whatever number you're thinking of, it probably isn't as bad as this.
[Open-plan offices productivity down 66%] You are one-third as productive in open-plan offices as in quiet rooms.
I have a tip for you: if you work in spaces like that, carry headphones with you, with a soothing sound like birdsong.
Put them on, and your productivity goes back up to triple what it would be.
The fourth way in which sound affects us is behaviorally.
With all that other stuff going on, it would be amazing if our behavior didn't change.
(Techno music) So ask yourself: Is this person ever going to drive at a steady 28 miles per hour?
I don't think so.
At the simplest, you move away from unpleasant sound and towards pleasant sounds.
So if I were to play this ...
(Jackhammer) for more than a few seconds, you'd feel uncomfortable; for more than a few minutes, you'd be leaving the room in droves.
For people who can't get away from noise like that, it's extremely damaging for their health.
And that's not the only thing that bad sound damages.
Most retail sound is inappropriate and accidental, even hostile, and it has a dramatic effect on sales.
For you retailers, you may want to look away before I show this slide.
[Inappropriate retail soundscapes sales down 28%] They're losing up to 30 percent of their business with people leaving shops faster, or just turning around at the door.
We've all done it, left the area, because the sound in there is so dreadful.
I want to spend just a moment talking about the model we've developed, which allows us to start at the top and look at the drivers of sound, analyze the soundscape and then predict the four outcomes I just talked about.
Or start at the bottom and say what outcomes we want, and then design a soundscape to have a desired effect.
At last we've got some science we can apply.
Just a word on music.
Music is the most powerful sound there is, often inappropriately deployed.
It's powerful for two reasons: you recognize it fast, and you associate it very powerfully.
I'll give you two examples.
(First chord of "A Hard Day's Night") Most of you recognize that immediately.
The younger, maybe not.
(Laughter) (First notes of "Jaws" theme) Most of you associate that with something!
Now, those are one-second samples of music.
Music is very powerful, and unfortunately, it's veneering commercial spaces, often inappropriately.
I hope that's going to change over the next few years.
Let me talk about brands for a moment, since some of you run brands.
Every brand is out there making sound right now.
There are eight expressions of a brand in sound; they're all important.
I'm glad to say that is starting to happen now.
(Intel ad jingle) You all recognize that one.
(Nokia ringtone) This is the most-played tune in the world today -- 1.8 billion times a day, that tune is played.
(Laughter) And it cost Nokia absolutely nothing.
I'll leave you with four golden rules, for those of you who run businesses, for commercial sound.
First, make it congruent, pointing in the same direction as your visual communication.
That increases impact by over 1,100 percent.
If your sound is pointing the opposite direction, incongruent, you reduce impact by 86 percent.
That's an order of magnitude, up or down.
This is important.
Secondly, make it appropriate to the situation.
Thirdly, make it valuable.
Give people something with the sound, don't just bombard them with stuff.
Finally, test and test it again.
Sound is complex; there are many countervailing influences.
It can be a bit like a bowl of spaghetti: sometimes you just have to eat it and see what happens.
So I hope this talk has raised sound in your consciousness.
If you're listening consciously, you can take control of the sound around you.
It's good for your health and for your productivity.
If we all do that, we move to a state that I like to think will be sound living in the world.
I'll leave you with more birdsong. (Birds chirping) I recommend at least five minutes a day, but there's no maximum dose.
Thank you for lending me your ears today.
Good evening, everyone.
I am from Japan, so I'd like to start with a story about Japanese fishing villages.
In the past, every fisherman was tempted to catch as many as fish as possible, but if everybody did that, the fish, common shared resource in the community, would disappear.
The result would be hardship and poverty for everyone.
This happened in some cases, but it did not happen in other cases.
In these communities, the fishermen developed a kind of social contract that told each one of them to hold back a bit to prevent overfishing.
The fisherman would keep an eye on each other.
There would be a penalty if you were caught cheating.
But once the benefit of a social contract became clear to everyone, the incentive to cheat dramatically dropped.
We find the same story around the world.
This is how villagers in medieval Europe managed pasture and forests.
This is how communities in Asia managed water, and this is how indigenous peoples in the Amazon managed wildlife.
These communities realized they relied on a finite, shared resource.
They developed rules and practices on how to manage those resources, and they changed their behavior so that they could continue to rely on those shared resources tomorrow by not overfishing, not overgrazing, not polluting or depleting water streams today.
This is a story of the commons, and also how to avoid the so-called tragedy of the commons.
But this is also a story of an economy that was mainly local, where everybody had a very strong sense of belonging.
Our economies are no longer local.
When we moved away from being local, we started to lose our connection to the commons.
We carried economic objectives, goals and systems beyond the local, but we did not carry the notion of taking care of the commons.
So our oceans, forests, once very close to us as our local commons, moved very far away from us.
So today, we pump millions of tons of greenhouse gases into the air, we dump plastics, fertilizers and industrial waste into the rivers and oceans, and we cut down forests that absorb CO2.
We make the wild biodiversity much more fragile.
We seem to have totally forgotten that there is such a thing as global commons: air, water, forests and biodiversity.
Now, it is modern science that reminds us how vital the global commons are.
In 2009, a group of scientists proposed how to assess the health of the global commons.
They defined nine planetary boundaries vital to our survival, then they measured how far we could go before we cross over the tipping points or thresholds that would lead us to the irreversible or even catastrophic change.
This is where we were in the 1950s.
We broadly remained within safe operating space, marked by the green line.
But look at where we are now.
We have crossed four of those boundaries, and we will be crossing others in the future.
How did we end up in this situation?
Well, my personal story may tell us something.
Five years ago, I was appointed as CEO of the GEF, Global Environment Facility, but I am not a conservationist or an environmental activist.
I am an economist, and for the last 30 years, I had worked for public finance in my home country and around the world.
I can tell you one thing for sure: during these 30 years, the notion of the global commons never crossed my mind.
I didn't have a single conversation about the global commons with my colleagues.
This tells me that the notion of the global commons was not really entering into the big money decisions like state budgets or investment plans.
And I'm wondering, why do we have this sheer ignorance about the global commons, including me, myself?
One possible explanation might be that until recently, it didn't really matter too much.
Even if we mess up some part of the environment, we were not fundamentally changing the functions of the earth system.
The global commons had still enough capacity to take the punches we gave them.
In fact, the fish were still plentiful, the fields for grazing were still vast.
Our mistake was to assume that the capacity of the earth for self-repair had no limits.
It does have limits.
The message from the science is very clear: we humans have become an overwhelming force to determine the future living conditions on earth, and what's more, we are running out of time.
If we don't act on them, we will be losing the global commons.
It's only our generation who are able to preserve it -- preserve the commons as we know them.
Now is the time we start managing the global commons as our parents or our grandparents managed their local commons.
The first thing we need to do is to simply recognize that we do have the global commons and they are very, very important.
Then we need to build the stewardship of the global commons into all of our thinking, our business, our economy, our policy-making -- in all of our actions.
We need to recreate the social contract of the fishing villages on the global scale.
But what does it mean in practice?
Where to start with?
I see there are four key economic systems that fundamentally need to change.
First, we need to change our cities.
By 2050, two thirds of our population will live in cities.
We need green cities.
Second, we need to change our energy system.
The world economy must sharply decarbonize, essentially in one generation.
Third, we need to change our production-consumption system.
We need to break away from current take-make-waste consumption patterns.
And finally, we need to change our food system, what to eat and how to produce it.
And all of those four systems are putting enormous pressure on the global commons, and it's also very difficult to flip them.
They are extremely complex, with many decision-makers, actors involved.
Let's take the example of the food system.
Food production is currently responsible for one quarter of greenhouse gas emissions.
It is also a main user of the world's water resources.
In fact, 70 percent of today's water is used to grow crops.
Vast areas of tropical forest are used for agriculture.
This deforestation drives extinction.
In fact, we are losing species 1,000 times faster than the natural rate.
And on top of all of that bad news, one third of food produced today globally is not eaten.
It's wasted.
But there is the good news, good signs.
Coalitions of stakeholders are now coming together to try to transform the food system with one shared goal: how to produce enough healthy food for everyone, at the same time, to try to cut, to sharply reduce, the footprint from the food system on the global commons.
I had an opportunity to fly over the Indonesian island of Sumatra, and I saw with my own eyes the massive deforestation to make room for palm oil plantations.
By the way, palm oil is included in thousands of food products we eat every day.
The global demand for palm oil is just increasing.
In Sumatra, I met smallholder farmers who need to make a day-to-day living from growing oil palm.
I met global food companies, financial institutions and local government officials.
All of them told me that they can't make the change by themselves, and only by working together under a kind of new contract, or a new practice, do they have a chance to protect tropical forests.
So it's so encouraging to see, at least for the last few years, this new coalition among these committed actors along the supply chain come together to try to transform the food system.
In fact, what they are trying to do is to create a new kind of social contract to manage the global commons.
All changes start at home, at your place and at my place.
At GEF, Global Environment Facility, we have now a new strategy, and we put the global commons at its center.
I hope we won't be the only ones.
If everybody stays on the sidelines, waiting for others to step in, the global commons will continue to deteriorate, and everybody will be much worse off.
We need to save ourselves from the tragedy of the commons.
So, I invite all of you to embrace the global commons.
Please do remember that global commons do exist and are waiting for your stewardship.
We all share one planet in common.
We breathe the same air, we drink the same water, we depend on the same oceans, forests, and biodiversity.
There is no space left on earth for egoism.
The global commons must be kept within their safe operating space, and we can only do it together.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Thirteen trillion dollars in wealth has evaporated over the course of the last two years.
We've questioned the future of capitalism.
We've questioned the financial industry.
We've looked at our government oversight.
We've questioned where we're going.
And yet, at the same time, this very well may be a seminal moment in American history, an opportunity for the consumer to actually take control and guide us to a new trajectory in America.
I'm calling this The Great Unwind.
(Laughter) And the idea is a simple, simple idea, which is the fact that the consumer has moved from a state of anxiety to action.
Consumers who represent 72 percent of the GDP of America have actually started, just like banks and just like businesses, to de-leverage, to unwind their leverage in daily life, to remove themselves from the liability and risk that presents itself as they move forward.
So, to understand this -- and I'm going to stress this -- it's not about the consumer being in retreat.
To understand this, we'll step back and look at what's happened over the last year and a half.
So if you've been gone, this is the CliffsNotes on what's happened in the economy.
(Laughter) Unemployment up. Housing values down. Equity markets down.
Commodity prices are like this.
If you're a mom trying to manage a budget, and oil was 150 dollars a barrel last summer, and it's somewhere between 50 and 70, do you plan vacations?
What's your strategy in your household? Will the bailout work?
We have national debt, Detroit, currency valuations, health care -- all these issues facing us.
You put them all together, mix them up in a bouillabaisse, and you have consumer confidence that's basically a ticking time bomb.
In fact, let's go back and look at what caused this crisis, because the consumer, all of us, in our daily lives, actually contributed a large part to the problem.
This is something I call the 50-20 paradox.
It took us 50 years to reach annual savings ratings of almost 10 percent.
Fifty years.
Do you know what this was right here? This was World War II.
There was nothing to buy, unless you wanted to buy some rivets.
What happened, though, over the course of the last 20 years, we went from a 10 percent savings rate to a negative savings rate.
Because we binged.
We bought extra-large cars, supersized everything, we bought remedies for restless leg syndrome.
All these things together basically created a factor where the consumer drove us headlong into the crisis that we face today.
The personal debt-to-income ratio basically went from 65 to 135 percent in the span of about 15 years.
So consumers got over-leveraged.
And of course our banks did as well, as did our federal government.
This is an absolutely staggering chart.
It shows leverage, trended out from 1919 to 2009.
And what you end up seeing is the whole phenomenon that we are actually stepping forth and basically leveraging future education, future children in our households.
So if you look at this in the context of visualizing the bailout, what you can see is, if you stack up dollar bills, first of all, 360,000 dollars is about the size of a five-foot-four guy.
But if you stack it up, you see this amazing, staggering amount of dollars that have been put into the system to fund and bail us out.
So this is the first 315 billion.
But I read this fact the other day, that one trillion seconds equals 32,000 years.
So if you think about that, the context, the casualness with which we talk about trillion-dollar bailout here and trillion there, we are stacking ourselves up for long-term leverage.
However, consumers have moved.
They are taking responsibility.
What we're seeing is an uptake in the savings rate.
In fact, 11 straight months of savings have happened since the beginning of the crisis.
We're working our way back up to that 10 percent.
Also, remarkably, in the fourth quarter, spending dropped to its lowest level in 62 years -- almost a 3.7 percent decline.
Visa now reports that more people are using debit cards than credit cards.
So we're starting to pay for things with money that we have.
And we're starting to be much more careful about how we save and invest.
But that's not really the whole story, because this has also been a dramatic time of transformation.
And you've got to admit, over the last year and a half, consumers have been doing some weird things.
It's pretty staggering, what we've lived through.
If you take into account that 80 percent of all Americans were born after World War II, this was essentially our Depression.
And so, as a result, some crazy things have happened.
I'll give you some examples.
Let's talk about dentists, vasectomies, guns and shark attacks.
(Laughter) Dentists report molars -- people grinding their teeth, coming in and reporting that they've had stress.
So there's an increase in people having to have their fillings replaced.
Gun sales, according to the FBI, who does background checks, are up almost 25 percent since January.
Vasectomies are up 48 percent, according to the Cornell Institute.
And lastly, but a very good point, hopefully not related to the former point I just made, which is that shark attacks are at their lowest level from 2003.
Does anybody know why?
(Laughter) No one's at the beach.
But seriously, what we see happening, and the reason I want to stress that the consumer is not in retreat, is that this is a tremendous opportunity for the consumer who drove us into this recession to lead us right back out.
What I mean by that is we can move from mindless consumption to mindful consumption.
Right?
(Applause) If you think about the last three decades, the consumer has moved from savvy about marketing in the '90s, to gathering all these amazing social and search tools in this decade.
But the one thing holding them back is the ability to discriminate.
By restricting their demand, consumers can actually align their values with their spending, and drive capitalism and business to not just be about more, but to be about better.
Based on Y&amp;R's BrandAsset Valuator, proprietary tool of VML and Young &amp; Rubicam, we set out to understand what's been happening in the crisis with the consumer marketplace.
We found a couple of really interesting things.
We're going to go through four value shifts that we see driving new consumer behaviors, that offer new management principles.
The first cultural value shift we see is this tendency toward something we call "liquid life."
This is the movement from Americans defining their success on having things to having liquidity, because the less excess that you have around you, the more nimble and fleet of foot you are.
As a result, déclassé consumption is in.
Déclassé consumption is the whole idea that spending money frivolously makes you look a little bit anti-fashion.
The management principle is dollars and cents.
So let's look at some examples of this déclassé consumption that falls out of this value.
The first thing is, something must be happening when P. Diddy vows to tone down his bling.
(Laughter) But seriously, we also have this phenomenon on Madison Avenue and in other places, where people are actually walking out of luxury boutiques with ordinary, generic paper bags to hide the brand purchases.
We see high-end haggling in fashion today, high-end haggling for luxury and real estate.
We also see just a relaxing of ego, and sort of a dismantling of artifice.
This is a story on the yacht club that's all basically blue collar.
Blue-collar yacht club -- where you can join, but you've got to work in the boatyard as condition of membership.
We also see the trend toward tourism that's a little bit more low-key: agritourism -- going to vineyards and going to farms.
And then we also see this movement forward from dollars and cents.
What businesses can do to connect with these new mindsets is really interesting.
One is that Frito-Lay figured out this liquidity thing with their consumer.
They found their consumer had more money at the beginning of the month, less at the end of the month.
So they started to change their packaging: larger packs at the beginning of the month, smaller packaging at the end of the month.
They've just instituted dynamic pricing.
It takes into account everything from the pitcher match-ups, to the weather, to the team records, in setting prices for the consumer.
Another quick example of these types of movements is the rise of Zynga.
Zynga has risen on the consumer's desire to not want to be locked in to fixed cost.
Again, this theme is about variable cost, variable living.
So micro-payments have become huge.
And lastly, some people are using Hulu as a device to get rid of their cable bill.
So, really clever ideas there that are being taken ahold of and that marketers are starting to understand.
The second of the four values is this movement toward ethics and fair play.
We see that play itself out with empathy and respect.
The consumer is demanding it.
And, as a result, businesses must provide not only value, but values.
Increasingly, consumers are looking at the culture of the company, at their conduct in the marketplace.
So we see with empathy and respect lots of really hopeful things come out of this recession.
I'll give you a few examples.
One is the rise toward communities and neighborhoods, and increased emphasis on your neighbors as your support system.
Also, a wonderful by-product of a really lousy thing, which has been unemployment, is a rise in volunteerism that's been noted in our country.
We also see the phenomenon -- some of you may have "boomerang kids" -- these are "boomerang alumni," where universities are actually reconnecting with alumni and helping them with jobs, sharing skills and retraining.
We also talked about character and professionalism.
We had this miracle on the Hudson in New York City in January, and suddenly Sully has become a key name on BabyCenter.
(Laughter) So, from a value and values standpoint, what companies can do is connect in lots of different ways.
Microsoft is doing something wonderful.
They are actually vowing to retrain two million Americans with IT training, using their existing infrastructure to do something good.
Also, a really interesting company is GORE-TEX.
GORE-TEX is all about personal accountability of their management and their employees, to the point where they really kind of shun the idea of bosses.
But they also talk about the fact that their executives -- all of their expense reports are put onto their company intranet for everyone to see.
Complete transparency.
Think twice before you have that bottle of wine.
(Laughter) The third of the four laws of post-crisis consumerism is about durable living.
We're seeing in our data that consumers are realizing this is a marathon, not a sprint.
They're digging in and looking for ways to extract value out of every purchase they make.
Witness the fact that Americans are holding on to their cars longer than ever before: 9.4 years on average, in March.
We also see the fact that libraries have become a huge resource for America.
Did you know that 68 percent of Americans now carry a library card?
The highest percentage ever in our nation's history.
So what you see in this trend is also the accumulation of knowledge.
Continuing education is up.
Everything is focused on betterment, training, development and moving forward.
We also see a big DIY movement.
I was fascinated to learn that 30 percent of all homes in America are actually built by owners.
That includes cottages and the like, but 30 percent.
People are getting their hands dirty, rolling up their sleeves.
We see it with the phenomenon of raising backyard hens, chickens and ducks.
And when you work out the math, they say it doesn't work, but the principle is there; it's about being sustainable and taking care of yourself.
Then we look at the High Line in New York City, an excellent use of reimagining existing infrastructure for something good, which is a brand-new park in New York City.
So what brands can do, and companies, is pay dividends to consumers, be a brand that lasts, offer transparency, promise you're going to be there beyond today's sale.
Patagonia's "Footprint Chronicles" basically goes through and tracks every product they make, and gives you social responsibility, and helps you understand the ethics behind the product they make.
Another great example is Fidelity.
Rather than instant cash-back rewards on your credit or debit purchases, this is about 529 rewards for your student education.
Or the interesting company Sunrun.
I love this company.
They've created a consumer collective where they put solar panels on households and create a consumer-based utility, where the electricity they generate is basically pumped back out into the marketplace.
So it's a consumer-driven co-op.
The fourth post-crisis consumerism that we see is this movement about "return to the fold."
It's incredibly important right now.
Trust is not parceled out, as we all know.
It's now about connecting to your communities, connecting to your social networks.
In my book, I talked about the fact that 72 percent of people trust what other people say about a brand or a company, versus 15 percent on advertising.
So in that respect, cooperative consumerism has really taken off.
This is about consumers working together to get what they want out of the marketplace.
Let's look at a couple of quick examples.
The artisanal movement is huge: everything about locally derived products and services, supporting your local neighborhoods, whether it's cheeses, wines and other products.
Also this rise of local currencies.
Realizing that it's difficult to get loans in this environment, you're doing business with people you trust in your local markets.
So this rise of local currency is another really interesting phenomenon.
And then they did a recent report I thought was fascinating.
They actually started, in certain communities in the United States, to publish people's electricity usage.
And what they found out is when that was available for public record, the people's electricity usage in those communities dropped.
Then we also look at the idea of cow-pooling, which is the whole phenomenon of consumers organizing together to buy meat from organic farms, that they know is safe and controlled in the way that they want it to be controlled.
And then there's this other really interesting movement in California, which is about carrot mobs.
The traditional thing would be to boycott, right? Have a stick.
Well, why not have a carrot?
So these are consumers organizing, pooling their resources to incentify companies to do good.
And then we look at what companies can do.
This is all the opportunity about being a community organizer.
You have to realize that you can't fight and control this.
You actually need to organize it.
You need to harness it. You need to give it meaning.
And there's lots of really interesting examples here.
First is just the rise of the fact that Zagat's has actually moved out of and diversified from rating restaurants, into actually rating health care.
So what credentials does Zagat's have?
Well, they have a lot, because it's their network of people.
So that becomes a very powerful force for them to make their brand more elastic.
Then you look at the phenomenon of Kogi.
This Kogi doesn't exist. It's a moving truck.
It's a moving truck through L.A., and the only way you can find it is through Twitter.
(Laughter) Or you look at Johnson &amp; Johnson's "Momversations," a phenomenal blog that's been built up, where J&amp;J basically is tapping into the power of mommy bloggers, allowing them to create a forum where they can communicate and connect.
And it's also become a very valuable advertising revenue for J&amp;J as well.
This, plus the fact that you've got phenomenal work from CEOs, from Ford to Zappos, connecting on Twitter, creating an open environment, allowing their employees to be part of the process, rather than hidden behind walls.
You see this rising force in total transparency and openness that companies are starting to adopt, all because the consumer is demanding it.
So when we look at this and step back, what I believe is that the crisis that exists today is definitely real.
It's been tremendously powerful for consumers.
But at the same time, this is also a tremendous opportunity.
The Chinese character for crisis is actually the same side of the same coin.
Crisis equals opportunity.
What we're seeing with consumers right now is the ability for them to actually lead us forward out of this recession.
So we believe that values-driven spending will force capitalism to be better: it will drive innovation; it will make longer-lasting products; it will create better, more intuitive customer service; and it will give us the opportunity to connect with companies that share the values that we share.
So when we look back and step out at this and see the beginning of these trends that we're seeing in our data, we see a very hopeful picture for the future of America.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One of the biggest challenges in computer graphics has been being able to create a photo-real, digital human face.
And one of the reasons it is so difficult is that, unlike aliens and dinosaurs, we look at human faces every day.
They are very important to how we communicate with each other.
As a result, we're tuned in to the subtlest things that could possibly be wrong with a computer rendering, in order to believe whether these things are realistic.
And what I'm going to do in the next five minutes is take you through a process where we tried to create a reasonably photo-realistic computer-generated face, using some computer graphics technology we've developed, and also some collaborators at a company called Image Metrics.
And we're going to try to do a photo-real face of an actress named Emily O'Brien, who is right there.
And that's actually a completely computer-generated rendering of her face.
By the end of the talk, we're going to see it move.
The way that we did this is we tried to start with Emily herself, who was gracious enough to come to our laboratory in Marina Del Rey, and sit for a session in Light Stage 5.
This is a face-scanning sphere, with 156 white LEDs all around that allow us to photograph her in a series of very controlled illumination conditions.
And the lighting that we use these days looks something like this.
We shoot all of these photographs in about three seconds.
And we basically capture enough information with video projector patterns that drape over the contours of her face, and different principle directions of light from the light stage, to figure out both the coarse-scale and the fine-scale detail of her face.
If we zoom in on this photograph right here, we can see it's a really nice photograph to have of her, because she is lit from absolutely everywhere at the same time to get a nice image of her facial texture.
And in addition, we've actually used polarizers on all the lights -- just like polarized sunglasses can block the glare off of the road, polarizers can block the shine off of the skin, so we don't get all those specular reflections to take this map.
Now, if we turn the polarizers around just a little bit, we can actually bring that specular reflection of the skin back in, and you can see she looks kind of shiny and oily at this point.
If you take the difference between these two images here, you can get an image lit from the entire sphere of light of just the shine off of Emily's skin.
I don't think any photograph like this had ever been taken before we had done this.
And this is very important light to capture, because this is the light that reflects off the first surface of the skin.
It doesn't get underneath the translucent layers of the skin and blur out.
And, as a result, it's a very good cue to the detailed shape of the skin-pore structure and all of the fine wrinkles that all of us have, the things that actually make us look like real humans.
So, if we use information that comes off of this specular reflection, we can go from a traditional face scan that might have the gross contours of the face and the basic shape, and augment it with information that puts in all of that skin pore structure and fine wrinkles.
And, even more importantly, since this is a photometric process that only takes three seconds to capture, we can shoot Emily in just part of an afternoon, in many different facial poses and facial expressions.
So, here you can see her moving her eyes around, moving her mouth around.
And these we're actually going to use to create a photo-real digital character.
If you take a look at these scans that we have of Emily, you can see that the human face does an enormous amount of amazing things as it goes into different facial expressions.
You can see things. Not only the face shape changes, but all sorts of different skin buckling and skin wrinkling occurs.
You can see that the skin pore structure changes enormously from stretched skin pores to the regular skin texture.
You can see the furrows in the brow and how the microstructure changes there.
You can see muscles pulling down at flesh to bring her eyebrows down.
Her muscles bulging in her forehead when she winces like that.
In addition to this kind of high-resolution geometry, since it's all captured with cameras, we've got a great texture map to use for the face.
And by looking at how the different color channels of the illumination, the red and the green and the blue, diffuse the light differently, we can come up with a way of shading the skin on the computer.
Then, instead of looking like a plaster mannequin, it actually looks like it's made out of living human flesh.
And this is what we used to give to the company Image Metrics to create a rigged, digital version of Emily.
We're just seeing the coarse-scale geometry here.
But they basically created a digital puppet of her, where you can pull on these various strings, and it actually moves her face in ways that are completely consistent with the scans that we took.
And, in addition to the coarse-scale geometry, they also used all of that detail to create a set of what are called "displacement maps" that animate as well.
These are the displacement maps here.
And you can see those different wrinkles actually show up as she animates.
So the next process was then to animate her.
We actually used one of her own performances to provide the source data.
So, by analyzing this video with computer vision techniques, they were able to drive the facial rig with the computer-generated performance.
So what you're going to see now, after this, is a completely photo-real digital face.
We can turn the volume up a little bit if that's available.
Emily: Image Metrics is a markerless, performance-driven animation company.
We specialize in high-quality facial animation for video games and films.
Image Metrics is a markerless, performance-driven animation company.
We specialize in high quality facial animation for video games and films.
Paul Debevec: So, if we break that down into layers, here's that diffuse component we saw in the first slide.
Here is the specular component animating.
You can see all the wrinkles happening there.
And there is the underlying wireframe mesh.
And that is Emily herself.
Now, where are we going with this here?
We've gone a little bit beyond Light Stage 5. This is Light Stage 6, and we're looking at taking this technology and applying it to whole human bodies.
This is Bruce Lawmen, one of our researchers in the group, who graciously agreed to get captured running in the Light Stage.
And let's take a look at a computer-generated version of Bruce, running in a new environment.
And thank you very much.
(Applause)
The magical moment, the magical moment of conducting.
Which is, you go onto a stage. There is an orchestra sitting.
They are all, you know, warming up and doing stuff.
And I go on the podium.
You know, this little office of the conductor.
Or rather a cubicle, an open-space cubicle, with a lot of space.
And in front of all that noise, you do a very small gesture.
Something like this, not very pomp, not very sophisticated, this.
And suddenly, out of the chaos, order.
Noise becomes music.
And this is fantastic. And it's so tempting to think that it's all about me.
(Laughter) All those great people here, virtuosos, they make noise, they need me to do that.
Not really. If it were that, I would just save you the talk, and teach you the gesture.
So you could go out to the world and do this thing in whatever company or whatever you want, and you have perfect harmony. It doesn't work.
Let's look at the first video.
I hope you'll think it's a good example of harmony.
And then speak a little bit about how it comes about.
(Music) Was that nice?
So that was a sort of a success.
Now, who should we thank for the success?
I mean, obviously the orchestra musicians playing beautifully, the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra.
They don't often even look at the conductor.
Then you have the clapping audience, yeah, actually taking part in doing the music.
You know Viennese audiences usually don't interfere with the music.
This is the closest to an Oriental bellydancing feast that you will ever get in Vienna.
(Laughter) Unlike, for example Israel, where audiences cough all the time.
You know, Arthur Rubinstein, the pianist, used to say that, "Anywhere in the world, people that have the flu, they go to the doctor.
In Tel Aviv they come to my concerts."
(Laughter) So that's a sort of a tradition.
But Viennese audiences do not do that.
Here they go out of their regular, just to be part of that, to become part of the orchestra, and that's great.
You know, audiences like you, yeah, make the event.
But what about the conductor? What can you say the conductor was doing, actually?
Um, he was happy.
And I often show this to senior management.
People get annoyed.
"You come to work. How come you're so happy?"
Something must be wrong there, yeah? But he's spreading happiness.
And I think the happiness, the important thing is this happiness does not come from only his own story and his joy of the music.
The joy is about enabling other people's stories to be heard at the same time.
You have the story of the orchestra as a professional body.
You have the story of the audience as a community. Yeah.
You have the stories of the individuals in the orchestra and in the audience.
And then you have other stories, unseen.
People who build this wonderful concert hall.
People who made those Stradivarius, Amati, all those beautiful instruments.
And all those stories are being heard at the same time.
This is the true experience of a live concert.
That's a reason to go out of home. Yeah?
And not all conductors do just that.
Let's see somebody else, a great conductor.
Riccardo Muti, please.
(Music) Yeah, that was very short, but you could see it's a completely different figure. Right?
He's awesome. He's so commanding. Yeah?
So clear. Maybe a little bit over-clear.
Can we have a little demonstration? Would you be my orchestra for a second?
Can you sing, please, the first note of Don Giovanni?
You have to sing "Aaaaaah," and I'll stop you.
Okay? Ready?
Audience: ♫ Aaaaaaah ... ♫ Itay Talgam: Come on, with me. If you do it without me I feel even more redundant than I already feel.
So please, wait for the conductor.
Now look at me. "Aaaaaah," and I stop you. Let's go.
Audience: ♫ ... Aaaaaaaah ... ♫ (Laughter) Itay Talgam: So we'll have a little chat later.
(Laughter) But ... There is a vacancy for a ...
But -- (Laughter) -- you could see that you could stop an orchestra with a finger.
Now what does Riccardo Muti do? He does something like this ...
(Laughter) And then -- sort of -- (Laughter) So not only the instruction is clear, but also the sanction, what will happen if you don't do what I tell you.
(Laughter) So, does it work? Yes, it works -- to a certain point.
When Muti is asked, "Why do you conduct like this?"
He says, "I'm responsible."
Responsible in front of him.
No he doesn't really mean Him. He means Mozart, which is -- (Laughter) -- like a third seat from the center.
(Laughter) So he says, "If I'm -- (Applause) if I'm responsible for Mozart, this is going to be the only story to be told.
It's Mozart as I, Riccardo Muti, understand it."
And you know what happened to Muti?
Three years ago he got a letter signed by all 700 employees of La Scala, musical employees, I mean the musicians, saying, "You're a great conductor. We don't want to work with you. Please resign."
(Laughter) "Why? Because you don't let us develop.
You're using us as instruments, not as partners.
And our joy of music, etc., etc. ..."
So he had to resign. Isn't that nice?
(Laughter) He's a nice guy. He's a really nice guy.
Well, can you do it with less control, or with a different kind of control?
Let's look at the next conductor, Richard Strauss.
(Music) I'm afraid you'll get the feeling that I really picked on him because he's old.
It's not true. When he was a young man of about 30, he wrote what he called "The Ten Commandments for Conductors."
The first one was: If you sweat by the end of the concert it means that you must have done something wrong.
That's the first one. The fourth one you'll like better.
It says: Never look at the trombones -- it only encourages them.
(Laughter) So, the whole idea is really to let it happen by itself.
Do not interfere.
But how does it happen? Did you see him turning pages in the score?
Now, either he is senile, and doesn't remember his own music, because he wrote the music.
Or he is actually transferring a very strong message to them, saying, "Come on guys. You have to play by the book.
So it's not about my story. It's not about your story.
It's only the execution of the written music, no interpretation."
Interpretation is the real story of the performer.
So, no, he doesn't want that. That's a different kind of control.
Let's see another super-conductor, a German super-conductor. Herbert von Karajan, please.
(Music) What's different? Did you see the eyes? Closed.
Did you see the hands?
Did you see this kind of movement? Let me conduct you. Twice.
Once like a Muti, and you'll -- (Claps) -- clap, just once.
And then like Karajan. Let's see what happens. Okay?
Like Muti. You ready? Because Muti ...
(Laughter) Okay? Ready? Let's do it.
Audience: (Claps) Itay Talgam: Hmm ... again.
Audience: (Claps) Itay Talgam: Good. Now like a Karajan. Since you're already trained, let me concentrate, close my eyes. Come, come.
Audience: (Claps) (Laughter) Itay Talgam: Why not together? (Laughter) Because you didn't know when to play.
Now I can tell you, even the Berlin Philharmonic doesn't know when to play.
(Laughter) But I'll tell you how they do it. No cynicism.
This is a German orchestra, yes?
They look at Karajan. And then they look at each other.
(Laughter) "Do you understand what this guy wants?"
And after doing that, they really look at each other, and the first players of the orchestra lead the whole ensemble in playing together.
And when Karajan is asked about it he actually says, "Yes, the worst damage I can do to my orchestra is to give them a clear instruction.
Because that would prevent the ensemble, the listening to each other that is needed for an orchestra."
Now that's great. What about the eyes?
Why are the eyes closed?
There is a wonderful story about Karajan conducting in London.
And he cues in a flute player like this.
The guy has no idea what to do. (Laughter) "Maestro, with all due respect, when should I start?"
What do you think Karajan's reply was? When should I start?
Oh yeah. He says, "You start when you can't stand it anymore."
(Laughter) Meaning that you know you have no authority to change anything.
It's my music. The real music is only in Karajan's head.
And you have to guess my mind. So you are under tremendous pressure because I don't give you instruction, and yet, you have to guess my mind.
So it's a different kind of, a very spiritual but yet very firm control.
Can we do it in another way? Of course we can. Let's go back to the first conductor we've seen: Carlos Kleiber, his name. Next video, please.
(Music) (Laughter) Yeah.
Well, it is different. But isn't that controlling in the same way?
No, it's not, because he is not telling them what to do.
When he does this, it's not, "Take your Stradivarius and like Jimi Hendrix, smash it on the floor." It's not that.
He says, "This is the gesture of the music.
I'm opening a space for you to put in another layer of interpretation."
That is another story.
But how does it really work together if it doesn't give them instructions?
It's like being on a rollercoaster. Yeah?
You're not really given any instructions, but the forces of the process itself keep you in place.
That's what he does.
The interesting thing is of course the rollercoaster does not really exist.
It's not a physical thing. It's in the players' heads.
And that's what makes them into partners.
You have the plan in your head.
You know what to do, even though Kleiber is not conducting you.
But here and there and that. You know what to do.
And you become a partner building the rollercoaster, yeah, with sound, as you actually take the ride.
This is very exciting for those players.
They do need to go to a sanatorium for two weeks, later.
(Laughter) It is very tiring. Yeah?
But it's the best music making, like this.
But of course it's not only about motivation and giving them a lot of physical energy.
You also have to be very professional.
And look again at this Kleiber.
Can we have the next video, quickly?
You'll see what happens when there is a mistake.
(Music) Again you see the beautiful body language.
(Music) And now there is a trumpet player who does something not exactly the way it should be done.
Go along with the video. Look.
See, second time for the same player.
(Laughter) And now the third time for the same player.
(Laughter) "Wait for me after the concert.
I have a short notice to give you."
You know, when it's needed, the authority is there. It's very important.
But authority is not enough to make people your partners.
Let's see the next video, please. See what happens here.
You might be surprised having seen Kleiber as such a hyperactive guy.
He's conducting Mozart.
(Music) The whole orchestra is playing.
(Music) Now something else.
(Music) See? He is there 100 percent, but not commanding, not telling what to do.
Rather enjoying what the soloist is doing.
(Music) Another solo now. See what you can pick up from this.
(Music) Look at the eyes.
First of all, it's a kind of a compliment we all like to get.
It's not feedback. It's an "Mmmm ..." Yeah, it comes from here.
So that's a good thing.
And the second thing is it's about actually being in control, but in a very special way.
When Kleiber does -- did you see the eyes, going from here? (Singing) You know what happens? Gravitation is no more.
Kleiber not only creates a process, but also creates the conditions in the world in which this process takes place.
So again, the oboe player is completely autonomous and therefore happy and proud of his work, and creative and all of that.
And the level in which Kleiber is in control is in a different level.
So control is no longer a zero-sum game.
You have this control. You have this control. And all you put together, in partnership, brings about the best music.
So Kleiber is about process.
Kleiber is about conditions in the world.
But you need to have process and content to create the meaning.
Lenny Bernstein, my own personal maestro.
Since he was a great teacher, Lenny Bernstein always started from the meaning. Look at this, please.
(Music) Do you remember the face of Muti, at the beginning?
Well he had a wonderful expression, but only one.
(Laughter) Did you see Lenny's face?
You know why? Because the meaning of the music is pain.
And you're playing a painful sound.
And you look at Lenny and he's suffering.
But not in a way that you want to stop.
It's suffering, like, enjoying himself in a Jewish way, as they say.
(Laughter) But you can see the music on his face.
You can see the baton left his hand. No more baton.
Now it's about you, the player, telling the story.
Now it's a reversed thing. You're telling the story. And you're telling the story.
And even briefly, you become the storyteller to which the community, the whole community, listens to.
And Bernstein enables that. Isn't that wonderful?
Now, if you are doing all the things we talked about, together, and maybe some others, you can get to this wonderful point of doing without doing.
And for the last video, I think this is simply the best title.
My friend Peter says, "If you love something, give it away." So, please.
(Music) (Applause)
I remember my aunt brushing my hair when I was a child.
I felt this tingling in my stomach, this swelling in my belly.
All her attention on me, just me.
My beautiful Aunt Bea, stroking my hair with a fine-bristled brush.
Do you have a memory like that that you can feel in your body right now?
Before language, we're all sensation.
As children, that's how we learn to differentiate ourselves in the world -- through touch.
Everything goes in the mouth, the hands, on the skin.
Sensation -- it is the way that we first experience love.
It's the basis of human connection.
We want our children to grow up to have healthy intimate relationships.
So as parents, one of the things that we do is we teach our children about sex.
We have books to help us, we have sex ed at school for the basics.
There's porn to fill in the gaps -- and it will fill in the gaps.
(Laughter) We teach our children "the talk" about biology and mechanics, about pregnancy and safe sex, and that's what our kids grow up thinking that sex is pretty much all about.
But we can do better than that.
We can teach our sons and daughters about pleasure and desire, about consent and boundaries, about what it feels like to be present in their body and to know when they're not.
And we do that in the ways that we model touch, play, make eye contact -- all the ways that we engage their senses.
We can teach our children not just about sex, but about sensuality.
This is the kind of talk that I needed as a girl.
I was extremely sensitive, but by the time I was an adolescent, I had numbed out.
The shame of boys mocking my changing body and then girls exiling me for, ironically, my interest in boys, it was so much.
I didn't have any language for what I was experiencing; I didn't know it was going to pass.
So I did the best thing I could at the time and I checked out.
And you can't isolate just the difficult feelings, so I lost access to the joy, the pleasure, the play, and I spent decades like that, with this his low-grade depression, thinking that this is what it meant to be a grown-up.
For the past year, I've been interviewing men and women about their relationship to sex and I've heard my story again and again.
Boys who were taught to man up -- "don't be so emotional."
I learned I was not alone in checking out.
It was my daughter who reminded me of how much I used to feel.
We were at the beach.
It was this rare day.
I turned off my cell phone, put in the calendar, "Day at the beach with the girls."
I laid our towels down just out of reach of the surf and fell asleep.
And when I woke up, I saw my daughter drizzling sand on her arm like this, and I could feel that light tickle of sand on her skin and I remembered my aunt brushing my hair.
So I curled up next to her and I drizzled sand on her other arm and then her legs.
And then I said, "Hey, you want me to bury you?"
And her eyes got really big and she was like, "Yeah!"
So we dug a hole and I covered her in sand and shells and drew this little mermaid tail.
And then I took her home and lathered her up in the shower and massaged her scalp and I dried her off in a towel.
And I thought, "Ah. How many times had I done that -- bathed her and dried her off -- but had I ever stopped and paid attention to the sensations that I was creating for her?"
I'd been treating her like she was on some assembly line of children needing to be fed and put to bed.
And I realized that when I dry my daughter off in a towel tenderly the way a lover would, I'm teaching her to expect that kind of touch.
I'm teaching her in that moment about intimacy.
About how to love her body and respect her body.
I realized there are parts of the talk that can't be conveyed in words.
In her book, "Girls and Sex," writer Peggy Orenstein finds that young women are focusing on their partner's pleasure, not their own.
This is something I'm going to talk about with my girls when they're older, but for now, I look for ways to help them identify what gives them pleasure and to practice articulating that.
"Rub my back," my daughter says when I tuck her in.
And I say, "OK, how do you want me to rub your back?"
"I don't know," she says.
So I pause, waiting for her directions.
Finally she says, "OK, up and to the right, like you're tickling me."
I run my fingertips up her spine.
"What else?" I ask.
"Over to the left, a little harder now."
We need to teach our children how to articulate their sensations so they're familiar with them.
I look for ways to play games with my girls at home to do this.
I scratch my fingernails on my daughter's arm and say, "Give me one word to describe this."
"Violent," she says.
I embrace her, hold her tight.
"Protected," she tells me.
I find opportunities to tell them how I'm feeling, what I'm experiencing, so we have common language.
Like right now, this tingling in my scalp down my spine means I'm nervous and I'm excited.
You are likely experiencing sensations in response to me.
The language I'm using, the ideas I'm sharing.
And our tendency is to judge these reactions and sort them into a hierarchy: better or worse, and then seek or avoid them.
And that's because we live in this binary culture and we're taught from a very young age to sort the world into good and bad.
"Did you like that book?"
"Did you have a good day?"
How about, "What did you notice about that story?"
"Tell me a moment about your day.
What did you learn?"
Let's teach our children to stay open and curious about their experiences, like a traveler in a foreign land.
And that way they can stay with sensation without checking out -- even the heightened and challenging ones -- the way I did, the way so many of us have.
This sense education, this is education I want for my daughters.
Sense education is what I needed as girl.
It's what I hope for all of our children.
This awareness of sensation, it's where we began as children.
It's what we can learn from our children and it's what we can in turn remind our children as they come of age.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Twenty-five-and-a-quarter years ago I read a newspaper article which said that one day syringes would be one of the major causes of the spread of AIDS, the transmission of AIDS.
I thought this was unacceptable. So I decided to do something about it.
Sadly, it's come true. Malaria, as we all know, kills approximately one million people a year.
The reuse of syringes now exceeds that and kills 1.3 million people a year.
This young girl and her friend that I met in an orphanage in Delhi were HIV positive from a syringe.
And what was so sad about this particular story was that once their parents had found out -- and don't forget, their parents took them to the doctor -- the parents threw them out on the street.
And hence they ended up in an orphanage.
And it comes from situations like this where you have either skilled or unskilled practitioners, blindly giving an injection to someone.
And the injection is so valuable, that the people basically trust the doctor, being second to God, which I've heard many times, to do the right thing. But in fact they're not.
And you can understand, obviously, the transmission problem between people in high-virus areas.
This video we took undercover, which shows you, over a half an hour period, a tray of medicines of 42 vials, which are being delivered with only 2 syringes in a public hospital in India.
And over the course of half an hour, not one syringe was filmed being unwrapped.
They started with two and they ended with two.
And you'll see, just now, a nurse coming back to the tray, which is their sort of modular station, and dropping the syringe she's just used back in the tray for it to be picked up and used again.
So you can imagine the scale of this problem.
And in fact in India alone, 62 percent of all injections given are unsafe.
These kids in Pakistan don't go to school.
They are lucky. They already have a job.
And that job is that they go around and pick up syringes from the back of hospitals, wash them, and in the course of this, obviously picking them up they injure themselves.
And then they repackage them and sell them out on markets for literally more money than a sterile syringe in the first place, which is quite bizarre.
In an interesting photo, their father, while we were talking to him, picked up a syringe and pricked his finger -- I don't know whether you can see the drop of blood on the end -- and immediately whipped out a box of matches, lit one, and burned the blood off the end of his finger, giving me full assurance that that was the way that you stopped the transmission of HIV.
In China, recycling is a major issue.
And they are collected en mass -- you can see the scale of it here -- and sorted out, by hand, back into the right sizes, and then put back out on the street.
So recycling and reuse are the major issues here.
But there was one interesting anecdote that I found in Indonesia.
In all schools in Indonesia, there is usually a toy seller in the playground.
The toy seller, in this case, had syringes, which they usually do, next door to the diggers, which is obviously what you would expect.
And they use them, in the breaks, for water pistols.
They squirt them at each other, which is lovely and innocent.
And they are having great fun.
But they also drink from them while they're in their breaks, because it's hot.
And they squirt the water into their mouths.
And these are used with traces of blood visible.
So we need a better product. And we need better information.
And I think, if I can just borrow this camera, I was going to show you my invention, which I came up with.
So, it's a normal-looking syringe.
You load it up in the normal way. This is made on existing equipment in 14 factories that we license.
You give the injection and then put it down.
If someone then tries to reuse it, it locks and breaks afterwards.
It's very, very simple. Thank you.
(Applause) And it costs the same as a normal syringe.
And in comparison, a Coca-Cola is 10 times the price.
And that will stop reusing a syringe 20 or 30 times.
And I have an information charity which has done huge scale amount of work in India.
And we're very proud of giving information to people, so that little kids like this don't do stupid things.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The future, as we know it, is very unpredictable.
The best minds in the best institutions generally get it wrong.
This is in technology. This is in the area of politics, where pundits, the CIA, MI6 always get it wrong.
And it's clearly in the area of finance.
With institutions established to think about the future, the IMF, the BIS, the Financial Stability Forum, couldn't see what was coming.
Over 20,000 economists whose job it is, competitive entry to get there, couldn't see what was happening.
Globalization is getting more complex.
And this change is getting more rapid.
The future will be more unpredictable.
Urbanization, integration, coming together, leads to a new renaissance.
It did this a thousand years ago.
The last 40 years have been extraordinary times.
Life expectancy has gone up by about 25 years.
It took from the Stone Age to achieve that.
Income has gone up for a majority of the world's population, despite the population going up by about two billion people over this period.
And illiteracy has gone down, from a half to about a quarter of the people on Earth.
A huge opportunity, unleashing of new potential for innovation, for development.
But there is an underbelly.
There are two Achilles' heels of globalization.
There is the Achilles' heel of growing inequality -- those that are left out, those that feel angry, those that are not participating. Globalization has not been inclusive.
The second Achilles' heel is complexity -- a growing fragility, a growing brittleness.
What happens in one place very quickly affects everything else.
This is a systemic risk, systemic shock.
We've seen it in the financial crisis. We've seen it in the pandemic flu.
It will become virulent and it's something we have to build resilience against.
A lot of this is driven by what's happening in technology.
There have been huge leaps. There will be a million-fold improvement in what you can get for the same price in computing by 2030.
That's what the experience of the last 20 years has been.
It will continue.
Our computers, our systems will be as primitive as the Apollo's are for today.
Our mobile phones are more powerful than the total Apollo space engine.
Our mobile phones are more powerful than some of the strongest computers of 20 years ago.
So what will this do?
It will create huge opportunities in technology.
Miniaturization as well.
There will be invisible capacity. Invisible capacity in our bodies, in our brains, and in the air.
This is a dust mite on a nanoreplica.
This sort of ability to do everything in new ways unleashes potential, not least in the area of medicine.
This is a stem cell that we've developed here in Oxford, from an embryonic stem cell.
We can develop any part of the body.
Increasingly, over time, this will be possible from our own skin -- able to replicate parts of the body.
Fantastic potential for regenerative medicine.
I don't think there will be a Special Olympics long after 2030, because of this capacity to regenerate parts of the body.
But the question is, "Who will have it?"
The other major development is going to be in the area of what can happen in genetics.
The capacity to create, as this mouse has been genetically modified, something which goes three times faster, lasts for three times longer, we could produce, as this mouse can, to the age of our equivalent of 80 years, using about the same amount of food.
But will this only be available for the super rich, for those that can afford it? Are we headed for a new eugenics?
Will only those that are able to afford it be able to be this super race of the future?
(Laughter) So the big question for us is, "How do we manage this technological change?"
How do we ensure that it creates a more inclusive technology, a technology which means that not only as we grow older, that we can also grow wiser, and that we're able to support the populations of the future?
One of the most dramatic manifestations of these improvements will be moving from population pyramids to what we might term population coffins.
There is unlikely to be a pension or a retirement age in 2030.
These will be redundant concepts. And this isn't only something of the West.
The most dramatic changes will be the skyscraper type of new pyramids that will take place in China and in many other countries.
So forget about retirements if you're young.
Forget about pensions. Think about life and where it's going to be going.
Of course, migration will become even more important.
The war on talent, the need to attract people at all skill ranges, to push us around in our wheelchairs, but also to drive our economies. Our innovation will be vital.
The employment in the rich countries will go down from about 800 to about 700 million of these people.
This would imply a massive leap in migration.
So the concerns, the xenophobic concerns of today, of migration, will be turned on their head, as we search for people to help us sort out our pensions and our economies in the future.
And then, the systemic risks.
We understand that these will become much more virulent, that what we see today is this interweaving of societies, of systems, fastened by technologies and hastened by just-in-time management systems.
Small levels of stock push resilience into other people's responsibility.
The collapse in biodiversity, climate change, pandemics, financial crises: these will be the currency that we will think about.
And so a new awareness will have to arise, of how we deal with these, how we mobilize ourselves, in a new way, and come together as a community to manage systemic risk.
It's going to require innovation.
It's going to require an understanding that the glory of globalization could also be its downfall.
This could be our best century ever because of the achievements, or it could be our worst.
And of course we need to worry about the individuals, particularly the individuals that feel that they've been left out in one way or another.
An individual, for the first time in the history of humanity, will have the capacity, by 2030, to destroy the planet, to wreck everything, through the creation, for example, of a biopathogen.
How do we begin to weave these tapestries together?
How do we think about complex systems in new ways?
That will be the challenge of the scholars, and of all of us engaged in thinking about the future.
The rest of our lives will be in the future. We need to prepare for it now.
We need to understand that the governance structure in the world is fossilized.
It cannot begin to cope with the challenges that this will bring.
We have to develop a new way of managing the planet, collectively, through collective wisdom.
We know, and I know from my own experience, that amazing things can happen, when individuals and societies come together to change their future.
I left South Africa, and 15 years later, after thinking I would never go back, I had the privilege and the honor to work in the government of Nelson Mandela.
This was a miracle. We can create miracles, collectively, in our lifetime.
It is vital that we do so.
It is vital that the ideas that are nurtured in TED, that the ideas that we think about look forward, and make sure that this will be the most glorious century, and not one of eco-disaster and eco-collapse.
Thank you. (Applause)
I'm sure that, throughout the 100,000-odd years of our species' existence and even before, our ancestors looked up at the night sky and wondered what stars are -- wondering, therefore, how to explain what they saw in terms of things unseen.
OK, so, most people only wondered that occasionally, like today, in breaks from whatever normally preoccupied them.
But what normally preoccupied them also involved yearning to know.
They wished they knew how to prevent their food supply from sometimes failing, and how they could rest when they were tired without risking starvation, be warmer, cooler, safer, in less pain.
I bet those prehistoric cave artists would have loved to know how to draw better.
(Laughter) In every aspect of their lives, they wished for progress, just as we do.
But they failed, almost completely, to make any.
They didn't know how to.
Discoveries like fire happened so rarely that, from an individual's point of view, the world never improved.
Nothing new was learned.
The first clue to the origin of starlight happened as recently as 1899: radioactivity.
And within 40 years, physicists discovered the whole explanation, expressed, as usual, in elegant symbols.
But never mind the symbols.
Think how many discoveries they represent.
Nuclei and nuclear reactions, of course.
But isotopes, particles of electricity, antimatter, neutrinos, the conversion of mass to energy -- that's E=mc2 -- gamma rays, transmutation.
That ancient dream that had always eluded the alchemists was achieved through these same theories that explained starlight and other ancient mysteries and new, unexpected phenomena.
That all that, discovered in 40 years, had not been in the previous hundred thousand was not for lack of thinking about stars and all those other urgent problems they had.
They even arrived at answers, such as myths, that dominated their lives, yet bore almost no resemblance to the truth.
The tragedy of that protracted stagnation isn't sufficiently recognized, I think.
These were people with brains of essentially the same design that eventually did discover all those things.
But that ability to make progress remained almost unused, until the event that revolutionized the human condition and changed the universe.
Or so we should hope, because that event was the scientific revolution, ever since which our knowledge of the physical world and of how to adapt it to our wishes has been growing relentlessly.
Now, what had changed?
What were people now doing for the first time that made that difference between stagnation and rapid, open-ended discovery?
How to make that difference is surely the most important universal truth that it's possible to know.
And worryingly, there's no consensus about what it is.
So, I'll tell you.
(Laughter) But I'll have to backtrack a little first.
Before the scientific revolution, they believed that everything important, knowable, was already known, enshrined in ancient writings, institutions and in some genuinely useful rules of thumb -- which were, however, entrenched as dogmas, along with many falsehoods.
So, they believed that knowledge came from authorities that actually knew very little.
And therefore, progress depended on learning how to reject the authority of learned men, the priests, traditions and rulers, which is why the scientific revolution had to have a wider context: the Enlightenment, a revolution in how people sought knowledge, trying not to rely on authority.
"Take no one's word for it."
But that can't be what made the difference.
Authorities had been rejected before, many times.
And that rarely, if ever, caused anything like the scientific revolution.
At the time, what they thought distinguished science was a radical idea about things unseen, known as empiricism -- all knowledge derives from the senses.
Well, we've seen that that can't be true.
It did help by promoting observation and experiment.
But, from the outset, it was obvious that there was something horribly wrong with it.
Knowledge comes from the senses?
In what language?
Certainly not the language of mathematics, in which, Galileo rightly said, the book of nature is written.
Look at the world.
You don't see equations carved on the mountainsides.
If you did, it would be because people had carved them.
By the way, why don't we do that?
(Laughter) What's wrong with us?
(Laughter) Empiricism is inadequate because, well, scientific theories explain the seen in terms of the unseen.
And the unseen, you have to admit, doesn't come to us through the senses.
We don't see those nuclear reactions in stars.
We don't see the origin of species.
We don't see the curvature of space-time, and other universes.
But we know about those things.
How?
Well, the classic empiricist answer is induction -- the unseen resembles the seen.
But it doesn't.
You know what the clinching evidence was that space-time is curved?
It was a photograph -- not of space-time, but of an eclipse, with a dot there rather than there.
And the evidence for evolution?
Some rocks and some finches.
And parallel universes?
Again: dots there rather than there, on a screen.
What we see in all these cases bears no resemblance to the reality that we conclude is responsible -- only a long chain of theoretical reasoning and interpretation connects them.
"Ah!" say creationists.
"So you admit it's all interpretation.
No one's ever seen evolution.
We see rocks.
You have your interpretation. We have ours.
Yours comes from guesswork; ours, from the Bible."
But what creationist and empiricists both ignore is that, in that sense, no one's ever seen a Bible either, that the eye only detects light, which we don't perceive.
Brains only detect nerve impulses.
And they don't perceive even those as what they really are, namely electrical crackles.
So we perceive nothing as what it really is.
Our connection to reality is never just perception.
It's always, as Karl Popper put it, theory-laden.
Scientific knowledge isn't derived from anything.
Like all knowledge, it's conjectural, guesswork, tested by observation, not derived from it.
So, were testable conjectures the great innovation that opened the intellectual prison gates?
No, contrary to what's usually said, testability is common in myths and all sorts of other irrational modes of thinking.
Any crank claiming the sun will go out next Tuesday has got a testable prediction.
Consider the ancient Greek myth explaining seasons.
Hades, god of the underworld, kidnaps Persephone, the goddess of spring, and negotiates a forced marriage contract, requiring her to return regularly, and lets her go.
And each year, she is magically compelled to return.
And her mother, Demeter, goddess of the earth, is sad, and makes it cold and barren.
That myth is testable.
If winter is caused by Demeter's sadness, then it must happen everywhere on earth simultaneously.
So if the ancient Greeks had only known that Australia is at its warmest when Demeter is at her saddest ...
(Laughter) they'd have known that their theory is false.
(Laughter) So, what was wrong with that myth and with all prescientific thinking?
And what, then, made that momentous difference?
I think there's one thing you have to care about and that implies testability, the scientific method, the Enlightenment and everything.
And here's the crucial thing: there is such a thing as a defect in a story.
I don't just mean a logical defect.
What does that mean?
Well, an explanation is an assertion about what's there, unseen, that accounts for what's seen; because the explanatory role of Persephone's marriage contract could be played equally well by infinitely many other ad hoc entities.
Why a marriage contract and not any other reason for regular annual action?
Here's one: Persephone wasn't released.
She escaped, and returns every spring to take revenge on Hades, with her spring powers.
She cools his domain with spring air, venting heat up to the surface, creating summer.
That accounts for the same phenomena as the original myth.
It's equally testable.
Yet what it asserts about reality is, in many ways, the opposite.
And that's possible because the details of the original myth are unrelated to seasons, except via the myth itself.
This easy variability is the sign of a bad explanation, because, without a functional reason to prefer one of countless variants, advocating one of them in preference to the others is irrational.
So, for the essence of what makes the difference to enable progress, seek good explanations, the ones that can't be easily varied, while still explaining the phenomena.
Now our current explanation of seasons is that the Earth's axis is tilted like that, so each hemisphere tilts towards the sun for half the year, and away for the other half.
[Not to scale!] Better put that up.
(Laughter) That's a good explanation: hard to vary, because every detail plays a functional role.
For instance, we know, independently of seasons, that surfaces tilted away from radiant heat are heated less, and that a spinning sphere, in space, points in a constant direction.
And the tilt also explains the sun's angle of elevation at different times of year, and predicts that the seasons will be out of phase in the two hemispheres.
If they'd been observed in phase, the theory would have been refuted.
But now, the fact that it's also a good explanation, hard to vary, makes the crucial difference.
If the ancient Greeks had found out about seasons in Australia, they could have easily varied their myth to predict that.
For instance, when Demeter's upset, she banishes heat from her vicinity into the other hemisphere, where it makes summer.
So, being proved wrong by observation and changing their theory accordingly still wouldn't have got the ancient Greeks one jot closer to understanding seasons, because their explanation was bad -- easy to vary.
And it's only when an explanation is good that it even matters whether it's testable.
If the axis-tilt theory had been refuted, its defenders would have had nowhere to go.
No easily implemented change could make that tilt cause the same seasons in both hemispheres.
The search for hard-to-vary explanations is the origin of all progress.
It's the basic regulating principle of the Enlightenment.
So, in science, two false approaches blight progress.
One's well-known: untestable theories.
But the more important one is explanationless theories.
Whenever you're told that some existing statistical trend will continue but you aren't given a hard-to-vary account of what causes that trend, you're being told a wizard did it.
When you are told that carrots have human rights because they share half our genes, but not how gene percentages confer rights -- wizard.
When someone announces that the nature-nurture debate has been settled because there's evidence that a given percentage of our political opinions are genetically inherited, but they don't explain how genes cause opinions, they've settled nothing.
They're saying that our opinions are caused by wizards, and presumably, so are their own.
(Laughter) That the truth consists of hard-to-vary assertions about reality is the most important fact about the physical world.
It's a fact that is itself unseen, yet impossible to vary.
Thank you.
Let's talk about how the narrative of Africa is being told, and who is doing the telling.
I want to share with you the selection of work by contemporary artists from Africa and its diaspora.
I love this art.
I find it beautiful and inspiring and thrilling, and I really hope I am able to pique your interest.
I want to share something about myself and why art matters to me.
I'm the daughter of an artist, so that means that growing up, I had the chance to see my father do artwork in his studio.
My home was surrounded by art, and I had an early art education, being dragged to museums and exhibitions over the summer holidays.
What I did not understand, really, at the time, is that this also gave me an early understanding about why art is important, how to look at it, how to understand it, but also how to love it.
So art matters to me on a personal level, and not only because it's beautiful and inspiring and thrilling, but because art tells powerful stories.
All these artists have stories to tell you about what it means to be African, stories that tell you and touches about our African identity, but also stories that tell us about who we are as Africans, but also stories that tell us about our complex history.
So how can art tell you powerful stories?
I want to share with you this series by Senegalese artist Omar Victor Diop.
This is a series of self-portraits, and the artist in this particular series is focusing on the representation of Africans in art history between the 15th to the 19th century.
I want to show you how, with one image, Diop is able to touch on our African identity, on the politics of representation, but also on our social value system.
In this particular self-portrait, Diop is actually referencing another portrait by Anne-Louis Girodet.
This picture is doing a portrait of Jean-Baptiste Belley.
Jean-Baptiste Belley was a native of Senegal, a former slave of Haiti, but during his lifetime, he also was elected to represent the colony at the third government of the French Revolution, and he advocated strongly for the abolition of slavery.
What is very smart and clever about Diop here is that he's going back to history.
He's reclaiming this figure by restaging this beautiful royal blue uniform, where he is restaging also the pose, and he's doing that to actually underline the issues that are still impacting individuals of color today.
There was nothing special about this very typical political portrait of the time, except that for the first time, an individual of color, in that case, Jean-Baptiste Belley, was actually named and acknowledged in a painting.
What Diop is adding to this picture is this crucial element, which is the football under his arm, and by doing that, Diop is actually touching at our hero worship culture of African football stars, who unfortunately, despite their fame, their immense talent, and their royalty status, they are still invisible.
Diop is asking us to dig deeper, to go beyond history and what has been written, and, basically, see how it still influences and impacts us in the present.
I want to share this other beautiful series called "Kesh Angels," by artist Hassan Hajjaj.
So in this particular series, the artist is really pushing on the boundaries of stereotype and cliché.
Hassan Hajjaj is a friend, and honestly, I admire him dearly, but this particular series is talking to me directly as a Muslim woman.
I experience this all the time, where, you know, people have a lot of expectations, religious ones and cultural ones, but what I love about this artist is that he's putting all this on its head.
He's actually challenging every representation of Muslim, Arabic women that there is.
Hassan Hajjaj is a child of the diaspora.
He grew up in Morocco amongst bright logo goods, you know, counterfeit originals being sold at the souks.
So to see those symbols representing in his work a celebration of the global culture, a critic of the global urban culture, is no surprise, but really at the heart of his work is his desire of a nuanced representation.
He wants us to interrupt ourselves and all the perception that we might have on people, on a culture, and on environment.
And for example, this particular picture, your common association would be, you know, certain street brand for a certain Western distinctive consumer.
Well, he mashes it all up, where he is daring to imagine a female biker culture where actually Chanel or Louis Vuitton is designing the djellaba, and Nike, the babouche, and this is actually the standard uniform.
What I love about the women in "Kesh Angels" is that they are able to hold your gaze.
We are completely participating in the image, but they are the one inviting us in, and on their own terms.
Hassan Hajjaj's "Kesh Angels" or "Project Diaspora" by Omar Victor Diop offer me two strong examples why art is so instrumental.
It is instrumental as it really inspires us to ask questions, but it is also instrumental because it ignites change.
Seeing diversity in race and ethnicity in contemporary art is the only way that we'll see changes in the art industry, but also for the relations between Africa and the Western canon.
How we will participate in all this is really up to us.
There's a lot of progress to be made, and honestly, we still need to support stronger voices, as they are the ones shaking things up and bringing new perspective.
I want to share this beautiful old painting by younger emerging artist Kudzanai-Violet Hwami.
For me, when I see her work, it really represents freedom.
Hwami has fantastic takes on what it means to be an African and an African life.
She has lived in three different countries: Zimbabwe, South Africa and Britain, and therefore has been influenced by a multitude of layers of communities and cultures, from LGBT to eco to Xhosa to emo to British cultures.
And as she says herself, the beauty of being a child of the diaspora is really being able to reinvent ourselves and what it means to be African.
I want to leave you with this powerful piece by South African artist Lawrence Lemaoana.
Lawrence Lemaoana also criticized the influence of the media on our moral consciousness, and he's doing that by using those fabrics like banners in political demonstrations, where he's asking us to reclaim our voices.
I believe in the transformative power of art, as it is our only way to paint a nuanced image of Africa, but also its diaspora, one that will be painted by its artists and its cultural producers with their radical but also very unique view of seeing the world and their place in it.
It is really through art that we can regain our sense of agency and empowerment.
It is through art that we can really tell our own story.
So like Lawrence Lemaoana says, the power is ours.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So many of us who care about sustainable development and the livelihood of local people do so for deeply personal reasons.
I grew up in Cameroon, a country of enchanting beauty and rich biodiversity, but plagued by poor governance, environmental destruction, and poverty.
As a child, like we see with most children in sub-Saharan Africa today, I regularly suffered from malaria.
To this day, more than one million people die from malaria every year, mostly children under the age of five, with 90 percent occurring in sub-Saharan Africa.
When I was 18, I left Cameroon in search of better educational opportunities.
At the time, there was just one university in Cameroon, but Nigeria next door offered some opportunities for Cameroonians of English extraction to be trained in various fields.
So I moved there, but practicing my trade, upon graduation as an ecologist in Nigeria, was an even bigger challenge.
So I left the continent when I was offered a scholarship to Boston University for my PhD.
It is disheartening to see that, with all our challenges, with all the talents, with all the skills we have in Africa as a continent, we tend to solve our problems by parachuting in experts from the West for short stays, exporting the best and brightest out of Africa, and treating Africa as a continent in perpetual need of handouts.
After my training at Boston University, I joined a research team at the University of California's Institute of the Environment and Sustainability because of its reputation for groundbreaking research and the development of policies and programs that save the lives of millions of people the world over, including in the developing world.
And it has been shown that for every skilled African that returns home, nine new jobs are created in the formal and informal sectors.
So as part of our program, therefore, to build a sustainable Africa together, we are leading a multi-initiative to develop the Congo Basin Institute, a permanent base where Africans can work in partnership with international researchers, but working out their own solutions to their own problems.
We are using our interdisciplinary approach to show how universities, NGOs and private business can partner in international development.
So instead of parachuting in experts from the West for short stays, we are building a permanent presence in Africa, a one-stop shop for logistics, housing and development of collaborative projects between Africans and international researchers.
So this has allowed students like Michel to receive high-quality training in Africa.
Michel is currently working in our labs to investigate the effects of climate change on insects, for his PhD, and has already secured his post-doctorate fellowship that will enable him to stay on the continent.
Also through our local help program, Dr. Gbenga Abiodun, a young Nigerian scientist, can work as a post-doctoral fellow with the Foundation for Professional Development in the University of Western Cape in South Africa and the University of California at the same time, investigating the effects of climate variability and change on malaria transmission in Africa.
Indeed, Gbenga is currently developing models that will be used as an early warning system to predict malaria transmission in Africa.
So rather than exporting our best and brightest out of Africa, we are nurturing and supporting local talent in Africa.
For example, like me, Dr. Eric Fokam was trained in the US.
He returned home to Cameroon, but couldn't secure the necessary grants, and he found it incredibly challenging to practice and learn the science he knew he could.
So when I met Eric, he was on the verge of returning to the US.
But we convinced him to start collaborating with the Congo Basin Institute.
Today, his lab in Buea has over half a dozen collaborative grants with researchers from the US and Europe supporting 14 graduate students, nine of them women, all carrying out groundbreaking research understanding biodiversity under climate change, human health and nutrition.
(Applause) So rather than buy into the ideas of Africa taking handouts, we are using our interdisciplinary approach to empower Africans to find their own solutions.
Right now, we are working with local communities and students, a US entrepreneur, scientists from the US and Africa to find a way to sustainably grow ebony, the iconic African hardwood.
Ebonies, like most African hardwood, are exploited for timber, but we know very little about their ecology, what disperses them, how they survive in our forest 80 to 200 years.
This is Arvin, a young PhD student working in our labs, conducting what is turning out to be some cutting-edge tissue culture work.
Arvin is holding in her hands the first ebony tree that was produced entirely from tissues.
This is unique in Africa.
We can now show that you can produce African timber from different plant tissues -- leaves, stems, roots -- in addition from generating them from seeds, which is a very difficult task.
(Applause) So other students will take the varieties of ebony which Arvin identifies in our lab, graft them to produce saplings, and work with local communities to co-produce ebony with local fruit tree species in their various farms using our own tree farm approach, whereby we invite all the farmers to choose their own tree species they want in their farms.
So in addition to the ebony, the species which the farmers choose themselves will be produced using our modern techniques and incorporated into their land-use systems, so that they start benefiting from these products while waiting for the ebony to mature.
Today we are planting 15,000 ebony trees in Cameroon, and for the first time, ebony won't be harvested from the middle of a pristine forest.
This is the model for our African hardwoods, and we are extending this to include sapele and bubinga, other highly prized hardwoods.
So if these examples existed when I was 18, I would never have left, but because of initiatives by the Congo Basin Institute, I am coming back, but I'm not coming back alone.
I'm bringing with me Western scientists, entrepreneurs and students, the best science from the best universities in the world, to work and to live in Africa.
But we all need to scale up this local, powerful and empowering approach.
So far we have half a dozen universities and NGOs as partners.
We are planning to build a green facility that will expand on our existing laboratory space and add more housing and conference facilities to promote a long-term disciplinary approach.
I want it to offer more opportunities to young African scholars, and would scale it up by leveraging the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture's existing network of 17 research stations across sub-Saharan Africa.
The tables are starting to turn ...
and I hope they keep turning, to reach several African nations like Côte d'Ivoire, Tanzania and Senegal, among the top fastest growing economies that can attract several opportunities for private-sector investment.
We want to give more opportunities to African scholars, and I long to see a day when the most intelligent Africans will stay on this continent and receive high-quality education through initiatives like the Congo Basin Institute, and when that happens, Africa will be on the way to solving Africa's problems.
And in 50 years, I hope someone will be giving a TED Talk on how to stop the brain drain of Westerners leaving your homes to work and live in Africa.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
All buildings today have something in common.
They're made using Victorian technologies.
This involves blueprints, industrial manufacturing and construction using teams of workers.
All of this effort results in an inert object.
And that means that there is a one-way transfer of energy from our environment into our homes and cities.
This is not sustainable.
I believe that the only way that it is possible for us to construct genuinely sustainable homes and cities is by connecting them to nature, not insulating them from it.
Now, in order to do this, we need the right kind of language.
Living systems are in constant conversation with the natural world, through sets of chemical reactions called metabolism.
And this is the conversion of one group of substances into another, either through the production or the absorption of energy.
And this is the way in which living materials make the most of their local resources in a sustainable way.
So, I'm interested in the use of metabolic materials for the practice of architecture.
But they don't exist. So I'm having to make them.
I'm working with architect Neil Spiller at the Bartlett School of Architecture, and we're collaborating with international scientists in order to generate these new materials from a bottom up approach.
That means we're generating them from scratch.
One of our collaborators is chemist Martin Hanczyc, and he's really interested in the transition from inert to living matter.
Now, that's exactly the kind of process that I'm interested in, when we're thinking about sustainable materials.
So, Martin, he works with a system called the protocell.
Now all this is -- and it's magic -- is a little fatty bag. And it's got a chemical battery in it.
And it has no DNA.
This little bag is able to conduct itself in a way that can only be described as living.
It is able to move around its environment.
It can follow chemical gradients.
It can undergo complex reactions, some of which are happily architectural.
So here we are. These are protocells, patterning their environment.
We don't know how they do that yet.
Here, this is a protocell, and it's vigorously shedding this skin.
Now, this looks like a chemical kind of birth.
This is a violent process.
Here, we've got a protocell to extract carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and turn it into carbonate.
And that's the shell around that globular fat.
They are quite brittle. So you've only got a part of one there.
So what we're trying to do is, we're trying to push these technologies towards creating bottom-up construction approaches for architecture, which contrast the current, Victorian, top-down methods which impose structure upon matter.
That can't be energetically sensible.
So, bottom-up materials actually exist today.
They've been in use, in architecture, since ancient times.
If you walk around the city of Oxford, where we are today, and have a look at the brickwork, which I've enjoyed doing in the last couple of days, you'll actually see that a lot of it is made of limestone.
And if you look even closer, you'll see, in that limestone, there are little shells and little skeletons that are piled upon each other.
And then they are fossilized over millions of years.
Now a block of limestone, in itself, isn't particularly that interesting.
It looks beautiful.
But imagine what the properties of this limestone block might be if the surfaces were actually in conversation with the atmosphere.
Maybe they could extract carbon dioxide.
Would it give this block of limestone new properties?
Well, most likely it would. It might be able to grow.
It might be able to self-repair, and even respond to dramatic changes in the immediate environment.
So, architects are never happy with just one block of an interesting material.
They think big. Okay?
So when we think about scaling up metabolic materials, we can start thinking about ecological interventions like repair of atolls, or reclamation of parts of a city that are damaged by water.
So, one of these examples would of course be the historic city of Venice.
Now, Venice, as you know, has a tempestuous relationship with the sea, and is built upon wooden piles.
So we've devised a way by which it may be possible for the protocell technology that we're working with to sustainably reclaim Venice.
And architect Christian Kerrigan has come up with a series of designs that show us how it may be possible to actually grow a limestone reef underneath the city.
So, here is the technology we have today.
This is our protocell technology, effectively making a shell, like its limestone forefathers, and depositing it in a very complex environment, against natural materials.
We're looking at crystal lattices to see the bonding process in this.
Now, this is the very interesting part.
We don't just want limestone dumped everywhere in all the pretty canals.
What we need it to do is to be creatively crafted around the wooden piles.
So, you can see from these diagrams that the protocell is actually moving away from the light, toward the dark foundations.
We've observed this in the laboratory.
The protocells can actually move away from the light.
They can actually also move towards the light. You have to just choose your species.
So that these don't just exist as one entity, we kind of chemically engineer them.
And so here the protocells are depositing their limestone very specifically, around the foundations of Venice, effectively petrifying it.
Now, this isn't going to happen tomorrow. It's going to take a while.
It's going to take years of tuning and monitoring this technology in order for us to become ready to test it out in a case-by-case basis on the most damaged and stressed buildings within the city of Venice.
But gradually, as the buildings are repaired, we will see the accretion of a limestone reef beneath the city.
An accretion itself is a huge sink of carbon dioxide.
Also it will attract the local marine ecology, who will find their own ecological niches within this architecture.
So, this is really interesting. Now we have an architecture that connects a city to the natural world in a very direct and immediate way.
But perhaps the most exciting thing about it is that the driver of this technology is available everywhere.
This is terrestrial chemistry. We've all got it, which means that this technology is just as appropriate for developing countries as it is for First World countries.
So, in summary, I'm generating metabolic materials as a counterpoise to Victorian technologies, and building architectures from a bottom-up approach.
Secondly, these metabolic materials have some of the properties of living systems, which means they can perform in similar ways.
They can expect to have a lot of forms and functions within the practice of architecture.
And finally, an observer in the future marveling at a beautiful structure in the environment may find it almost impossible to tell whether this structure has been created by a natural process or an artificial one.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to tell you a story about Manson.
Manson was this 28-year-old interior designer, a father to a loving daughter, and a son who found himself behind bars due to a broken-down judicial system.
He was framed for a murder he didn't commit and was sentenced to the gallows.
There were two victims of this murder -- the victim who actually died in the murder and Manson, who had been sentenced to prison for an offense which he did not commit.
He was locked up in a cell, eight by seven, with 13 other grown-up men for 23 and a half hours a day.
Food was not guaranteed that you'd get.
And I remember yesterday, as I walked into the room where I was, I imagined the kind of cell that Manson would have been living in.
Because the toilet -- The row of the small rooms that were there were slightly bigger than the eight-by-seven cell.
But being in that cell as he awaited the executioner -- because in prison, he did not have a name -- Manson was known by a number.
He was just a statistic.
He did not know how long he would wait.
The wait could have been a minute, the executioner could have come the next minute, the next day, or it could have taken 30 years.
The wait had no end.
And in the midst of the excruciating pain, the mental torture, the many unanswered questions that Manson faced, he knew he was not going to play the victim.
He refused to play the role of the victim.
He was angry at the justice system that had put him behind bars.
But he knew the only way he could change that justice system or help other people get justice was not to play the victim.
Change came to Manson when he decided to embrace forgiveness for those who had put him in prison.
I speak that as a fact.
Because I know who Manson is.
I am Manson.
My real name is Peter Manson Ouko.
And after my conviction, after that awakening of forgiveness, I had this move to help change the system.
I already decided I was not going to be a victim anymore.
But how was I going to help change a system that was bringing in younger inmates every day who deserve to be with their families?
So I started mobilizing my colleagues in prison, my fellow inmates, to write letters and memoranda to the justice system, to the Judicial Service Commission, the numerous task forces that had been set up in our country, Kenya, to help change the constitution.
And we decided to grasp at those -- to clutch at those straws, if I may use that word -- if only to make the justice system work, and work for all.
Just about the same time, I met a young university graduate from the UK, called Alexander McLean.
Alexander had come in with three or four of his colleagues from university in their gap year, and they wanted to help assist, set up a library in Kamiti Maximum Prison, which if you Google, you will see is written as one of the 15 worst prisons in the world.
That was then.
But when Alexander came in, he was a young 20-year-old boy.
And I was on death row at that time.
And we took him under our wing.
It was an honest trust issue.
He trusted us, even though we were on death row.
And through that trust, we saw him and his colleagues from the university refurbish the library with the latest technology and set up the infirmary to very good standards so that those of us falling sick in prison would not necessarily have to die in indignity.
Having met Alexander, I had a chance, and he gave me the opportunity and the support, to enroll for a university degree at the University of London.
Just like Mandela studied from South Africa, I had a chance to study at Kamiti Maximum Security Prison.
And two years later, I became the first graduate of the program from the University of London from within the prison system.
Having graduated, what happened next -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Having graduated, now I felt empowered.
I was not going to play the helpless victim.
But I felt empowered not only to assist myself, to prosecute my own case, but also to assist the other inmates who are suffering the similar injustices that have just been spoken about here.
So I started writing legal briefs for them.
With my other colleagues in prison, we did as much as we could.
That wasn't enough.
Alexander McLean and his team at the African Prisons Project decided to support more inmates.
And as I'm speaking to you today, there are 63 inmates and staff in the Kenya Prison Service studying law at the University of London through distance learning.
(Applause) These are changemakers who are being motivated not only to assist the most indolent in society, but also to help the inmates and others get access to justice.
Down there in my prison cell, something kept stirring me.
The words of Martin Luther King kept hitting me.
And he was always telling me, "Pete, if you can't fly, you can run.
And if you can't run, you can walk.
But if you can't walk, then you can crawl.
But whatever it is, whatever it takes, just keep on moving."
And so I had this urge to keep moving.
I still have this urge to keep moving in whatever I do.
Because I feel the only way we can change our society, the only way we can change the justice system -- which has really improved in our country -- is to help get the systems right.
So, on 26th October last year, after 18 years in prison, I walked out of prison on presidential pardon.
I'm now focused on helping APP -- the African Prisons Project -- achieve its mandate of training and setting up the first law school and legal college behind bars.
Where we are going to train -- (Applause) Where we are going to train inmates and staff not only to assist their fellow inmates, but to assist the entire wider society of the poor who cannot access legal justice.
So as I speak before you today, I stand here in the full knowledge that we can all reexamine ourselves, we can all reexamine our situations, we can all reexamine our circumstances and not play the victim narrative.
The victim narrative will not take us anywhere.
I was behind bars, yeah.
But I never felt and I was not a prisoner.
The basic thing I got to learn was that if I thought, and if you think, you can, you will.
But if you sit thinking that you can't, you won't.
It's as simple as that.
And so I'm encouraged by the peaceful revolutionaries I've heard on this stage.
The world needs you now, the world needs you today.
And as I finish my talk, I'd just like to ask each and every single one of you here, wonderful thinkers, changemakers, innovators, the wonderful global citizens we have at TED, just remember the words of Martin Luther King.
Let them continue ringing in your heart and your life.
Whatever it is, wherever you are, whatever it takes, keep on moving.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
I guess because I'm from Tanzania I have a responsibility to welcome all of you once again.
Thank you for coming.
So, first of all, before we start, how many of you in the audience have been in the past a victim of this bug here?
We apologize on behalf of all the mosquito catchers.
(Laughter) Ladies and gentlemen, imagine getting seven infectious mosquito bites every day.
That's 2,555 infectious bites every year.
When I was in college, I moved to the Kilombero River valley in the southeastern part of Tanzania.
This is historically one of the most malarious zones in the world at that time.
Life here was difficult.
In its later stages malaria manifested with extreme seizures locally known as degedege.
It's killed both women and men, adults and children, without mercy.
My home institution, Ifakara Health Institute, began in this valley in the 1950s to address priority health needs for the local communities.
In fact, the name Ifakara refers to a place you go to die, which is a reflection of what life used to be here in the days before organized public health care.
When I first moved here, my primary role was to estimate how much malaria transmission was going on across the villages and which mosquitoes were transmitting the disease.
So my colleague and myself came 30 kilometers south of Ifakara town across the river.
Every evening we went into the villages with flashlights and siphons.
We rolled up our trousers, and waited for mosquitoes that were coming to bite us so we could collect them to check if they were carrying malaria.
(Laughter) My colleague and myself selected a household, and we started inside and outside, swapping positions every half hour.
And we did this for 12 hours every night for 24 consecutive nights.
We slept for four hours every morning and worked the rest of the day, sorting mosquitoes, identifying them and chopping off their heads so they could be analyzed in the lab to check if they were carrying malaria parasites in their blood mouthparts.
This way we were able to not only know how much malaria was going on here but also which mosquitoes were carrying this malaria.
We were also able to know whether malaria was mostly inside houses or outside houses.
Today, ladies and gentlemen, I still catch mosquitoes for a living.
But I do this mostly to improve people's lives and well-being.
This has been called by some people the most dangerous animal on earth -- which unfortunately is true.
But what do we really know about mosquitoes?
It turns out we actually know very little.
Consider the fact that at the moment our best practice against malaria are bednets -- insecticide treated bednets.
We know now that across Africa you have widespread resistance to insecticides.
And these are the same insecticides, the pyrethroid class, that are put on these bednets.
We know now that these bednets protect you from bites but only minimally kill the mosquitoes that they should.
What it means is that we've got to do more to be able to get to zero.
And that's part of our duty.
At Ifakara Health Institute we focus very much on the biology of the mosquito, and we try to do this so we can identify new opportunities.
A new approach.
New ways to try and get new options that we can use together with things such as bednets to be able to get to zero.
And I'm going to share with you a few examples of the things that my colleagues and myself do.
Take this, for example.
Mosquitoes breed in small pools of water.
Not all of them are easy to find -- they can be scattered across villages, they can be as small as hoofprints.
They can be behind your house or far from your house.
And so, if you wanted to control mosquito larvae, it can actually be quite difficult to get them.
What my colleagues and I have decided to do is to think about what if we used mosquitoes themselves to carry the insecticides from a place of our choice to their own breeding habitats so that whichever eggs they lay there shall not survive.
This is Dickson Lwetoijera.
This is my colleague who runs this show at Ifakara.
And he has demonstrated cleverly that you can actually get mosquitoes to come to the place where they normally come to get blood to pick up a dose of sterilants or insecticide, carry this back to their own breeding habitat and kill all their progeny.
And we have demonstrated that you can do this and crush populations very, very rapidly.
This is beautiful.
This is our mosquito city.
It is the largest mosquito farm available in the world for malaria research.
Here we have large-scale self-sustaining colonies of malaria mosquitoes that we rear in these facilities.
Of course, they are disease-free.
But what these systems allow us to do is to introduce new tools and test them immediately, very quickly, and see if we can crush these populations or control them in some way.
And my colleagues have demonstrated that if you just put two or three positions where mosquitoes can go pick up these lethal substances, we can crush these colonies in just three months.
That's autodissemination, as we call it.
But what if we could use the mosquitoes' sexual behavior to also control them?
So, first of all I would like to tell you that actually mosquitoes mate in what we call swarms.
Male mosquitoes usually congregate in clusters around the horizon, usually after sunset.
The males go there for a dance, the females fly into that dance and select a male mosquito of their choice, usually the best-looking male in their view.
They clump together and fall down onto the floor.
If you watch this, it's beautiful.
It's a fantastic phenomenon.
This is where our mosquito-catching work gets really interesting.
What we have seen, when we go swarm hunting in the villages, is that these swarm locations tend to be at exactly the same location every day, every week, every month, year in, year out.
They start at exactly the same time of the evening, and they are at exactly the same locations.
What does this tell us?
It means that if we can map all these locations across villages, we could actually crush these populations by just a single blow.
Kind of, you know, bomb-spray them or nuke them out.
And that is what we try to do with young men and women across the villages.
We organize these crews, teach them how to identify the swarms, and spray them out.
My colleagues and I believe we have a new window to get mosquitoes out of the valley.
But perhaps the fact that mosquitoes eat blood, human blood, is the reason they are the most dangerous animal on earth.
But think about it this way -- mosquitoes actually smell you.
And they have developed incredible sensory organs.
They can smell from as far sometimes as 100 meters away.
And when they get closer, they can even tell the difference between two family members.
They know who you are based on what you produce from your breath, skin, sweat and body odor.
What we have done at Ifakara is to identify what it is in your skin, your body, your sweat or your breath that these mosquitoes like.
Once we identified these substances, we created a concoction, kind of a mixture, a blend of synthetic substances that are reminiscent of what you produce from your body.
And we made a synthetic blend that was attracting three to five times more mosquitoes than a human being.
What can you do with this?
You put in a trap, lure a lot of mosquitoes and you kill them, right?
And of course, you can also use it for surveillance.
At Ifakara we wish to expand our knowledge on the biology of the mosquito; to control many other diseases, including, of course, the malaria, but also those other diseases that mosquitoes transmit like dengue, Chikungunya and Zika virus.
And this is why my colleagues, for example -- we have looked at the fact that some mosquitoes like to bite you on the leg region.
And we've now created these mosquito repellent sandals that tourists and locals can wear when they're coming.
And you don't get bitten -- this gives you 'round the clock protection until the time you go under your bednet.
(Applause) My love-hate relationship with mosquitoes continues.
(Laughter) And it's going to go a long way, I can see.
But that's OK.
WHO has set a goal of 2030 to eliminate malaria from 35 countries.
The African Union has set a goal of 2030 to eliminate malaria from the continent.
At Ifakara we are firmly behind these goals.
And we've put together a cohort of young scientists, male and female, who are champions, who are interested in coming together to make this vision come true.
They do what they can to make it work.
And we are supporting them.
We are here to make sure that these dreams come true.
Ladies and gentlemen, even if it doesn't happen in our lifetime, even if it doesn't happen before you and me go away, I believe that your child and my child shall inherit a world free of malaria transmitting mosquitoes and free of malaria.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
(Applause) Thank you.
Kelo Kubu: OK, Fredros.
Let's talk about CRISPR for a bit.
(Laughter) It's taken the world by storm, it promises to do amazing things.
What do you think of scientists using CRISPR to kill off mosquitoes?
Fredros Okumu: To answer this question, let's start from what the problem is.
First of all, we're talking about a disease that still kills -- according to the latest figures we have from WHO -- 429,000 people.
Most of these are African children.
Of course, we've made progress, there are countries that have achieved up to 50-60 percent reduction in malaria burden.
But we still have to do more to get to zero.
There is already proof of principle that gene-editing techniques, such as CRISPR, can be used effectively to transform mosquitoes so that either they do not transmit malaria -- we call this population alteration -- or that they no longer exist, population suppression.
This is already proven in the lab.
There is also modeling work that has demonstrated that even if you were to release just a small number of these genetically modified mosquitoes, that you can actually achieve elimination very, very quickly.
So, CRISPR and tools like this offer us some real opportunities -- real-life opportunities to have high-impact interventions that we can use in addition to what we have now to eventually go to zero.
This is important.
Now, of course people always ask us -- which is a common question, I guess you're going to ask this as well -- "What happens if you eliminate mosquitoes?"
KK: I won't ask then, you answer.
FO: OK. In respect to this, I would just like to remind my colleagues that we have 3,500 mosquito species in this world.
Maybe more than that.
About 400 of these are Anophelenes, and only about 70 of them have any capacity to transmit malaria.
In Africa, we're having to deal with three or four of these as the major guys.
They carry most -- like 99 percent of all the malaria we have.
If we were to go out with gene editing like CRISPR, if we were to go out with gene drives to control malaria, we would be going after only one or two.
I don't see a diversity problem with that.
But that's personal view.
I think it's OK.
And remember, by the way, all these years we've been trying to eliminate these mosquitoes effectively by spraying them -- our colleagues in America have sprayed with -- really bomb-spraying these insects out of the villages.
In Africa we do a lot of household spraying.
All these are aimed solely at killing the mosquitoes.
So there's really no problem if we had a new tool.
But having said that, I have to say we also have to be very, very responsible here.
So there's the regulatory side, and we have to partner with our regulators and make sure that everything that we do is done correctly, is done responsibly and that we also have to do independent risk assessments, to just make sure that all these processes do not fall into the wrong hands.
Thank you very much.
KK: Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a writer and a journalist, and I'm also an insanely curious person, so in 22 years as a journalist, I've learned how to do a lot of new things.
And three years ago, one of the things I learned how to do was to become invisible.
I became one of the working homeless.
I quit my job as a newspaper editor after my father died in February of that same year, and decided to travel.
His death hit me pretty hard.
And there were a lot of things that I wanted to feel and deal with while I was doing that.
I've camped my whole life. And I decided that living in a van for a year to do this would be like one long camping trip.
So I packed my cat, my Rottweiler and my camping gear into a 1975 Chevy van, and drove off into the sunset, having fully failed to realize three critical things.
One: that society equates living in a permanent structure, even a shack, with having value as a person.
Two: I failed to realize how quickly the negative perceptions of other people can impact our reality, if we let it.
Three: I failed to realize that homelessness is an attitude, not a lifestyle.
At first, living in the van was great.
I showered in campgrounds. I ate out regularly.
And I had time to relax and to grieve.
But then the anger and the depression about my father's death set in.
My freelance job ended. And I had to get a full-time job to pay the bills.
What had been a really mild spring turned into a miserably hot summer.
And it became impossible to park anywhere -- (Laughs) -- without being very obvious that I had a cat and a dog with me, and it was really hot.
The cat came and went through an open window in the van.
The doggy went into doggy day care.
And I sweated.
Whenever I could, I used employee showers in office buildings and truck stops.
Or I washed up in public rest rooms.
Nighttime temperatures in the van rarely dropped below 80 degrees Fahrenheit, making it difficult or impossible to sleep.
Food rotted in the heat.
Ice in my ice chest melted within hours, and it was pretty miserable.
I couldn't afford to find an apartment, or couldn't afford an apartment that would allow me to have the Rottweiler and the cat.
And I refused to give them up, so I stayed in the van.
And when the heat made me too sick to walk the 50 feet to the public restroom outside my van at night, I used a bucket and a trash bag as a toilet.
When winter weather set in, the temperatures dropped below freezing. And they stayed there.
And I faced a whole new set of challenges.
I parked a different place every night so I would avoid being noticed and hassled by the police.
I didn't always succeed.
But I felt out of control of my life.
And I don't know when or how it happened, but the speed at which I went from being a talented writer and journalist to being a homeless woman, living in a van, took my breath away.
I hadn't changed. My I.Q. hadn't dropped.
My talent, my integrity, my values, everything about me remained the same.
But I had changed somehow.
I spiraled deeper and deeper into a depression.
And eventually someone referred me to a homeless health clinic.
And I went. I hadn't bathed in three days.
I was as smelly and as depressed as anyone in line.
I just wasn't drunk or high.
And when several of the homeless men realized that, including a former university professor, they said, "You aren't homeless. Why are you really here?"
Other homeless people didn't see me as homeless, but I did.
Then the professor listened to my story and he said, "You have a job. You have hope.
The real homeless don't have hope."
A reaction to the medication the clinic gave me for my depression left me suicidal. And I remember thinking, "If I killed myself, no one would notice."
A friend told me, shortly after that, that she had heard that Tim Russert, a nationally renowned journalist, had been talking about me on national T.V.
An essay I'd written about my father, the year before he died, was in Tim's new book.
And he was doing the talk show circuit. And he was talking about my writing.
And when I realized that Tim Russert, former moderator of "Meet the Press," was talking about my writing, while I was living in a van in a Wal-Mart parking lot, I started laughing.
You should too.
(Laughter) I started laughing because it got to the point where, was I a writer, or was I a homeless woman?
So I went in the bookstore. And I found Tim's book.
And I stood there. And I reread my essay.
And I cried.
Because I was a writer.
I was a writer.
Shortly after that I moved back to Tennessee.
I alternated between living in a van and couch surfing with friends.
And I started writing again.
By the summer of the following year I was a working journalist.
I was winning awards. I was living in my own apartment.
I was no longer homeless.
And I was no longer invisible.
Thousands of people work full and part-time jobs, and live in their cars.
But society continues to stigmatize and criminalize living in your vehicle or on the streets.
So the homeless, the working homeless, primarily remain invisible.
But if you ever meet one, engage them, encourage them, and offer them hope.
The human spirit can overcome anything if it has hope.
And I'm not here to be the poster girl for the homeless.
I'm not here to encourage you to give money to the next panhandler you meet.
But I am here to tell you that, based on my experience, people are not where they live, where they sleep, or what their life situation is at any given time.
Three years ago I was living in a van in a Wal-Mart parking lot, and today I'm speaking at TED.
Hope always, always finds a way. Thank you.
(Applause)
As other speakers have said, it's a rather daunting experience -- a particularly daunting experience -- to be speaking in front of this audience.
But unlike the other speakers, I'm not going to tell you about the mysteries of the universe, or the wonders of evolution, or the really clever, innovative ways people are attacking the major inequalities in our world.
Or even the challenges of nation-states in the modern global economy.
My brief, as you've just heard, is to tell you about statistics -- and, to be more precise, to tell you some exciting things about statistics.
And that's -- (Laughter) -- that's rather more challenging than all the speakers before me and all the ones coming after me.
(Laughter) One of my senior colleagues told me, when I was a youngster in this profession, rather proudly, that statisticians were people who liked figures but didn't have the personality skills to become accountants.
(Laughter) And there's another in-joke among statisticians, and that's, "How do you tell the introverted statistician from the extroverted statistician?"
To which the answer is, "The extroverted statistician's the one who looks at the other person's shoes."
(Laughter) But I want to tell you something useful -- and here it is, so concentrate now.
This evening, there's a reception in the University's Museum of Natural History.
And it's a wonderful setting, as I hope you'll find, and a great icon to the best of the Victorian tradition.
It's very unlikely -- in this special setting, and this collection of people -- but you might just find yourself talking to someone you'd rather wish that you weren't.
So here's what you do.
When they say to you, "What do you do?" -- you say, "I'm a statistician."
(Laughter) Well, except they've been pre-warned now, and they'll know you're making it up.
And then one of two things will happen.
They'll either discover their long-lost cousin in the other corner of the room and run over and talk to them.
Or they'll suddenly become parched and/or hungry -- and often both -- and sprint off for a drink and some food.
And you'll be left in peace to talk to the person you really want to talk to.
It's one of the challenges in our profession to try and explain what we do.
We're not top on people's lists for dinner party guests and conversations and so on.
And it's something I've never really found a good way of doing.
But my wife -- who was then my girlfriend -- managed it much better than I've ever been able to.
Many years ago, when we first started going out, she was working for the BBC in Britain, and I was, at that stage, working in America.
I was coming back to visit her.
She told this to one of her colleagues, who said, "Well, what does your boyfriend do?"
Sarah thought quite hard about the things I'd explained -- and she concentrated, in those days, on listening.
(Laughter) Don't tell her I said that.
And she was thinking about the work I did developing mathematical models for understanding evolution and modern genetics.
So when her colleague said, "What does he do?"
She paused and said, "He models things."
(Laughter) Well, her colleague suddenly got much more interested than I had any right to expect and went on and said, "What does he model?"
Well, Sarah thought a little bit more about my work and said, "Genes."
(Laughter) "He models genes."
That is my first love, and that's what I'll tell you a little bit about.
What I want to do more generally is to get you thinking about the place of uncertainty and randomness and chance in our world, and how we react to that, and how well we do or don't think about it.
So you've had a pretty easy time up till now -- a few laughs, and all that kind of thing -- in the talks to date.
You've got to think, and I'm going to ask you some questions.
So here's the scene for the first question I'm going to ask you.
Can you imagine tossing a coin successively?
And for some reason -- which shall remain rather vague -- we're interested in a particular pattern.
Here's one -- a head, followed by a tail, followed by a tail.
So suppose we toss a coin repeatedly.
Then the pattern, head-tail-tail, that we've suddenly become fixated with happens here.
And you can count: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10 -- it happens after the 10th toss.
So you might think there are more interesting things to do, but humor me for the moment.
Imagine this half of the audience each get out coins, and they toss them until they first see the pattern head-tail-tail.
The first time they do it, maybe it happens after the 10th toss, as here.
The second time, maybe it's after the fourth toss.
The next time, after the 15th toss.
So you do that lots and lots of times, and you average those numbers.
That's what I want this side to think about.
The other half of the audience doesn't like head-tail-tail -- they think, for deep cultural reasons, that's boring -- and they're much more interested in a different pattern -- head-tail-head.
So, on this side, you get out your coins, and you toss and toss and toss.
And you count the number of times until the pattern head-tail-head appears and you average them. OK?
So on this side, you've got a number -- you've done it lots of times, so you get it accurately -- which is the average number of tosses until head-tail-tail.
On this side, you've got a number -- the average number of tosses until head-tail-head.
So here's a deep mathematical fact -- if you've got two numbers, one of three things must be true.
Either they're the same, or this one's bigger than this one, or this one's bigger than that one.
So what's going on here?
So you've all got to think about this, and you've all got to vote -- and we're not moving on.
And I don't want to end up in the two-minute silence to give you more time to think about it, until everyone's expressed a view. OK.
So what you want to do is compare the average number of tosses until we first see head-tail-head with the average number of tosses until we first see head-tail-tail.
Who thinks that A is true -- that, on average, it'll take longer to see head-tail-head than head-tail-tail?
Who thinks that B is true -- that on average, they're the same?
Who thinks that C is true -- that, on average, it'll take less time to see head-tail-head than head-tail-tail?
OK, who hasn't voted yet? Because that's really naughty -- I said you had to.
(Laughter) OK. So most people think B is true.
And you might be relieved to know even rather distinguished mathematicians think that.
It's not. A is true here.
It takes longer, on average.
In fact, the average number of tosses till head-tail-head is 10 and the average number of tosses until head-tail-tail is eight.
How could that be?
Anything different about the two patterns?
There is. Head-tail-head overlaps itself.
If you went head-tail-head-tail-head, you can cunningly get two occurrences of the pattern in only five tosses.
You can't do that with head-tail-tail.
That turns out to be important.
There are two ways of thinking about this.
I'll give you one of them.
So imagine -- let's suppose we're doing it.
On this side -- remember, you're excited about head-tail-tail; you're excited about head-tail-head.
We start tossing a coin, and we get a head -- and you start sitting on the edge of your seat because something great and wonderful, or awesome, might be about to happen.
The next toss is a tail -- you get really excited.
The champagne's on ice just next to you; you've got the glasses chilled to celebrate.
You're waiting with bated breath for the final toss.
And if it comes down a head, that's great.
You're done, and you celebrate.
If it's a tail -- well, rather disappointedly, you put the glasses away and put the champagne back.
And you keep tossing, to wait for the next head, to get excited.
On this side, there's a different experience.
It's the same for the first two parts of the sequence.
You're a little bit excited with the first head -- you get rather more excited with the next tail.
Then you toss the coin.
If it's a tail, you crack open the champagne.
If it's a head you're disappointed, but you're still a third of the way to your pattern again.
And that's an informal way of presenting it -- that's why there's a difference.
Another way of thinking about it -- if we tossed a coin eight million times, then we'd expect a million head-tail-heads and a million head-tail-tails -- but the head-tail-heads could occur in clumps.
So if you want to put a million things down amongst eight million positions and you can have some of them overlapping, the clumps will be further apart.
It's another way of getting the intuition.
What's the point I want to make?
It's a very, very simple example, an easily stated question in probability, which every -- you're in good company -- everybody gets wrong.
This is my little diversion into my real passion, which is genetics.
There's a connection between head-tail-heads and head-tail-tails in genetics, and it's the following.
When you toss a coin, you get a sequence of heads and tails.
When you look at DNA, there's a sequence of not two things -- heads and tails -- but four letters -- As, Gs, Cs and Ts.
And there are little chemical scissors, called restriction enzymes which cut DNA whenever they see particular patterns.
And they're an enormously useful tool in modern molecular biology.
And instead of asking the question, "How long until I see a head-tail-head?" -- you can ask, "How big will the chunks be when I use a restriction enzyme which cuts whenever it sees G-A-A-G, for example?
How long will those chunks be?"
That's a rather trivial connection between probability and genetics.
There's a much deeper connection, which I don't have time to go into and that is that modern genetics is a really exciting area of science.
And we'll hear some talks later in the conference specifically about that.
But it turns out that unlocking the secrets in the information generated by modern experimental technologies, a key part of that has to do with fairly sophisticated -- you'll be relieved to know that I do something useful in my day job, rather more sophisticated than the head-tail-head story -- but quite sophisticated computer modelings and mathematical modelings and modern statistical techniques.
And I will give you two little snippets -- two examples -- of projects we're involved in in my group in Oxford, both of which I think are rather exciting.
You know about the Human Genome Project.
That was a project which aimed to read one copy of the human genome.
The natural thing to do after you've done that -- and that's what this project, the International HapMap Project, which is a collaboration between labs in five or six different countries.
Think of the Human Genome Project as learning what we've got in common, and the HapMap Project is trying to understand where there are differences between different people.
Why do we care about that?
Well, there are lots of reasons.
The most pressing one is that we want to understand how some differences make some people susceptible to one disease -- type-2 diabetes, for example -- and other differences make people more susceptible to heart disease, or stroke, or autism and so on.
That's one big project.
There's a second big project, recently funded by the Wellcome Trust in this country, involving very large studies -- thousands of individuals, with each of eight different diseases, common diseases like type-1 and type-2 diabetes, and coronary heart disease, bipolar disease and so on -- to try and understand the genetics.
To try and understand what it is about genetic differences that causes the diseases.
Why do we want to do that?
Because we understand very little about most human diseases.
We don't know what causes them.
And if we can get in at the bottom and understand the genetics, we'll have a window on the way the disease works, and a whole new way about thinking about disease therapies and preventative treatment and so on.
So that's, as I said, the little diversion on my main love.
Back to some of the more mundane issues of thinking about uncertainty.
Here's another quiz for you -- now suppose we've got a test for a disease which isn't infallible, but it's pretty good.
It gets it right 99 percent of the time.
And I take one of you, or I take someone off the street, and I test them for the disease in question.
Let's suppose there's a test for HIV -- the virus that causes AIDS -- and the test says the person has the disease.
What's the chance that they do?
The test gets it right 99 percent of the time.
So a natural answer is 99 percent.
Who likes that answer?
Come on -- everyone's got to get involved.
Don't think you don't trust me anymore.
(Laughter) Well, you're right to be a bit skeptical, because that's not the answer.
That's what you might think.
It's not the answer, and it's not because it's only part of the story.
It actually depends on how common or how rare the disease is.
So let me try and illustrate that.
Here's a little caricature of a million individuals.
So let's think about a disease that affects -- it's pretty rare, it affects one person in 10,000.
Amongst these million individuals, most of them are healthy and some of them will have the disease.
And in fact, if this is the prevalence of the disease, about 100 will have the disease and the rest won't.
So now suppose we test them all.
What happens?
Well, amongst the 100 who do have the disease, the test will get it right 99 percent of the time, and 99 will test positive.
Amongst all these other people who don't have the disease, the test will get it right 99 percent of the time.
It'll only get it wrong one percent of the time.
But there are so many of them that there'll be an enormous number of false positives.
Put that another way -- of all of them who test positive -- so here they are, the individuals involved -- less than one in 100 actually have the disease.
So even though we think the test is accurate, the important part of the story is there's another bit of information we need.
Here's the key intuition.
What we have to do, once we know the test is positive, is to weigh up the plausibility, or the likelihood, of two competing explanations.
Each of those explanations has a likely bit and an unlikely bit.
One explanation is that the person doesn't have the disease -- that's overwhelmingly likely, if you pick someone at random -- but the test gets it wrong, which is unlikely.
The other explanation is that the person does have the disease -- that's unlikely -- but the test gets it right, which is likely.
And the number we end up with -- that number which is a little bit less than one in 100 -- is to do with how likely one of those explanations is relative to the other.
Each of them taken together is unlikely.
Here's a more topical example of exactly the same thing.
Those of you in Britain will know about what's become rather a celebrated case of a woman called Sally Clark, who had two babies who died suddenly.
And initially, it was thought that they died of what's known informally as "cot death," and more formally as "Sudden Infant Death Syndrome."
For various reasons, she was later charged with murder.
And at the trial, her trial, a very distinguished pediatrician gave evidence that the chance of two cot deaths, innocent deaths, in a family like hers -- which was professional and non-smoking -- was one in 73 million.
To cut a long story short, she was convicted at the time.
Later, and fairly recently, acquitted on appeal -- in fact, on the second appeal.
And just to set it in context, you can imagine how awful it is for someone to have lost one child, and then two, if they're innocent, to be convicted of murdering them.
To be put through the stress of the trial, convicted of murdering them -- and to spend time in a women's prison, where all the other prisoners think you killed your children -- is a really awful thing to happen to someone.
And it happened in large part here because the expert got the statistics horribly wrong, in two different ways.
So where did he get the one in 73 million number?
He looked at some research, which said the chance of one cot death in a family like Sally Clark's is about one in 8,500.
So he said, "I'll assume that if you have one cot death in a family, the chance of a second child dying from cot death aren't changed."
So that's what statisticians would call an assumption of independence.
It's like saying, "If you toss a coin and get a head the first time, that won't affect the chance of getting a head the second time."
So if you toss a coin twice, the chance of getting a head twice are a half -- that's the chance the first time -- times a half -- the chance a second time.
So he said, "Here, I'll assume that these events are independent.
When you multiply 8,500 together twice, you get about 73 million."
And none of this was stated to the court as an assumption or presented to the jury that way.
Unfortunately here -- and, really, regrettably -- first of all, in a situation like this you'd have to verify it empirically.
And secondly, it's palpably false.
There are lots and lots of things that we don't know about sudden infant deaths.
It might well be that there are environmental factors that we're not aware of, and it's pretty likely to be the case that there are genetic factors we're not aware of.
So if a family suffers from one cot death, you'd put them in a high-risk group.
They've probably got these environmental risk factors and/or genetic risk factors we don't know about.
And to argue, then, that the chance of a second death is as if you didn't know that information is really silly.
It's worse than silly -- it's really bad science.
Nonetheless, that's how it was presented, and at trial nobody even argued it.
That's the first problem.
The second problem is, what does the number of one in 73 million mean?
So after Sally Clark was convicted -- you can imagine, it made rather a splash in the press -- one of the journalists from one of Britain's more reputable newspapers wrote that what the expert had said was, "The chance that she was innocent was one in 73 million."
Now, that's a logical error.
It's exactly the same logical error as the logical error of thinking that after the disease test, which is 99 percent accurate, the chance of having the disease is 99 percent.
In the disease example, we had to bear in mind two things, one of which was the possibility that the test got it right or not.
And the other one was the chance, a priori, that the person had the disease or not.
It's exactly the same in this context.
There are two things involved -- two parts to the explanation.
We want to know how likely, or relatively how likely, two different explanations are.
One of them is that Sally Clark was innocent -- which is, a priori, overwhelmingly likely -- most mothers don't kill their children.
And the second part of the explanation is that she suffered an incredibly unlikely event.
Not as unlikely as one in 73 million, but nonetheless rather unlikely.
The other explanation is that she was guilty.
Now, we probably think a priori that's unlikely.
And we certainly should think in the context of a criminal trial that that's unlikely, because of the presumption of innocence.
And then if she were trying to kill the children, she succeeded.
So the chance that she's innocent isn't one in 73 million.
We don't know what it is.
It has to do with weighing up the strength of the other evidence against her and the statistical evidence.
We know the children died.
What matters is how likely or unlikely, relative to each other, the two explanations are.
And they're both implausible.
There's a situation where errors in statistics had really profound and really unfortunate consequences.
In fact, there are two other women who were convicted on the basis of the evidence of this pediatrician, who have subsequently been released on appeal.
Many cases were reviewed.
And it's particularly topical because he's currently facing a disrepute charge at Britain's General Medical Council.
So just to conclude -- what are the take-home messages from this?
Well, we know that randomness and uncertainty and chance are very much a part of our everyday life.
It's also true -- and, although, you, as a collective, are very special in many ways, you're completely typical in not getting the examples I gave right.
It's very well documented that people get things wrong.
They make errors of logic in reasoning with uncertainty.
We can cope with the subtleties of language brilliantly -- and there are interesting evolutionary questions about how we got here.
We are not good at reasoning with uncertainty.
That's an issue in our everyday lives.
As you've heard from many of the talks, statistics underpins an enormous amount of research in science -- in social science, in medicine and indeed, quite a lot of industry.
All of quality control, which has had a major impact on industrial processing, is underpinned by statistics.
It's something we're bad at doing.
At the very least, we should recognize that, and we tend not to.
To go back to the legal context, at the Sally Clark trial all of the lawyers just accepted what the expert said.
So if a pediatrician had come out and said to a jury, "I know how to build bridges. I've built one down the road.
Please drive your car home over it," they would have said, "Well, pediatricians don't know how to build bridges.
That's what engineers do."
On the other hand, he came out and effectively said, or implied, "I know how to reason with uncertainty. I know how to do statistics."
And everyone said, "Well, that's fine. He's an expert."
So we need to understand where our competence is and isn't.
Exactly the same kinds of issues arose in the early days of DNA profiling, when scientists, and lawyers and in some cases judges, routinely misrepresented evidence.
Usually -- one hopes -- innocently, but misrepresented evidence.
Forensic scientists said, "The chance that this guy's innocent is one in three million."
Even if you believe the number, just like the 73 million to one, that's not what it meant.
And there have been celebrated appeal cases in Britain and elsewhere because of that.
And just to finish in the context of the legal system.
It's all very well to say, "Let's do our best to present the evidence."
But more and more, in cases of DNA profiling -- this is another one -- we expect juries, who are ordinary people -- and it's documented they're very bad at this -- we expect juries to be able to cope with the sorts of reasoning that goes on.
In other spheres of life, if people argued -- well, except possibly for politics -- but in other spheres of life, if people argued illogically, we'd say that's not a good thing.
We sort of expect it of politicians and don't hope for much more.
In the case of uncertainty, we get it wrong all the time -- and at the very least, we should be aware of that, and ideally, we might try and do something about it.
Thanks very much.
On the 30th of May, 1832, a gunshot was heard ringing out across the 13th arrondissement in Paris.
(Gunshot) A peasant, who was walking to market that morning, ran towards where the gunshot had come from, and found a young man writhing in agony on the floor, clearly shot by a dueling wound.
The young man's name was Evariste Galois.
He was a well-known revolutionary in Paris at the time.
Galois was taken to the local hospital where he died the next day in the arms of his brother.
And the last words he said to his brother were, "Don't cry for me, Alfred.
I need all the courage I can muster to die at the age of 20."
It wasn't, in fact, revolutionary politics for which Galois was famous.
But a few years earlier, while still at school, he'd actually cracked one of the big mathematical problems at the time.
And he wrote to the academicians in Paris, trying to explain his theory.
But the academicians couldn't understand anything that he wrote.
(Laughter) This is how he wrote most of his mathematics.
So, the night before that duel, he realized this possibly is his last chance to try and explain his great breakthrough.
So he stayed up the whole night, writing away, trying to explain his ideas.
And as the dawn came up and he went to meet his destiny, he left this pile of papers on the table for the next generation.
Maybe the fact that he stayed up all night doing mathematics was the fact that he was such a bad shot that morning and got killed.
But contained inside those documents was a new language, a language to understand one of the most fundamental concepts of science -- namely symmetry.
Now, symmetry is almost nature's language.
It helps us to understand so many different bits of the scientific world.
For example, molecular structure.
What crystals are possible, we can understand through the mathematics of symmetry.
In microbiology you really don't want to get a symmetrical object, because they are generally rather nasty.
The swine flu virus, at the moment, is a symmetrical object.
And it uses the efficiency of symmetry to be able to propagate itself so well.
But on a larger scale of biology, actually symmetry is very important, because it actually communicates genetic information.
I've taken two pictures here and I've made them artificially symmetrical.
And if I ask you which of these you find more beautiful, you're probably drawn to the lower two.
Because it is hard to make symmetry.
And if you can make yourself symmetrical, you're sending out a sign that you've got good genes, you've got a good upbringing and therefore you'll make a good mate.
So symmetry is a language which can help to communicate genetic information.
Symmetry can also help us to explain what's happening in the Large Hadron Collider in CERN.
Or what's not happening in the Large Hadron Collider in CERN.
To be able to make predictions about the fundamental particles we might see there, it seems that they are all facets of some strange symmetrical shape in a higher dimensional space.
And I think Galileo summed up, very nicely, the power of mathematics to understand the scientific world around us.
He wrote, "The universe cannot be read until we have learnt the language and become familiar with the characters in which it is written.
It is written in mathematical language, and the letters are triangles, circles and other geometric figures, without which means it is humanly impossible to comprehend a single word."
But it's not just scientists who are interested in symmetry.
Artists too love to play around with symmetry.
They also have a slightly more ambiguous relationship with it.
Here is Thomas Mann talking about symmetry in "The Magic Mountain."
He has a character describing the snowflake, and he says he "shuddered at its perfect precision, found it deathly, the very marrow of death."
But what artists like to do is to set up expectations of symmetry and then break them.
And a beautiful example of this I found, actually, when I visited a colleague of mine in Japan, Professor Kurokawa.
And he took me up to the temples in Nikko.
And just after this photo was taken we walked up the stairs.
And the gateway you see behind has eight columns, with beautiful symmetrical designs on them.
Seven of them are exactly the same, and the eighth one is turned upside down.
And I said to Professor Kurokawa, "Wow, the architects must have really been kicking themselves when they realized that they'd made a mistake and put this one upside down."
And he said, "No, no, no. It was a very deliberate act."
And he referred me to this lovely quote from the Japanese "Essays in Idleness" from the 14th century, in which the essayist wrote, "In everything, uniformity is undesirable.
Leaving something incomplete makes it interesting, and gives one the feeling that there is room for growth."
Even when building the Imperial Palace, they always leave one place unfinished.
But if I had to choose one building in the world to be cast out on a desert island, to live the rest of my life, being an addict of symmetry, I would probably choose the Alhambra in Granada.
This is a palace celebrating symmetry.
Recently I took my family -- we do these rather kind of nerdy mathematical trips, which my family love.
This is my son Tamer. You can see he's really enjoying our mathematical trip to the Alhambra.
But I wanted to try and enrich him.
I think one of the problems about school mathematics is it doesn't look at how mathematics is embedded in the world we live in.
So, I wanted to open his eyes up to how much symmetry is running through the Alhambra.
You see it already. Immediately you go in, the reflective symmetry in the water.
But it's on the walls where all the exciting things are happening.
The Moorish artists were denied the possibility to draw things with souls.
So they explored a more geometric art.
And so what is symmetry?
The Alhambra somehow asks all of these questions.
What is symmetry? When [there] are two of these walls, do they have the same symmetries?
Can we say whether they discovered all of the symmetries in the Alhambra?
And it was Galois who produced a language to be able to answer some of these questions.
For Galois, symmetry -- unlike for Thomas Mann, which was something still and deathly -- for Galois, symmetry was all about motion.
What can you do to a symmetrical object, move it in some way, so it looks the same as before you moved it?
I like to describe it as the magic trick moves.
What can you do to something? You close your eyes.
I do something, put it back down again.
It looks like it did before it started.
So, for example, the walls in the Alhambra -- I can take all of these tiles, and fix them at the yellow place, rotate them by 90 degrees, put them all back down again and they fit perfectly down there.
And if you open your eyes again, you wouldn't know that they'd moved.
But it's the motion that really characterizes the symmetry inside the Alhambra.
But it's also about producing a language to describe this.
And the power of mathematics is often to change one thing into another, to change geometry into language.
So I'm going to take you through, perhaps push you a little bit mathematically -- so brace yourselves -- push you a little bit to understand how this language works, which enables us to capture what is symmetry.
So, let's take these two symmetrical objects here.
Let's take the twisted six-pointed starfish.
What can I do to the starfish which makes it look the same?
Well, there I rotated it by a sixth of a turn, and still it looks like it did before I started.
I could rotate it by a third of a turn, or a half a turn, or put it back down on its image, or two thirds of a turn.
And a fifth symmetry, I can rotate it by five sixths of a turn.
And those are things that I can do to the symmetrical object that make it look like it did before I started.
Now, for Galois, there was actually a sixth symmetry.
Can anybody think what else I could do to this which would leave it like I did before I started?
I can't flip it because I've put a little twist on it, haven't I?
It's got no reflective symmetry.
But what I could do is just leave it where it is, pick it up, and put it down again.
And for Galois this was like the zeroth symmetry.
Actually, the invention of the number zero was a very modern concept, seventh century A.D., by the Indians.
It seems mad to talk about nothing.
And this is the same idea. This is a symmetrical -- so everything has symmetry, where you just leave it where it is.
So, this object has six symmetries.
And what about the triangle?
Well, I can rotate by a third of a turn clockwise or a third of a turn anticlockwise.
But now this has some reflectional symmetry.
I can reflect it in the line through X, or the line through Y, or the line through Z.
Five symmetries and then of course the zeroth symmetry where I just pick it up and leave it where it is.
So both of these objects have six symmetries.
Now, I'm a great believer that mathematics is not a spectator sport, and you have to do some mathematics in order to really understand it.
So here is a little question for you.
And I'm going to give a prize at the end of my talk for the person who gets closest to the answer.
The Rubik's Cube.
How many symmetries does a Rubik's Cube have?
How many things can I do to this object and put it down so it still looks like a cube?
Okay? So I want you to think about that problem as we go on, and count how many symmetries there are.
And there will be a prize for the person who gets closest at the end.
But let's go back down to symmetries that I got for these two objects.
What Galois realized: it isn't just the individual symmetries, but how they interact with each other which really characterizes the symmetry of an object.
If I do one magic trick move followed by another, the combination is a third magic trick move.
And here we see Galois starting to develop a language to see the substance of the things unseen, the sort of abstract idea of the symmetry underlying this physical object.
For example, what if I turn the starfish by a sixth of a turn, and then a third of a turn?
So I've given names. The capital letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, are the names for the rotations.
B, for example, rotates the little yellow dot to the B on the starfish. And so on.
So what if I do B, which is a sixth of a turn, followed by C, which is a third of a turn?
Well let's do that. A sixth of a turn, followed by a third of a turn, the combined effect is as if I had just rotated it by half a turn in one go.
So the little table here records how the algebra of these symmetries work.
I do one followed by another, the answer is it's rotation D, half a turn.
What I if I did it in the other order? Would it make any difference?
Let's see. Let's do the third of the turn first, and then the sixth of a turn.
Of course, it doesn't make any difference.
It still ends up at half a turn.
And there is some symmetry here in the way the symmetries interact with each other.
But this is completely different to the symmetries of the triangle.
Let's see what happens if we do two symmetries with the triangle, one after the other.
Let's do a rotation by a third of a turn anticlockwise, and reflect in the line through X.
Well, the combined effect is as if I had just done the reflection in the line through Z to start with.
Now, let's do it in a different order.
Let's do the reflection in X first, followed by the rotation by a third of a turn anticlockwise.
The combined effect, the triangle ends up somewhere completely different.
It's as if it was reflected in the line through Y.
Now it matters what order you do the operations in.
And this enables us to distinguish why the symmetries of these objects -- they both have six symmetries. So why shouldn't we say they have the same symmetries?
But the way the symmetries interact enable us -- we've now got a language to distinguish why these symmetries are fundamentally different.
And you can try this when you go down to the pub, later on.
Take a beer mat and rotate it by a quarter of a turn, then flip it. And then do it in the other order, and the picture will be facing in the opposite direction.
Now, Galois produced some laws for how these tables -- how symmetries interact.
It's almost like little Sudoku tables.
You don't see any symmetry twice in any row or column.
And, using those rules, he was able to say that there are in fact only two objects with six symmetries.
And they'll be the same as the symmetries of the triangle, or the symmetries of the six-pointed starfish.
I think this is an amazing development.
It's almost like the concept of number being developed for symmetry.
In the front here, I've got one, two, three people sitting on one, two, three chairs.
The people and the chairs are very different, but the number, the abstract idea of the number, is the same.
And we can see this now: we go back to the walls in the Alhambra.
Here are two very different walls, very different geometric pictures.
But, using the language of Galois, we can understand that the underlying abstract symmetries of these things are actually the same.
For example, let's take this beautiful wall with the triangles with a little twist on them.
You can rotate them by a sixth of a turn if you ignore the colors. We're not matching up the colors.
But the shapes match up if I rotate by a sixth of a turn around the point where all the triangles meet.
What about the center of a triangle? I can rotate by a third of a turn around the center of the triangle, and everything matches up.
And then there is an interesting place halfway along an edge, where I can rotate by 180 degrees.
And all the tiles match up again.
So rotate along halfway along the edge, and they all match up.
Now, let's move to the very different-looking wall in the Alhambra.
And we find the same symmetries here, and the same interaction.
So, there was a sixth of a turn. A third of a turn where the Z pieces meet.
And the half a turn is halfway between the six pointed stars.
And although these walls look very different, Galois has produced a language to say that in fact the symmetries underlying these are exactly the same.
And it's a symmetry we call 6-3-2.
Here is another example in the Alhambra.
This is a wall, a ceiling, and a floor.
They all look very different. But this language allows us to say that they are representations of the same symmetrical abstract object, which we call 4-4-2. Nothing to do with football, but because of the fact that there are two places where you can rotate by a quarter of a turn, and one by half a turn.
Now, this power of the language is even more, because Galois can say, "Did the Moorish artists discover all of the possible symmetries on the walls in the Alhambra?"
And it turns out they almost did.
You can prove, using Galois' language, there are actually only 17 different symmetries that you can do in the walls in the Alhambra.
And they, if you try to produce a different wall with this 18th one, it will have to have the same symmetries as one of these 17.
But these are things that we can see.
And the power of Galois' mathematical language is it also allows us to create symmetrical objects in the unseen world, beyond the two-dimensional, three-dimensional, all the way through to the four- or five- or infinite-dimensional space.
And that's where I work. I create mathematical objects, symmetrical objects, using Galois' language, in very high dimensional spaces.
So I think it's a great example of things unseen, which the power of mathematical language allows you to create.
So, like Galois, I stayed up all last night creating a new mathematical symmetrical object for you, and I've got a picture of it here.
Well, unfortunately it isn't really a picture. If I could have my board at the side here, great, excellent.
Here we are. Unfortunately, I can't show you a picture of this symmetrical object.
But here is the language which describes how the symmetries interact.
Now, this new symmetrical object does not have a name yet.
Now, people like getting their names on things, on craters on the moon or new species of animals.
So I'm going to give you the chance to get your name on a new symmetrical object which hasn't been named before.
And this thing -- species die away, and moons kind of get hit by meteors and explode -- but this mathematical object will live forever.
It will make you immortal.
In order to win this symmetrical object, what you have to do is to answer the question I asked you at the beginning.
How many symmetries does a Rubik's Cube have?
Okay, I'm going to sort you out.
Rather than you all shouting out, I want you to count how many digits there are in that number. Okay?
If you've got it as a factorial, you've got to expand the factorials.
Okay, now if you want to play, I want you to stand up, okay?
If you think you've got an estimate for how many digits, right -- we've already got one competitor here.
If you all stay down he wins it automatically.
Okay. Excellent. So we've got four here, five, six.
Great. Excellent. That should get us going. All right.
Anybody with five or less digits, you've got to sit down, because you've underestimated.
Five or less digits. So, if you're in the tens of thousands you've got to sit down.
60 digits or more, you've got to sit down.
You've overestimated.
20 digits or less, sit down.
How many digits are there in your number?
Two? So you should have sat down earlier.
(Laughter) Let's have the other ones, who sat down during the 20, up again. Okay?
If I told you 20 or less, stand up.
Because this one. I think there were a few here.
The people who just last sat down.
Okay, how many digits do you have in your number?
(Laughs) 21. Okay good. How many do you have in yours?
18. So it goes to this lady here.
21 is the closest.
It actually has -- the number of symmetries in the Rubik's cube has 25 digits.
So now I need to name this object.
So, what is your name?
I need your surname. Symmetrical objects generally -- spell it for me.
G-H-E-Z No, SO2 has already been used, actually, in the mathematical language. So you can't have that one.
So Ghez, there we go. That's your new symmetrical object.
You are now immortal.
(Applause) And if you'd like your own symmetrical object, I have a project raising money for a charity in Guatemala, where I will stay up all night and devise an object for you, for a donation to this charity to help kids get into education in Guatemala.
And I think what drives me, as a mathematician, are those things which are not seen, the things that we haven't discovered.
It's all the unanswered questions which make mathematics a living subject.
And I will always come back to this quote from the Japanese "Essays in Idleness": "In everything, uniformity is undesirable.
Leaving something incomplete makes it interesting, and gives one the feeling that there is room for growth." Thank you.
(Applause)
One of my favorite cartoon characters is Snoopy.
I love the way he sits and lies on his kennel and contemplates the great things of life.
So when I thought about compassion, my mind immediately went to one of the cartoon strips, where he's lying there and he says, "I really understand, and I really appreciate how one should love one's neighbor as one love's oneself.
The only trouble is the people next door; I can't stand them."
This, in a way, is one of the challenges of how to interpret a really good idea.
We all, I think, believe in compassion.
If you look at all the world religions, all the main world religions, you'll find within them some teaching concerning compassion.
So in Judaism, we have, from our Torah, that you should love your neighbor as you love yourself.
And within Jewish teachings, the rabbinic teachings, we have Hillel, who taught that you shouldn't do to others what you don't like being done to yourself.
And all the main religions have similar teachings.
And again, within Judaism, we have a teaching about God, who is called the compassionate one, Ha-rachaman.
After all, how could the world exist without God being compassionate?
And we, as taught within the Torah that we are made in the image of God, so we too have to be compassionate.
But what does it mean? How does it impact on our everyday life?
Sometimes, of course, being compassionate can produce feelings within us that are very difficult to control.
I know there are many times when I've gone and conducted a funeral, or when I have been sitting with the bereaved, or with people who are dying, and I am overwhelmed by the sadness, by the difficulty, the challenge that is there for the family, for the person.
And I'm touched, so that tears come to my eyes.
And yet, if I just allowed myself to be overwhelmed by these feelings, I wouldn't be doing my job -- because I have to actually be there for them and make sure that rituals happen, that practicalities are seen to.
And yet, on the other hand, if I didn't feel this compassion, then I feel that it would be time for me to hang up my robe and give up being a rabbi.
And these same feelings are there for all of us as we face the world.
Who cannot be touched by compassion when we see the terrible horrors of the results of war, or famine, or earthquakes, or tsunamis?
I know some people who say "Well, you know there's just so much out there -- I can't do anything, I'm not going to even begin to try."
And there are some charity workers who call this compassion fatigue.
There are others who feel they can't confront compassion anymore, and so they turn off the television and don't watch.
In Judaism, though, we tend to always say, there has to be a middle way.
You have to, of course, be aware of the needs of others, but you have to be aware in such a way that you can carry on with your life and be of help to people.
So part of compassion has to be an understanding of what makes people tick.
And, of course, you can't do that unless you understand yourself a bit more.
And there's a lovely rabbinic interpretation of the beginnings of creation, which says that when God created the world, God thought that it would be best to create the world only with the divine attribute of justice.
Because, after all, God is just.
Therefore, there should be justice throughout the world.
And then God looked to the future and realized, if the world was created just with justice, the world couldn't exist.
So, God thought, "Nope, I'm going to create the world just with compassion."
And then God looked to the future and realized that, in fact, if the world were just filled with compassion, there would be anarchy and chaos.
There had to be limits to all things.
The rabbis describe this as being like a king who has a beautiful, fragile glass bowl.
If you put too much cold water in, it will shatter.
If you put boiling water in, it will shatter.
What do you have to do? Put in a mixture of the two.
And so God put both of these possibilities into the world.
There is something more though that has to be there.
And that is the translation of the feelings that we may have about compassion into the wider world, into action.
So, like Snoopy, we can't just lie there and think great thoughts about our neighbors.
We actually have to do something about it.
And so there is also, within Judaism, this notion of love and kindness that becomes very important: "chesed."
All these three things, then, have to be melded together.
The idea of justice, which gives boundaries to our lives and gives us a feeling of what's right about life, what's right about living, what should we be doing, social justice.
There has to be a willingness to do good deeds, but not, of course, at the expense of our own sanity.
You know, there's no way that you can do anything for anyone if you overdo things.
And balancing them all in the middle is this notion of compassion, which has to be there, if you like, at our very roots.
This idea of compassion comes to us because we're made in the image of God, who is ultimately the compassionate one.
What does this compassion entail?
It entails understanding the pain of the other.
But even more than that, it means understanding one's connection to the whole of creation: understanding that one is part of that creation, that there is a unity that underlies all that we see, all that we hear, all that we feel.
I call that unity God.
And that unity is something that connects all of creation.
And, of course, in the modern world, with the environmental movement, we're becoming even more aware of the connectivity of things, that something I do here actually does matter in Africa, that if I use too much of my carbon allowance, it seems to be that we are causing a great lack of rain in central and eastern Africa.
So there is a connectivity, and I have to understand that -- as part of the creation, as part of me being made in the image of God.
And I have to understand that my needs sometimes have to be sublimated to other needs.
This "18 minutes" business, I find quite fascinating.
Because in Judaism, the number 18, in Hebrew letters, stands for life -- the word "life."
So, in a sense, the 18 minutes is challenging me to say, "In life, this is what's important in terms of compassion."
But, something else as well: actually, 18 minutes is important.
Because at Passover, when we have to eat unleavened bread, the rabbis say, what is the difference between dough that is made into bread, and dough that is made into unleavened bread, or "matzah"?
And they say "It's 18 minutes."
Because that's how long they say it takes for this dough to become leaven.
What does it mean, "dough becomes leaven"?
It means it gets filled with hot air.
What's matzah? What's unleavened bread? You don't get it.
Symbolically, what the rabbis say is that at Passover, what we have to do is try to get rid of our hot air -- our pride, our feeling that we are the most important people in the whole entire world, and that everything should revolve round us.
So we try and get rid of those, and so doing, try to get rid of the habits, the emotions, the ideas that enslave us, that make our eyes closed, give us tunnel vision so we don't see the needs of others -- and free ourselves and free ourselves from that.
And that too is a basis for having compassion, for understanding our place in the world.
Now there is, in Judaism, a gorgeous story of a rich man who sat in synagogue one day.
And, as many people do, he was dozing off during the sermon.
And as he was dozing off, they were reading from the book of Leviticus in the Torah.
And they were saying that in the ancient times in the temple in Jerusalem, the priests used to have bread, which they used to place into a special table in the temple in Jerusalem.
The man was asleep, but he heard the words bread, temple, God, and he woke up.
He said, "God wants bread. That's it. God wants bread. I know what God wants."
And he rushed home. And after the Sabbath, he made 12 loaves of bread, took them to the synagogue, went into the synagogue, opened the ark and said, "God, I don't know why you want this bread, but here you are."
And he put it in the ark with the scrolls of the Torah.
Then he went home.
The cleaner came into the synagogue.
"Oh God, I'm in such trouble. I've got children to feed.
My wife's ill. I've got no money. What can I do?"
He goes into the synagogue. "God, will you please help me?
Ah, what a wonderful smell."
He goes to the ark. He opens the ark.
"There's bread! God, you've answered my plea. You've answered my question."
Takes the bread and goes home.
Meanwhile, the rich man thinks to himself, "I'm an idiot. God wants bread?
God, the one who rules the entire universe, wants my bread?"
He rushes to the synagogue. "I'll get it out of the ark before anybody finds it."
He goes in there, and it's not there.
And he says, "God, you really did want it. You wanted my bread.
Next week, with raisins."
This went on for years.
Every week, the man would bring bread with raisins, with all sorts of good things, put it into the ark.
Every week, the cleaner would come. "God you've answered my plea again."
Take the bread. Take it home.
Went on until a new rabbi came. Rabbis always spoil things.
The rabbi came in and saw what was going on.
And he called the two of them to his office.
And he said, you know, "This is what's happening."
And the rich man -- oh, dear -- crestfallen.
"You mean God didn't want my bread?"
And the poor man said, "And you mean God didn't answer my pleas?"
And the rabbi said, "You've misunderstood me.
You've misunderstood totally," he said.
"Of course, what you are doing," he said to the rich man, "is answering God's plea that we should be compassionate.
And God," he said to the poor man, "is answering your plea that people should be compassionate and give."
He looked at the rich man. He held the rich man's hands and said, "Don't you understand?" He said, "These are the hands of God."
So that is the way I feel: that I can only try to approach this notion of being compassionate, of understanding that there is a connectivity, that there is a unity in this world; that I want to try and serve that unity, and that I can try and do that by understanding, I hope, trying to understand something of the pain of others; but understanding that there are limits, that people have to bear responsibility for some of the problems that come upon them; and that I have to understand that there are limits to my energy, to the giving I can give.
I have to reevaluate them, try and separate out the material things and my emotions that may be enslaving me, so that I can see the world clearly.
And then I have to try to see in what ways I can make these the hands of God.
And so try to bring compassion to life in this world.
A human child is born, and for quite a long time is a consumer.
It cannot be consciously a contributor.
It is helpless.
It doesn't know how to survive, even though it is endowed with an instinct to survive.
It needs the help of mother, or a foster mother, to survive.
It can't afford to doubt the person who tends the child.
It has to totally surrender, as one surrenders to an anesthesiologist.
It has to totally surrender.
That implies a lot of trust.
That implies the trusted person won't violate the trust.
As the child grows, it begins to discover that the person trusted is violating the trust.
It doesn't know even the word "violation."
Therefore, it has to blame itself, a wordless blame, which is more difficult to really resolve -- the wordless self-blame.
As the child grows to become an adult: so far, it has been a consumer, but the growth of a human being lies in his or her capacity to contribute, to be a contributor.
One cannot contribute unless one feels secure, one feels big, one feels: I have enough.
To be compassionate is not a joke.
It's not that simple.
One has to discover a certain bigness in oneself.
That bigness should be centered on oneself, not in terms of money, not in terms of power you wield, not in terms of any status that you can command in the society, but it should be centered on oneself.
The self: you are self-aware.
On that self, it should be centered -- a bigness, a wholeness.
Otherwise, compassion is just a word and a dream.
You can be compassionate occasionally, more moved by empathy than by compassion.
Thank God we are empathetic.
When somebody's in pain, we pick up the pain.
In a Wimbledon final match, these two guys fight it out.
Each one has got two games.
It can be anybody's game.
What they have sweated so far has no meaning.
One person wins.
The tennis etiquette is, both the players have to come to the net and shake hands.
The winner boxes the air and kisses the ground, throws his shirt as though somebody is waiting for it.
(Laughter) And this guy has to come to the net.
When he comes to the net, you see, his whole face changes.
It looks as though he's wishing that he didn't win.
Why? Empathy.
That's human heart.
No human heart is denied of that empathy.
No religion can demolish that by indoctrination.
No culture, no nation and nationalism -- nothing can touch it because it is empathy.
And that capacity to empathize is the window through which you reach out to people, you do something that makes a difference in somebody's life -- even words, even time.
Compassion is not defined in one form.
There's no Indian compassion.
There's no American compassion.
It transcends nation, the gender, the age.
Why? Because it is there in everybody.
It's experienced by people occasionally.
Then this occasional compassion, we are not talking about -- it will never remain occasional.
By mandate, you cannot make a person compassionate.
You can't say, "Please love me."
Love is something you discover.
It's not an action, but in the English language, it is also an action.
I will come to it later.
So one has got to discover a certain wholeness.
I am going to cite the possibility of being whole, which is within our experience, everybody's experience.
In spite of a very tragic life, one is happy in moments which are very few and far between.
And the one who is happy, even for a slapstick joke, accepts himself and also the scheme of things in which one finds oneself.
That means the whole universe, known things and unknown things.
All of them are totally accepted because you discover your wholeness in yourself.
The subject -- "me" -- and the object -- the scheme of things -- fuse into oneness, an experience nobody can say, "I am denied of," an experience common to all and sundry.
That experience confirms that, in spite of all your limitations -- all your wants, desires, unfulfilled, and the credit cards and layoffs and, finally, baldness -- you can be happy.
But the extension of the logic is that you don't need to fulfill your desire to be happy.
You are the very happiness, the wholeness that you want to be.
There's no choice in this: that only confirms the reality that the wholeness cannot be different from you, cannot be minus you.
It has got to be you.
You cannot be a part of wholeness and still be whole.
Your moment of happiness reveals that reality, that realization, that recognition: "Maybe I am the whole.
Maybe the swami is right.
Maybe the swami is right." You start your new life.
Then everything becomes meaningful.
I have no more reason to blame myself.
If one has to blame oneself, one has a million reasons plus many.
But if I say, in spite of my body being limited -- if it is black it is not white, if it is white it is not black: body is limited any which way you look at it. Limited.
Your knowledge is limited, health is limited, and power is therefore limited, and the cheerfulness is going to be limited.
Compassion is going to be limited.
Everything is going to be limitless.
You cannot command compassion unless you become limitless, and nobody can become limitless, either you are or you are not. Period.
And there is no way of your being not limitless too.
Your own experience reveals, in spite of all limitations, you are the whole.
And the wholeness is the reality of you when you relate to the world.
It is love first.
When you relate to the world, the dynamic manifestation of the wholeness is, what we say, love.
And itself becomes compassion if the object that you relate to evokes that emotion.
Then that again transforms into giving, into sharing.
You express yourself because you have compassion.
To discover compassion, you need to be compassionate.
To discover the capacity to give and share, you need to be giving and sharing.
There is no shortcut: it is like swimming by swimming.
You learn swimming by swimming.
You cannot learn swimming on a foam mattress and enter into water.
(Laughter) You learn swimming by swimming. You learn cycling by cycling.
You learn cooking by cooking, having some sympathetic people around you to eat what you cook.
(Laughter) And, therefore, what I say, you have to fake it and make it.
(Laughter) You need to.
My predecessor meant that.
You have to act it out.
You have to act compassionately.
There is no verb for compassion, but you have an adverb for compassion.
That's interesting to me.
You act compassionately.
But then, how to act compassionately if you don't have compassion?
That is where you fake.
You fake it and make it. This is the mantra of the United States of America.
(Laughter) You fake it and make it.
You act compassionately as though you have compassion: grind your teeth, take all the support system.
If you know how to pray, pray.
Ask for compassion.
Let me act compassionately.
Do it.
You'll discover compassion and also slowly a relative compassion, and slowly, perhaps if you get the right teaching, you'll discover compassion is a dynamic manifestation of the reality of yourself, which is oneness, wholeness, and that's what you are.
With these words, thank you very much.
(Applause)
Compassion: what does it look like?
Come with me to 915 South Bloodworth Street in Raleigh, North Carolina, where I grew up.
If you come in you will see us: evening time, at table -- set for ten but not always all seats filled -- at the point when dinner is ready to be served.
Since mom had eight kids, sometimes she said she couldn't tell who was who and where they were.
Before we could eat, she would ask, "Are all the children in?"
And if someone happened to be missing, we would have to, we say, "Fix a plate" for that person, put it in the oven, then we could say grace, and we could eat.
Also, while we were at the table, there was a ritual in our family: when something significant had happened for any one of us -- whether mom had just been elected as the president of the PTA, or whether dad had gotten an assignment at the college of our denomination, or whether someone had won the jabberwocky contest for talent -- the ritual at the family was, once the announcement is made, we must take five, ten minutes to do what we call "make over" that person -- that is, to make a fuss over the one who had been honored in some way.
For when one is honored, all are honored.
Also, we had to make a report on our extended "visited" members, that is, extended members of the family, sick and elderly, shut in.
My task was, at least once a week, to visit Mother Lassiter who lived on East Street, Mother Williamson who lived on Bledsoe Avenue, and Mother Lathers who lived on Oberlin Road.
Why? Because they were old and infirm, and we needed to go by to see if they needed anything.
For mom said, "To be family, is to care and share and to look out for one another.
They are our family."
And, of course, sometimes there was a bonus for going.
They would offer sweets or money.
Mom says, "If they ask you what it costs to either go shopping for them, you must always say, 'Nothing.' And if they insist, say, 'Whatever you mind to give me.'" This was the nature of being at that table.
In fact, she indicated that if we would do that, not only would we have the joy of receiving the gratitude from the members of the extended family, but she said, "Even God will smile, and when God smiles, there is peace, and justice, and joy."
So, at the table at 915, I learned something about compassion.
Of course, it was a minister's family, so we had to add God into it.
And so, I came to think that mama eternal, mama eternal, is always wondering: Are all the children in?
And if we had been faithful in caring and sharing, we had the sense that justice and peace would have a chance in the world.
Now, it was not always wonderful at that table.
Let me explain a point at which we did not rise to the occasion.
It was Christmas, and at our family, oh, what a morning.
Christmas morning, where we open up our gifts, where we have special prayers, and where we get to the old upright piano and we would sing carols. It was a very intimate moment.
In fact, you could come down to the tree to get your gifts and get ready to sing, and then get ready for breakfast without even taking a bath or getting dressed, except that daddy messed it up.
There was a member of his staff who did not have any place on that particular Christmas to celebrate.
And daddy brought Elder Revels to the Christmas family celebration.
We thought he must be out of his mind.
This is our time. This is intimate time.
This is when we can just be who we are, and now we have this stuffy brother with his shirt and tie on, while we are still in our PJs.
Why would daddy bring Elder Revels?
Any other time, but not to the Christmas celebration.
And mom overheard us and said, "Well, you know what? If you really understand the nature of this celebration, it is that this is a time where you extend the circle of love.
That's what the celebration is all about.
It's time to make space, to share the enjoyment of life in a beloved community."
So, we sucked up.
(Laughter) But growing up at 915, compassion was not a word to be debated; it was a sensibility to how we are together.
We are sisters and brothers united together.
And, like Chief Seattle said, "We did not spin the web of life.
We're all strands in it.
And whatever we do to the web, we do to ourselves."
Now that's compassion.
So, let me tell you, I kind of look at the world this way.
I see pictures, and something says, "Now, that's compassion."
A harvested field of grain, with some grain in the corners, reminding me of the Hebrew tradition that you may indeed harvest, but you must always leave some on the edges, just in case there's someone who has not had the share necessary for good nurture.
Talk about a picture of compassion.
I see -- always, it stirs my heart -- a picture of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
walking arm in arm with Andy Young and Rabbi Heschel and maybe Thich Nhat Hanh and some of the other saints assembled, walking across the bridge and going into Selma.
Just a photograph.
Arm in arm for struggle.
Suffering together in a common hope that we can be brothers and sisters without the accidents of our birth or our ethnicity robbing us of a sense of unity of being.
So, there's another picture. Here, this one. I really do like this picture.
When Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated, that day, everybody in my community was upset.
You heard about riots all across the land.
Bobby Kennedy was scheduled to bring an inner city message in Indianapolis.
This is the picture. They said, "It's going to be too volatile for you to go."
He insisted, "I must go."
So, sitting on a flatbed truck, the elders of the community are there, and Bobby stands up and says to the people, "I have bad news for you.
Some of you may not have heard that Dr. King has been assassinated.
I know that you are angry, and I know that you would almost wish to have the opportunity to enter now into activities of revenge. But," he said, "what I really want you to know is that I know how you feel.
Because I had someone dear to me snatched away.
I know how you feel."
And he said, "I hope that you will have the strength to do what I did.
I allowed my anger, my bitterness, my grief to simmer a while, and then I made up my mind that I was going to make a different world, and we can do that together."
That's a picture. Compassion? I think I see it.
I saw it when the Dalai Lama came to the Riverside Church while I was a pastor, and he invited representatives of faith traditions from all around the world.
He asked them to give a message, and they each read in their own language a central affirmation, and that was some version of the golden rule: "As you would that others would do unto you, do also unto them."
Twelve in their ecclesiastical or cultural or tribal attire affirming one message.
We are so connected that we must treat each other as if an action toward you is an action toward myself.
One more picture while I'm stinking and thinking about the Riverside Church: 9/11. Last night at Chagrin Fall, a newspaperman and a television guy said, "That evening, when a service was held at the Riverside Church, we carried it on our station in this city.
It was," he said, "one of the most powerful moments of life together.
We were all suffering.
But you invited representatives of all of the traditions to come, and you invited them.
'Find out what it is in your tradition that tells us what to do when we have been humiliated, when we have been despised and rejected.' And they all spoke out of their own traditions, a word about the healing power of solidarity, one with the other."
I developed a sense of compassion sort of as second nature, but I became a preacher.
Now, as a preacher, I got a job. I got to preach the stuff, but I got to do it too.
Or, as Father Divine in Harlem used to say to folks, "Some people preach the Gospel.
I have to tangibilitate the Gospel."
So, the real issue is: How do you tangibilitate compassion?
How do you make it real?
My faith has constantly lifted up the ideal, and challenged me when I fell beneath it.
In my tradition, there is a gift that we have made to other traditions -- to everybody around the world who knows the story of the "Good Samaritan."
Many people think of it primarily in terms of charity, random acts of kindness.
But for those who really study that text a little more thoroughly, you will discover that a question has been raised that leads to this parable.
The question was: "What is the greatest commandment?"
And, according to Jesus, the word comes forth, "You must love yourself, you must love the Lord your God with all your heart, mind and soul, and your neighbor as yourself."
And then the person asked, "Well, what do you mean, 'neighbor?'" And he answered it by telling the story of the man who fell among thieves, and how religious authorities went the other way, and how their supporters in the congregation went the other way; but an unsuspecting, despised person came along, saw the man in need, provided oil and wine for his wounds, put him on his own transportation, and took him to the inn and asked the innkeeper, "Take care of him."
And he said, "Here, this is the initial investment, but if needs continue, make sure that you provide them.
And whatever else is needed, I will provide it and pay for it when I return."
This always seemed to me to be a deepening of the sense of what it means to be a Good Samaritan.
A Good Samaritan is not simply one whose heart is touched in an immediate act of care and charity, but one who provides a system of sustained care -- I like that, 'a system of sustained care ' -- in the inn, take care.
I think maybe it's one time when the Bible talks about a healthcare system and a commitment to do whatever is necessary -- that all God's children would have their needs cared for, so that we could answer when mommy eternal asks, "In regards to health, are all the children in?" And we could say yes.
Oh, what a joy it has been to be a person seeking to tangibilitate compassion.
I recall that my work as a pastor has always involved caring for their spiritual needs; being concerned for housing, for healthcare, for the prisoners, for the infirm, for children -- even the foster care children for whom no one can even keep a record where they started off, where they are going.
To be a pastor is to care for these individual needs.
But now, to be a Good Samaritan -- and I always say, and to be a good American -- for me, is not simply to congratulate myself for the individual acts of care.
Compassion takes on a corporate dynamic.
I believe that whatever we did around that table at Bloodworth Street must be done around tables and rituals of faith until we become that family, that family together that understands the nature of our unity.
We are one people together.
So, let me explain to you what I mean when I think about compassion, and why I think it is so important that right at this point in history.
We would decide to establish this charter of compassion.
The reason it's important is because this is a very special time in history.
It is the time that, biblically, we would speak of as the day, or the year, of God's favor.
This is a season of grace.
Unusual things are beginning to happen.
Please pardon me, as a black man, for celebrating that the election of Obama was an unusual sign of the fact that it is a year of favor.
And yet, there is so much more that needs to be done.
We need to bring health and food and education and respect for all God's citizens, all God's children, remembering mama eternal.
Now, let me close my comments by telling you that whenever I feel something very deeply, it usually takes the form of verse.
And so I want to close with a little song.
I close with this song -- it's a children's song -- because we are all children at the table of mama eternal.
And if mama eternal has taught us correctly, this song will make sense, not only to those of us who are a part of this gathering, but to all who sign the charter for compassion.
And this is why we do it.
The song says, ♫ "I made heaven so happy today, ♫ ♫ Receiving God's love and giving it away ♫ ♫ When I looked up, heaven smiled at me ♫ ♫ Now, I'm so happy. Can't you see? ♫ ♫ I'm happy. Look at me. I'm happy. Can't you see? ♫ ♫ Sharing makes me happy, makes heaven happy too ♫ ♫ I'm happy. Look at me. I'm happy. Can't you see? ♫ ♫ Let me share my happy loving smile with you. ♫ That's compassion. (Applause)
I'm speaking about compassion from an Islamic point of view, and perhaps my faith is not very well thought of as being one that is grounded in compassion.
The truth of the matter is otherwise.
Our holy book, the Koran, consists of 114 chapters, and each chapter begins with what we call the basmala, the saying of "In the name of God, the all compassionate, the all merciful," or, as Sir Richard Burton -- not the Richard Burton who was married to Elizabeth Taylor, but the Sir Richard Burton who lived a century before that and who was a worldwide traveler and translator of many works of literature -- translates it. "In the name of God, the compassionating, the compassionate."
And in a saying of the Koran, which to Muslims is God speaking to humanity, God says to his prophet Muhammad -- whom we believe to be the last of a series of prophets, beginning with Adam, including Noah, including Moses, including Abraham, including Jesus Christ, and ending with Muhammad -- that, "We have not sent you, O Muhammad, except as a 'rahmah,' except as a source of compassion to humanity."
For us human beings, and certainly for us as Muslims, whose mission, and whose purpose in following the path of the prophet is to make ourselves as much like the prophet.
And the prophet, in one of his sayings, said, "Adorn yourselves with the attributes of God."
And because God Himself said that the primary attribute of his is compassion -- in fact, the Koran says that "God decreed upon himself compassion," or, "reigned himself in by compassion" -- therefore, our objective and our mission must be to be sources of compassion, activators of compassion, actors of compassion and speakers of compassion and doers of compassion.
That is all well and good, but where do we go wrong, and what is the source of the lack of compassion in the world?
For the answer to this, we turn to our spiritual path.
In every religious tradition, there is the outer path and the inner path, or the exoteric path and the esoteric path.
The esoteric path of Islam is more popularly known as Sufism, or "tasawwuf" in Arabic.
And these doctors or these masters, these spiritual masters of the Sufi tradition, refer to teachings and examples of our prophet that teach us where the source of our problems lies.
In one of the battles that the prophet waged, he told his followers, "We are returning from the lesser war to the greater war, to the greater battle."
And they said, "Messenger of God, we are battle-weary.
How can we go to a greater battle?"
He said, "That is the battle of the self, the battle of the ego."
The sources of human problems have to do with egotism, "I."
The famous Sufi master Rumi, who is very well known to most of you, has a story in which he talks of a man who goes to the house of a friend, and he knocks on the door, and a voice answers, "Who's there?"
"It's me," or, more grammatically correctly, "It is I," as we might say in English.
The voice says, "Go away."
After many years of training, of disciplining, of search and struggle, he comes back.
With much greater humility, he knocks again on the door.
The voice asks, "Who is there?"
He said, "It is you, O heartbreaker."
The door swings open, and the voice says, "Come in, for there is no room in this house for two I's," -- two capital I's, not these eyes -- "for two egos."
And Rumi's stories are metaphors for the spiritual path.
In the presence of God, there is no room for more than one "I," and that is the "I" of divinity.
In a teaching -- called a "hadith qudsi" in our tradition -- God says that, "My servant," or "My creature, my human creature, does not approach me by anything that is dearer to me than what I have asked them to do."
And those of you who are employers know exactly what I mean.
You want your employees to do what you ask them to do, and if they've done that, then they can do extra.
But don't ignore what you've asked them to do.
"And," God says, "my servant continues to get nearer to me, by doing more of what I've asked them to do" -- extra credit, we might call it -- "until I love him or love her.
And when I love my servant," God says, "I become the eyes by which he or she sees, the ears by which he or she listens, the hand by which he or she grasps, and the foot by which he or she walks, and the heart by which he or she understands."
It is this merging of our self with divinity that is the lesson and purpose of our spiritual path and all of our faith traditions.
Muslims regard Jesus as the master of Sufism, the greatest prophet and messenger who came to emphasize the spiritual path.
When he says, "I am the spirit, and I am the way," and when the prophet Muhammad said, "Whoever has seen me has seen God," it is because they became so much an instrument of God, they became part of God's team -- so that God's will was manifest through them, and they were not acting from their own selves and their own egos.
Compassion on earth is given, it is in us.
All we have to do is to get our egos out of the way, get our egotism out of the way.
I'm sure, probably all of you here, or certainly the very vast majority of you, have had what you might call a spiritual experience, a moment in your lives when, for a few seconds, a minute perhaps, the boundaries of your ego dissolved.
And at that minute, you felt at one with the universe -- one with that jug of water, one with every human being, one with the Creator -- and you felt you were in the presence of power, of awe, of the deepest love, the deepest sense of compassion and mercy that you have ever experienced in your lives.
That is a moment which is a gift of God to us -- a gift when, for a moment, he lifts that boundary which makes us insist on "I, I, I, me, me, me," and instead, like the person in Rumi's story, we say, "Oh, this is all you.
This is all you. And this is all us.
And us, and I, and us are all part of you.
O, Creator! O, the Objective! The source of our being and the end of our journey, you are also the breaker of our hearts.
You are the one whom we should all be towards, for whose purpose we live, and for whose purpose we shall die, and for whose purpose we shall be resurrected again to account to God to what extent we have been compassionate beings."
Our message today, and our purpose today, and those of you who are here today, and the purpose of this charter of compassion, is to remind.
For the Koran always urges us to remember, to remind each other, because the knowledge of truth is within every human being.
We know it all.
We have access to it all.
Jung may have called it "the subconscious."
Through our subconscious, in your dreams -- the Koran calls our state of sleep "the lesser death," "the temporary death" -- in our state of sleep we have dreams, we have visions, we travel even outside of our bodies, for many of us, and we see wonderful things.
We travel beyond the limitations of space as we know it, and beyond the limitations of time as we know it.
But all this is for us to glorify the name of the creator whose primary name is the compassionating, the compassionate.
God, Bokh, whatever name you want to call him with, Allah, Ram, Om, whatever the name might be through which you name or access the presence of divinity, it is the locus of absolute being, absolute love and mercy and compassion, and absolute knowledge and wisdom, what Hindus call "satchidananda."
The language differs, but the objective is the same.
Rumi has another story about three men, a Turk, an Arab and -- and I forget the third person, but for my sake, it could be a Malay.
One is asking for angur -- one is, say, an Englishman -- one is asking for eneb, and one is asking for grapes.
And they have a fight and an argument because -- "I want grapes." "I want eneb. "I want angur." -- not knowing that the word that they're using refers to the same reality in different languages.
There's only one absolute reality by definition, one absolute being by definition, because absolute is, by definition, single, and absolute and singular.
There's this absolute concentration of being, the absolute concentration of consciousness, awareness, an absolute locus of compassion and love that defines the primary attributes of divinity.
And these should also be the primary attributes of what it means to be human.
For what defines humanity, perhaps biologically, is our physiology, but God defines humanity by our spirituality, by our nature.
And the Koran says, He speaks to the angels and says, "When I have finished the formation of Adam from clay, and breathed into him of my spirit, then, fall in prostration to him."
The angels prostrate, not before the human body, but before the human soul.
Why? Because the soul, the human soul, embodies a piece of the divine breath, a piece of the divine soul.
This is also expressed in biblical vocabulary when we are taught that we were created in the divine image.
What is the imagery of God?
The imagery of God is absolute being, absolute awareness and knowledge and wisdom and absolute compassion and love.
And therefore, for us to be human -- in the greatest sense of what it means to be human, in the most joyful sense of what it means to be human -- means that we too have to be proper stewards of the breath of divinity within us, and seek to perfect within ourselves the attribute of being, of being alive, of beingness; the attribute of wisdom, of consciousness, of awareness; and the attribute of being compassionate and loving beings.
This is what I understand from my faith tradition, and this is what I understand from my studies of other faith traditions, and this is the common platform on which we must all stand, and when we stand on this platform as such, I am convinced that we can make a wonderful world.
And I believe, personally, that we're on the verge and that, with the presence and help of people like you here, we can bring about the prophecy of Isaiah.
For he foretold of a period when people shall transform their swords into plowshares and will not learn war or make war anymore.
We have reached a stage in human history that we have no option: we must, we must lower our egos, control our egos -- whether it is individual ego, personal ego, family ego, national ego -- and let all be for the glorification of the one.
Thank you, and God bless you.
(Applause)
I want to open by quoting Einstein's wonderful statement, just so people will feel at ease that the great scientist of the 20th century also agrees with us, and also calls us to this action.
He said, "A human being is a part of the whole, called by us, the 'universe,' -- a part limited in time and space.
He experiences himself, his thoughts and feelings, as something separated from the rest, a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness.
This delusion is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires and to affection for a few persons nearest to us.
Our task must be to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of compassion, to embrace all living creatures and the whole of nature in its beauty."
This insight of Einstein's is uncannily close to that of Buddhist psychology, wherein compassion -- "karuna," it is called -- is defined as, "the sensitivity to another's suffering and the corresponding will to free the other from that suffering."
It pairs closely with love, which is the will for the other to be happy, which requires, of course, that one feels some happiness oneself and wishes to share it.
This is perfect in that it clearly opposes self-centeredness and selfishness to compassion, the concern for others, and, further, it indicates that those caught in the cycle of self-concern suffer helplessly, while the compassionate are more free and, implicitly, more happy.
The Dalai Lama often states that compassion is his best friend.
It helps him when he is overwhelmed with grief and despair.
Compassion helps him turn away from the feeling of his suffering as the most absolute, most terrible suffering anyone has ever had and broadens his awareness of the sufferings of others, even of the perpetrators of his misery and the whole mass of beings.
In fact, suffering is so huge and enormous, his own becomes less and less monumental.
And he begins to move beyond his self-concern into the broader concern for others.
And this immediately cheers him up, as his courage is stimulated to rise to the occasion.
Thus, he uses his own suffering as a doorway to widening his circle of compassion.
He is a very good colleague of Einstein's, we must say.
Now, I want to tell a story, which is a very famous story in the Indian and Buddhist tradition, of the great Saint Asanga who was a contemporary of Augustine in the West and was sort of like the Buddhist Augustine.
And Asanga lived 800 years after the Buddha's time.
And he was discontented with the state of people's practice of the Buddhist religion in India at that time.
And so he said, "I'm sick of all this. Nobody's really living the doctrine.
They're talking about love and compassion and wisdom and enlightenment, but they are acting selfish and pathetic.
So, Buddha's teaching has lost its momentum.
I know the next Buddha will come a few thousand years from now, but exists currently in a certain heaven" -- that's Maitreya -- "so, I'm going to go on a retreat and I'm going to meditate and pray until the Buddha Maitreya reveals himself to me, and gives me a teaching or something to revive the practice of compassion in the world today."
So he went on this retreat. And he meditated for three years and he did not see the future Buddha Maitreya.
And he left in disgust.
And as he was leaving, he saw a man -- a funny little man sitting sort of part way down the mountain.
And he had a lump of iron.
And he was rubbing it with a cloth.
And he became interested in that.
He said, "Well what are you doing?"
And the man said, "I'm making a needle."
And he said, "That's ridiculous. You can't make a needle by rubbing a lump of iron with a cloth."
And the man said, "Really?" And he showed him a dish full of needles.
So he said, "Okay, I get the point."
He went back to his cave. He meditated again.
Another three years, no vision. He leaves again.
This time, he comes down.
And as he's leaving, he sees a bird making a nest on a cliff ledge.
And where it's landing to bring the twigs to the cliff, its feathers brushes the rock -- and it had cut the rock six to eight inches in. There was a cleft in the rock by the brushing of the feathers of generations of the birds.
So he said, "All right. I get the point." He went back.
Another three years.
Again, no vision of Maitreya after nine years.
And he again leaves, and this time: water dripping, making a giant bowl in the rock where it drips in a stream.
And so, again, he goes back. And after 12 years there is still no vision.
And he's freaked out. And he won't even look left or right to see any encouraging vision.
And he comes to the town. He's a broken person.
And there, in the town, he's approached by a dog who comes like this -- one of these terrible dogs you can see in some poor countries, even in America, I think, in some areas -- and he's looking just terrible.
And he becomes interested in this dog because it's so pathetic, and it's trying to attract his attention. And he sits down looking at the dog.
And the dog's whole hindquarters are a complete open sore.
Some of it is like gangrenous, and there are maggots in the flesh. And it's terrible.
He thinks, "What can I do to fix up this dog?
Well, at least I can clean this wound and wash it."
So, he takes it to some water. He's about to clean, but then his awareness focuses on the maggots.
And he sees the maggots, and the maggots are kind of looking a little cute.
And they're maggoting happily in the dog's hindquarters there.
"Well, if I clean the dog, I'll kill the maggots. So how can that be?
That's it. I'm a useless person and there's no Buddha, no Maitreya, and everything is all hopeless.
And now I'm going to kill the maggots?"
So, he had a brilliant idea.
And he took a shard of something, and cut a piece of flesh from his thigh, and he placed it on ground.
He was not really thinking too carefully about the ASPCA.
He was just immediately caught with the situation.
So he thought, "I will take the maggots and put them on this piece of flesh, then clean the dog's wounds, and then I'll figure out what to do with the maggots."
So he starts to do that. He can't grab the maggots.
Apparently they wriggle around. They're kind of hard to grab, these maggots.
So he says, "Well, I'll put my tongue on the dog's flesh.
And then the maggots will jump on my warmer tongue" -- the dog is kind of used up -- "and then I'll spit them one by one down on the thing."
So he goes down, and he's sticking his tongue out like this.
And he had to close his eyes, it's so disgusting, and the smell and everything.
And then, suddenly, there's a pfft, a noise like that.
He jumps back and there, of course, is the future Buddha Maitreya in a beautiful vision -- rainbow lights, golden, jeweled, a plasma body, an exquisite mystic vision -- that he sees.
And he says, "Oh." He bows.
But, being human, he's immediately thinking of his next complaint.
So as he comes up from his first bow he says, "My Lord, I'm so happy to see you, but where have you been for 12 years?
What is this?"
And Maitreya says, "I was with you. Who do you think was making needles and making nests and dripping on rocks for you, mister dense?"
(Laughter) "Looking for the Buddha in person," he said.
And he said, "You didn't have, until this moment, real compassion.
And, until you have real compassion, you cannot recognize love."
"Maitreya" means love, "the loving one," in Sanskrit.
And so he looked very dubious, Asanga did.
And he said, "If you don't believe me, just take me with you."
And so he took the Maitreya -- it shrunk into a globe, a ball -- took him on his shoulder.
And he ran into town in the marketplace, and he said, "Rejoice! Rejoice!
The future Buddha has come ahead of all predictions. Here he is."
And then pretty soon they started throwing rocks and stones at him -- it wasn't Chautauqua, it was some other town -- because they saw a demented looking, scrawny looking yogi man, like some kind of hippie, with a bleeding leg and a rotten dog on his shoulder, shouting that the future Buddha had come.
So, naturally, they chased him out of town.
But on the edge of town, one elderly lady, a charwoman in the charnel ground, saw a jeweled foot on a jeweled lotus on his shoulder and then the dog, but she saw the jewel foot of the Maitreya, and she offered a flower.
So that encouraged him, and he went with Maitreya.
Maitreya then took him to a certain heaven, which is the typical way a Buddhist myth unfolds.
And Maitreya then kept him in heaven for five years, dictating to him five complicated tomes of the methodology of how you cultivate compassion.
And then I thought I would share with you what that method is, or one of them.
A famous one, it's called the "Sevenfold Causal Method of Developing Compassion."
And it begins first by one meditating and visualizing that all beings are with one -- even animals too, but everyone is in human form.
The animals are in one of their human lives. The humans are human.
And then, among them, you think of your friends and loved ones, the circle at the table.
And you think of your enemies, and you think of the neutral ones.
And then you try to say, "Well, the loved ones I love.
But, you know, after all, they're nice to me.
I had fights with them. Sometimes they were unfriendly.
I got mad. Brothers can fight. Parents and children can fight.
So, in a way, I like them so much because they're nice to me.
While the neutral ones I don't know. They could all be just fine.
And then the enemies I don't like because they're mean to me.
But they are nice to somebody. I could be them."
And then the Buddhists, of course, think that, because we've all had infinite previous lives, we've all been each other's relatives, actually.
Therefore all of you, in the Buddhist view, in some previous life, although you don't remember it and neither do I, have been my mother -- for which I do apologize for the trouble I caused you.
And also, actually, I've been your mother.
I've been female, and I've been every single one of yours' mother in a previous life, the way the Buddhists reflect.
So, my mother in this life is really great. But all of you in a way are part of the eternal mother.
You gave me that expression; "the eternal mama," you said. That's wonderful.
So, that's the way the Buddhists do it.
A theist Christian can think that all beings, even my enemies, are God's children.
So, in that sense, we're related.
So, they first create this foundation of equality.
So, we sort of reduce a little of the clinging to the ones we love -- just in the meditation -- and we open our mind to those we don't know.
And we definitely reduce the hostility and the "I don't want to be compassionate to them" to the ones we think of as the bad guys, the ones we hate and we don't like.
And we don't hate anyone, therefore. So we equalize. That's very important.
And then the next thing we do is what is called "mother recognition."
And that is, we think of every being as familiar, as family.
We expand. We take the feeling about remembering a mama, and we defuse that to all beings in this meditation.
And we see the mother in every being.
We see that look that the mother has on her face, looking at this child that is a miracle that she has produced from her own body, being a mammal, where she has true compassion, truly is the other, and identifies completely.
Often the life of that other will be more important to her than her own life.
And that's why it's the most powerful form of altruism.
The mother is the model of all altruism for human beings, in spiritual traditions.
And so, we reflect until we can sort of see that motherly expression in all beings.
People laugh at me because, you know, I used to say that I used to meditate on mama Cheney as my mom, when, of course, I was annoyed with him about all of his evil doings in Iraq.
I used to meditate on George Bush. He's quite a cute mom in a female form.
He has his little ears and he smiles and he rocks you in his arms.
And you think of him as nursing you.
And then Saddam Hussein's serious mustache is a problem, but you think of him as a mom.
And this is the way you do it. You take any being who looks weird to you, and you see how they could be familiar to you.
And you do that for a while, until you really feel that.
You can feel the familiarity of all beings.
Nobody seems alien. They're not "other."
You reduce the feeling of otherness about beings.
Then you move from there to remembering the kindness of mothers in general, if you can remember the kindness of your own mother, if you can remember the kindness of your spouse, or, if you are a mother yourself, how you were with your children.
And you begin to get very sentimental; you cultivate sentimentality intensely.
You will even weep, perhaps, with gratitude and kindness.
And then you connect that with your feeling that everyone has that motherly possibility.
Every being, even the most mean looking ones, can be motherly.
And then, third, you step from there to what is called "a feeling of gratitude."
You want to repay that kindness that all beings have shown to you.
And then the fourth step, you go to what is called "lovely love."
In each one of these you can take some weeks, or months, or days depending on how you do it, or you can do them in a run, this meditation.
And then you think of how lovely beings are when they are happy, when they are satisfied.
And every being looks beautiful when they are internally feeling a happiness.
Their face doesn't look like this. When they're angry, they look ugly, every being, but when they're happy they look beautiful.
And so you see beings in their potential happiness.
And you feel a love toward them and you want them to be happy, even the enemy.
We think Jesus is being unrealistic when he says, "Love thine enemy."
He does say that, and we think he's being unrealistic and sort of spiritual and highfalutin. "Nice for him to say it, but I can't do that."
But, actually, that's practical.
If you love your enemy that means you want your enemy to be happy.
If your enemy was really happy, why would they bother to be your enemy?
How boring to run around chasing you.
They would be relaxing somewhere having a good time.
So it makes sense to want your enemy to be happy, because they'll stop being your enemy because that's too much trouble.
But anyway, that's the "lovely love. " And then finally, the fifth step is compassion, "universal compassion."
And that is where you then look at the reality of all the beings you can think of.
And you look at them, and you see how they are.
And you realize how unhappy they are actually, mostly, most of the time.
You see that furrowed brow in people.
And then you realize they don't even have compassion on themselves.
They're driven by this duty and this obligation.
"I have to get that. I need more. I'm not worthy. And I should do something."
And they're rushing around all stressed out.
And they think of it as somehow macho, hard discipline on themselves.
But actually they are cruel to themselves.
And, of course, they are cruel and ruthless toward others.
And they, then, never get any positive feedback.
And the more they succeed and the more power they have, the more unhappy they are.
And this is where you feel real compassion for them.
And you then feel you must act.
And the choice of the action, of course, hopefully will be more practical than poor Asanga, who was fixing the maggots on the dog because he had that motivation, and whoever was in front of him, he wanted to help.
But, of course, that is impractical. He should have founded the ASPCA in the town and gotten some scientific help for dogs and maggots.
And I'm sure he did that later. (Laughter) But that just indicates the state of mind, you know.
And so the next step -- the sixth step beyond "universal compassion" -- is this thing where you're linked with the needs of others in a true way, and you have compassion for yourself also, and it isn't sentimental only. You might be in fear of something.
Some bad guy is making himself more and more unhappy being more and more mean to other people and getting punished in the future for it in various ways.
And in Buddhism, they catch it in the future life.
Of course in theistic religion they're punished by God or whatever.
And materialism, they think they get out of it just by not existing, by dying, but they don't.
And so they get reborn as whatever, you know.
Never mind. I won't get into that.
But the next step is called "universal responsibility."
And that is very important -- the Charter of Compassion must lead us to develop through true compassion, what is called "universal responsibility."
In the great teaching of his Holiness the Dalai Lama that he always teaches everywhere, he says that that is the common religion of humanity: kindness.
But "kindness" means "universal responsibility."
And that means whatever happens to other beings is happening to us: we are responsible for that, and we should take it and do whatever we can at whatever little level and small level that we can do it.
We absolutely must do that. There is no way not to do it.
And then, finally, that leads to a new orientation in life where we live equally for ourselves and for others and we are joyful and happy.
One thing we mustn't think is that compassion makes you miserable.
Compassion makes you happy.
The first person who is happy when you get great compassion is yourself, even if you haven't done anything yet for anybody else.
Although, the change in your mind already does something for other beings: they can sense this new quality in yourself, and it helps them already, and gives them an example.
And that uncompassionate clock has just showed me that it's all over.
So, practice compassion, read the charter, disseminate it and develop it within yourself.
Don't just think, "Well, I'm compassionate," or "I'm not compassionate," and sort of think you're stuck there.
You can develop this. You can diminish the non-compassion, the cruelty, the callousness, the neglect of others, and take universal responsibility for them.
And then, not only will God smile and the eternal mama will smile, but Karen Armstrong will smile.
Thank you very much. (Applause)
I'm going to talk about compassion and the golden rule from a secular perspective and even from a kind of scientific perspective.
I'm going to try to give you a little bit of a natural history of compassion and the golden rule.
So, I'm going to be sometimes using kind of clinical language, and so it's not going to sound as warm and fuzzy as your average compassion talk.
I want to warn you about that.
So, I do want to say, at the outset, that I think compassion's great.
The golden rule is great. I'm a big supporter of both.
And I think it's great that the leaders of the religions of the world are affirming compassion and the golden rule as fundamental principles that are integral to their faiths.
At the same time, I think religions don't deserve all the credit.
I think nature gave them a helping hand here.
I'm going to argue tonight that compassion and the golden rule are, in a certain sense, built into human nature.
But I'm also going to argue that once you understand the sense in which they are built into human nature, you realize that just affirming compassion, and affirming the golden rule, is really not enough.
There's a lot of work to be done after that.
OK so, a quick natural history, first of compassion.
In the beginning, there was compassion, and I mean not just when human beings first showed up, but actually even before that.
I think it's probably the case that, in the human evolutionary lineage, even before there were homo sapiens, feelings like compassion and love and sympathy had earned their way into the gene pool, and biologists have a pretty clear idea of how this first happened.
It happened through a principle known as kin selection.
And the basic idea of kin selection is that, if an animal feels compassion for a close relative, and this compassion leads the animal to help the relative, then, in the end, the compassion actually winds up helping the genes underlying the compassion itself.
So, from a biologist's point of view, compassion is actually a gene's way of helping itself. OK.
I warned you this was not going to be very warm and fuzzy.
I'll get there -- I hope to get a little fuzzier.
This doesn't bother me so much, that the underlying Darwinian rationale of compassion is kind of self-serving at the genetic level.
Actually, I think the bad news about kin selection is just that it means that this kind of compassion is naturally deployed only within the family.
That's the bad news. The good news is compassion is natural.
The bad news is that this kin selected compassion is naturally confined to the family.
Now, there's more good news that came along later in evolution, a second kind of evolutionary logic.
Biologists call that "reciprocal altruism." OK.
And there, the basic idea is that compassion leads you to do good things for people who then will return the favor.
Again, I know this is not as inspiring a notion of compassion as you may have heard in the past, but from a biologist's point of view, this reciprocal altruism kind of compassion is ultimately self-serving too.
It's not that people think that, when they feel the compassion.
It's not consciously self-serving, but to a biologist, that's the logic.
And so, you wind up most easily extending compassion to friends and allies.
I'm sure a lot of you, if a close friend has something really terrible happen to them, you feel really bad.
But if you read in the newspaper that something really horrible happened to somebody you've never heard of, you can probably live with that.
That's just human nature.
So, it's another good news/bad news story.
It's good that compassion was extended beyond the family by this kind of evolutionary logic.
The bad news is this doesn't bring us universal compassion by itself.
So, there's still work to be done.
Now, there's one other result of this dynamic called reciprocal altruism, which I think is kind of good news, which is that the way that this is played out in the human species, it has given people an intuitive appreciation of the golden rule.
I don't quite mean that the golden rule itself is written in our genes, but you can go to a hunter gatherer society that has had no exposure to any of the great religious traditions, no exposure to ethical philosophy, and you'll find, if you spend time with these people, that, basically, they believe that one good turn deserves another, and that bad deeds should be punished.
And evolutionary psychologists think that these intuitions have a basis in the genes.
So, they do understand that if you want to be treated well, you treat other people well.
And it's good to treat other people well.
That's close to being a kind of built-in intuition.
So, that's good news. Now, if you've been paying attention, you're probably anticipating that there's bad news here; we still aren't to universal love, and it's true because, although an appreciation of the golden rule is natural, it's also natural to carve out exceptions to the golden rule.
I mean, for example, none of us, probably, want to go to prison, but we all think that there are some people who should go to prison. Right?
So, we think we should treat them differently than we would want to be treated.
Now, we have a rationale for that.
We say they did these bad things that make it just that they should go to prison.
None of us really extends the golden rule in truly diffuse and universal fashion.
We have the capacity to carve out exceptions, put people in a special category.
And the problem is that -- although in the case of sending people to prison, you have this impartial judiciary determining who gets excluded from the golden rule -- that in everyday life, the way we all make these decisions about who we're not going to extend the golden rule to, is we use a much rougher and readier formula.
Basically it's just like, if you're my enemy, if you're my rival -- if you're not my friend, if you're not in my family -- I'm much less inclined to apply the golden rule to you.
We all do that, and you see it all over the world.
You see it in the Middle East: people who, from Gaza, are firing missiles at Israel.
They wouldn't want to have missiles fired at them, but they say, "Well, but the Israelis, or some of them have done things that put them in a special category."
The Israelis would not want to have an economic blockade imposed on them, but they impose one on Gaza, and they say, "Well, the Palestinians, or some of them, have brought this on themselves."
So, it's these exclusions to the golden rule that amount to a lot of the world's trouble.
And it's natural to do that.
So, the fact that the golden rule is in some sense built in to us is not, by itself, going to bring us universal love.
It's not going to save the world.
Now, there's one piece of good news I have that may save the world. Okay.
Are you on the edges of your seats here?
Good, because before I tell you about that good news, I'm going to have to take a little excursion through some academic terrain.
So, I hope I've got your attention with this promise of good news that may save the world.
It's this non-zero-sumness stuff you just heard a little bit about.
It's just a quick introduction to game theory.
This won't hurt. Okay.
It's about zero-sum and non-zero-sum games.
If you ask what kind of a situation is conducive to people becoming friends and allies, the technical answer is a non-zero-sum situation.
And if you ask what kind of situation is conducive to people defining people as enemies, it's a zero-sum situation.
So, what do those terms mean?
Basically, a zero-sum game is the kind you're used to in sports, where there's a winner and a loser.
So, their fortunes add up to zero.
So, in tennis, every point is either good for you and bad for the other person, or good for them, bad for you.
Either way, your fortunes add up to zero. That's a zero-sum game.
Now, if you're playing doubles, then the person on your side of the net is in a non-zero-sum relationship with you, because every point is either good for both of you -- positive, win-win -- or bad for both of you, it's lose-lose.
That's a non-zero-sum game.
And in real life, there are lots of non-zero-sum games.
In the realm of economics, say, if you buy something: that means you'd rather have the merchandise than the money, but the merchant would rather have the money than the merchandise.
You both feel you've won.
In a war, two allies are playing a non-zero-sum game.
It's going to either be win-win or lose-lose for them.
So, there are lots of non-zero-sum games in real life.
And you could basically reformulate what I said earlier, about how compassion is deployed and the golden rule is deployed, by just saying, well, compassion most naturally flows along non-zero-sum channels where people perceive themselves as being in a potentially win-win situation with some of their friends or allies.
The deployment of the golden rule most naturally happens along these non-zero-sum channels.
So, kind of webs of non-zero-sumness are where you would expect compassion and the golden rule to kind of work their magic.
With zero-sum channels you would expect something else.
Okay. So, now you're ready for the good news that I said might save the world.
And now I can admit that it might not too, now that I've held your attention for three minutes of technical stuff.
But it may. And the good news is that history has naturally expanded these webs of non-zero-sumness, these webs that can be these channels for compassion.
You can go back all the way to the stone age: technological evolution -- roads, the wheel, writing, a lot of transportation and communication technologies -- has just inexorably made it so that more people can be in more non-zero-sum relationships with more and more people at greater and greater distances.
That's the story of civilization.
It's why social organization has grown from the hunter-gatherer village to the ancient state, the empire, and now here we are in a globalized world.
And the story of globalization is largely a story of non-zero-sumness.
You've probably heard the term "interdependence" applied to the modern world. Well, that's just another term for non-zero-sum.
If your fortunes are interdependent with somebody, then you live in a non-zero-sum relationship with them.
And you see this all the time in the modern world.
You saw it with the recent economic crash, where bad things happen in the economy -- bad for everybody, for much of the world.
Good things happen, and it's good for much of the world.
And, you know, I'm happy to say, I think there's really evidence that this non-zero-sum kind of connection can expand the moral compass.
I mean, if you look at the American attitudes toward Japanese during World War II -- look at the depictions of Japanese in the American media as just about subhuman, and look at the fact that we dropped atomic bombs, really without giving it much of a thought -- and you compare that to the attitude now, I think part of that is due to a kind of economic interdependence.
Any form of interdependence, or non-zero-sum relationship forces you to acknowledge the humanity of people.
So, I think that's good.
And the world is full of non-zero-sum dynamics.
Environmental problems, in many ways, put us all in the same boat.
And there are non-zero-sum relationships that maybe people aren't aware of.
For example, probably a lot of American Christians don't think of themselves as being in a non-zero-sum relationship with Muslims halfway around the world, but they really are, because if these Muslims become happier and happier with their place in the world and feel that they have a place in it, that's good for Americans, because there will be fewer terrorists to threaten American security.
If they get less and less happy, that will be bad for Americans.
So, there's plenty of non-zero-sumness.
And so, the question is: If there's so much non-zero-sumness, why has the world not yet been suffused in love, peace, and understanding?
The answer's complicated. It's the occasion for a whole other talk.
Certainly, a couple of things are that, first of all, there are a lot of zero-sum situations in the world.
And also, sometimes people don't recognize the non-zero-sum dynamics in the world.
In both of these areas, I think politicians can play a role.
This isn't only about religion.
I think politicians can help foster non-zero-sum relationships, Economic engagement is generally better than blockades and so on, in this regard.
And politicians can be aware, and should be aware that, when people around the world are looking at them, are looking at their nation and picking up their cues for whether they are in a zero-sum or a non-zero-sum relationship with a nation -- like, say, America, or any other nation -- human psychology is such that they use cues like: Do we feel we're being respected?
Because, you know, historically, if you're not being respected, you're probably not going to wind up in a non-zero-sum, mutually profitable relationship with people.
So, we need to be aware of what kind of signals we're sending out.
And some of this, again, is in the realm of political work.
If there's one thing I can encourage everyone to do, politicians, religious leaders, and us, it would be what I call "expanding the moral imagination" -- that is to say, your ability to put yourself in the shoes of people in very different circumstances.
This is not the same as compassion, but it's conducive to compassion. It opens the channels for compassion.
And I'm afraid we have another good news/bad news story, which is that the moral imagination is part of human nature.
That's good, but again we tend to deploy it selectively.
Once we define somebody as an enemy, we have trouble putting ourselves in their shoes, just naturally.
So, if you want to take a particularly hard case for an American: somebody in Iran who is burning an American flag, and you see them on TV.
Well, the average American is going to resist the moral exercise of putting themselves in that person's head and is going to resist the idea that they have much in common with that person.
And if you tell them, "Well, they think America disrespects them and even wants to dominate them, and they hate America.
Has there ever been somebody who disrespected you so much that you kind of hated them briefly"?
You know, they'll resist that comparison and that's natural, that's human.
And, similarly, the person in Iran: when you try to humanize somebody in America who said that Islam is evil, they'll have trouble with that.
So, it's a very difficult thing to get people to expand the moral imagination to a place it doesn't naturally go.
I think it's worth the trouble because, again, it just helps us to understand.
If you want to reduce the number of people who are burning flags, it helps to understand what makes them do it.
And I think it's good moral exercise.
I would say here is where religious leaders come in, because religious leaders are good at reframing issues for people, at harnessing the emotional centers of the brain to get people to alter their awareness and reframe the way they think.
I mean, religious leaders are kind of in the inspiration business.
It's their great calling right now, to get people all around the world better at expanding their moral imaginations, appreciating that in so many ways they're in the same boat.
I would just sum up the way things look, at least from this secular perspective, as far as compassion and the golden rule go, by saying that it's good news that compassion and the golden rule are in some sense built into human nature.
It's unfortunate that they tend to be selectively deployed.
And it's going to take real work to change that.
But, nobody ever said that doing God's work was going to be easy. Thanks.
(Applause)
I've got apparently 18 minutes to convince you that history has a direction, an arrow; that in some fundamental sense, it's good; that the arrow points to something positive.
Now, when the TED people first approached me about giving this upbeat talk -- (Laughter) -- that was before the cartoon of Muhammad had triggered global rioting.
It was before the avian flu had reached Europe.
It was before Hamas had won the Palestinian election, eliciting various counter-measures by Israel.
And to be honest, if I had known when I was asked to give this upbeat talk that even as I was giving the upbeat talk, the apocalypse would be unfolding -- (Laughter) -- I might have said, "Is it okay if I talk about something else?"
But I didn't, OK. So we're here. I'll do what I can. I'll do what I can.
I've got to warn you: the sense in which my worldview is upbeat has always been kind of subtle, sometimes even elusive.
(Laughter) The sense in which I can be uplifting and inspiring -- I mean, there's always been a kind of a certain grim dimension to the way I try to uplift, so if grim inspiration -- (Laughter) -- if grim inspiration is not a contradiction in terms, that is, I'm afraid, the most you can hope for. OK, today -- that's if I succeed.
I'll see what I can do. OK?
Now, in one sense, the claim that history has a direction is not that controversial.
If you're just talking about social structure, OK, clearly that's gotten more complex a little over the last 10,000 years -- has reached higher and higher levels.
And in fact, that's actually sustaining a long-standing trend that predates human beings, OK, that biological evolution was doing for us.
Because what happened in the beginning, this stuff encases itself in a cell, then cells start hanging out together in societies.
Eventually they get so close, they form multicellular organisms, then you get complex multicellular organisms; they form societies.
But then at some point, one of these multicellular organisms does something completely amazing with this stuff, which is it launches a whole second kind of evolution: cultural evolution.
And amazingly, that evolution sustains the trajectory that biological evolution had established toward greater complexity.
By cultural evolution we mean the evolution of ideas.
A lot of you have heard the term "memes." The evolution of technology, I pay a lot of attention to, so, you know, one of the first things you got was a little hand axe.
Generations go by, somebody says, hey, why don't we put it on a stick?
(Laughter) Just absolutely delights the little ones.
Next best thing to a video game.
This may not seem to impress, but technological evolution is progressive, so another 10, 20,000 years, and armaments technology takes you here.
(Laughter) Impressive. And the rate of technological evolution speeds up, so a mere quarter of a century after this, you get this, OK.
(Laughter) And this.
(Laughter) I'm sorry -- it was a cheap laugh, but I wanted to find a way to transition back to this idea of the unfolding apocalypse, and I thought that might do it.
(Applause) So, what threatens to happen with this unfolding apocalypse is the collapse of global social organization.
Now, first let me remind you how much work it took to get us where we are, to be on the brink of true global social organization.
Originally, you had the most complex societies, the hunter-gatherer village.
Stonehenge is the remnant of a chiefdom, which is what you get with the invention of agriculture: multi-village polity with centralized rule.
With the invention of writing, you start getting cities. This is blurry. I kind of like that because it makes it look like a one-celled organism and reminds you how many levels organic organization has already moved through to get to this point. And then you get to, you know, you get empires.
I want to stress, you know, social organization can transcend political bounds.
This is the Silk Road connecting the Chinese Empire and the Roman Empire.
So you had social complexity spanning the whole continent, even if no polity did similarly. Today, you've got nation states.
Point is: there's obviously collaboration and organization going on beyond national bounds.
This is actually just a picture of the earth at night, and I'm just putting it up because I think it's pretty.
Does kind of convey the sense that this is an integrated system.
Now, I explained this growth of complexity by reference to something called "non-zero sumness."
Assuming that a few of you did not do the assigned reading, very quickly, the key idea is the distinction between zero-sum games, in which correlations are inverse: always a winner and a loser.
Non-zero-sum games in which correlations can be positive, OK.
So like in tennis, usually it's win-lose; it always adds up to zero-zero-sum. But if you're playing doubles, the person on your side of the net, they're in the same boat as you, so you're playing a non-zero-sum game with them.
A lot of forms of non-zero-sum behavior in the realm of economics and so on in everyday life often leads to cooperation.
The argument I make is basically that, well, non-zero-sum games have always been part of life.
You have them in hunter-gatherer societies, but then through technological evolution, new forms of technology arise that facilitate or encourage the playing of non-zero-sum games, involving more people over larger territory.
Social structure adapts to accommodate this possibility and to harness this productive potential, so you get cities, you know, and you get all the non-zero-sum games you don't think about that are being played across the world.
Like, have you ever thought when you buy a car, how many people on how many different continents contributed to the manufacture of that car? Those are people in effect you're playing a non-zero-sum game with.
I mean, there are certainly plenty of them around.
Now, this sounds like an intrinsically upbeat worldview in a way, because when you think of non-zero, you think win-win, you know, that's good. Well, there are a few reasons that actually it's not intrinsically upbeat.
First of all, it can accommodate; it doesn't deny the existence of inequality exploitation war.
But there's a more fundamental reason that it's not intrinsically upbeat, because a non-zero-sum game, all it tells you for sure is that the fortunes will be correlated for better or worse.
It doesn't necessarily predict a win-win outcome.
So, in a way, the question is: on what grounds am I upbeat at all about history? And the answer is, first of all, on balance I would say people have played their games to more win-win outcomes than lose-lose outcomes. On balance, I think history is a net positive in the non-zero-sum game department.
And a testament to this is the thing that most amazes me, most impresses me, and most uplifts me, which is that there is a moral dimension to history; there is a moral arrow. We have seen moral progress over time.
2,500 years ago, members of one Greek city-state considered members of another Greek city-state subhuman and treated them that way. And then this moral revolution arrived, and they decided that actually, no, Greeks are human beings.
It's just the Persians who aren't fully human and don't deserve to be treated very nicely.
But this was progress -- you know, give them credit. And now today, we've seen more progress. I think -- I hope -- most people here would say that all people everywhere are human beings, deserve to be treated decently, unless they do something horrendous, regardless of race or religion.
And you have to read your ancient history to realize what a revolution that has been, OK. This was not a prevalent view, few thousand years ago, and I attribute it to this non-zero-sum dynamic.
I think that's the reason there is as much tolerance toward nationalities, ethnicities, religions as there is today. If you asked me, you know, why am I not in favor of bombing Japan, well, I'm only half-joking when I say they built my car.
We have this non-zero-sum relationship, and I think that does lead to a kind of a tolerance to the extent that you realize that someone else's welfare is positively correlated with yours -- you're more likely to cut them a break.
I kind of think this is a kind of a business-class morality.
Unfortunately, I don't fly trans-Atlantic business class often enough to know, or any other kind of business class really, but I assume that in business class, you don't hear many expressions of, you know, bigotry about racial groups or ethnic groups, because the people who are flying trans-Atlantic business class are doing business with all these people; they're making money off all these people. And I really do think that, in that sense at least, capitalism has been a constructive force, and more fundamentally, it's a non-zero-sumness that has been a constructive force in expanding people's realm of moral awareness. I think the non-zero-sum dynamic, which is not only economic by any means -- it's not always commerce -- but it has driven us to the verge of a moral truth, which is the fundamental equality of everyone. It has done that.
As it has moved global, moved us toward a global level of social organization, it has driven us toward moral truth.
Now, back to the unfolding apocalypse.
And you may wonder, OK, that's all fine, sounds great -- moral direction in history -- but what about this so-called clash of civilizations? Well, first of all, I would emphasize that it fits into the non-zero-sum framework, OK. If you look at the relationship between the so-called Muslim world and Western world -- two terms I don't like, but can't really avoid; in such a short span of time, they're efficient if nothing else -- it is non-zero-sum. And by that I mean, if people in the Muslim world get more hateful, more resentful, less happy with their place in the world, it'll be bad for the West. If they get more happy, it'll be good for the West.
So that is a non-zero-sum dynamic.
And I would say the non-zero-sum dynamic is only going to grow more intense over time because of technological trends, but more intense in a kind of negative way.
It's the downside correlation of their fortunes that will become more and more possible.
And one reason is because of something I call the "growing lethality of hatred."
More and more, it's possible for grassroots hatred abroad to manifest itself in the form of organized violence on American soil.
And that's pretty new, and I think it's probably going to get a lot worse -- this capacity -- because of trends in information technology, in technologies that can be used for purposes of munitions like biotechnology and nanotechnology.
We may be hearing more about that today.
And there's something I worry about especially, which is that this dynamic will lead to a kind of a feedback cycle that puts us on a slippery slope.
What I have in mind is: terrorism happens here; we overreact to it.
That, you know, we're not sufficiently surgical in our retaliation leads to more hatred abroad, more terrorism.
We overreact because being human, we feel like retaliating, and it gets worse and worse and worse.
You could call this the positive feedback of negative vibes, but I think in something so spooky, we really shouldn't have the word positive there at all, even in a technical sense.
So let's call it the death spiral of negativity.
(Laughter) I assure you if it happens, at the end, both the West and the Muslim world will have suffered.
So, what do we do? Well, first of all, we can do a lot more with arms control, the international regulation of dangerous technologies.
I have a whole global governance sermon that I will spare you right now, because I don't think that's going to be enough anyway, although it's essential.
I think we're going to have to have a major round of moral progress in the world.
I think you're just going to have to see less hatred among groups, less bigotry, and, you know, racial groups, religious groups, whatever.
I've got to admit I feel silly saying that.
It sounds so kind of Pollyannaish. I feel like Rodney King, you know, saying, why can't we all just get along?
But hey, I don't really see any alternative, given the way I read the situation.
There's going to have to be moral progress.
There's going to have to be a lessening of the amount of hatred in the world, given how dangerous it's becoming.
In my defense, I'd say, as naive as this may sound, it's ultimately grounded in cynicism.
That is to say -- (Laughter) -- thank you, thank you. That is to say, remember: my whole view of morality is that it boils down to self-interest.
It's when people's fortunes are correlated.
It's when your welfare conduces to mine, that I decide, oh yeah, I'm all in favor of your welfare. That's what's responsible for this growth of this moral progress so far, and I'm saying we once again have a correlation of fortunes, and if people respond to it intelligently, we will see the development of tolerance and so on -- the norms that we need, you know.
We will see the further evolution of this kind of business-class morality.
So, these two things, you know, if they get people's attention and drive home the positive correlation and people do what's in their self-interests, which is further the moral evolution, then they could actually have a constructive effect.
And that's why I lump growing lethality of hatred and death spiral of negativity under the general rubric, reasons to be cheerful.
(Laughter) Doing the best I can, OK.
(Laughter) I never called myself Mr. Uplift.
I'm just doing what I can here.
(Laughter) Now, launching a moral revolution has got to be hard, right?
I mean, what do you do?
And I think the answer is a lot of different people are going to have to do a lot of different things.
We all start where we are. Speaking as an American who has children whose security 10, 20, 30 years down the road I worry about -- what I personally want to start out doing is figuring out why so many people around the world hate us, OK.
I think that's a worthy research project myself.
I also like it because it's an intrinsically kind of morally redeeming exercise.
Because to understand why somebody in a very different culture does something -- somebody you're kind of viewing as alien, who's doing things you consider strange in a culture you consider strange -- to really understand why they do the things they do is a morally redeeming accomplishment, because you've got to relate their experience to yours.
To really understand it, you've got to say, "Oh, I get it.
So when they feel resentful, it's kind of like the way I feel resentful when this happens, and for somewhat the same reasons." That's true understanding.
And I think that is an expansion of your moral compass when you manage to do that.
It's especially hard to do when people hate you, OK, because you don't really, in a sense, want to completely understand why people hate you.
I mean, you want to hear the reason, but you don't want to be able to relate to it.
You don't want it to make sense, right? (Laughter) You don't want to say, "Well, yeah, I can kind of understand how a human being in those circumstances would hate the country I live in." That's not a pleasant thing, but I think it's something that we're going to have to get used to and work on. Now, I want to stress that to understand, you know -- there are people who don't like this whole business of understanding the grassroots, the root causes of things; they don't want to know why people hate us. I want to understand it.
The reason you're trying to understand why they hate us, is to get them to quit hating us. The idea when you go through this moral exercise of really coming to appreciate their humanity and better understand them, is part of an effort to get them to appreciate your humanity in the long run.
I think it's the first step toward that. That's the long-term goal.
There are people who worry about this, and in fact, I, myself, apparently, was denounced on national TV a couple of nights ago because of an op-ed I'd written.
It was kind of along these lines, and the allegation was that I have, quote, "affection for terrorists."
Now, the good news is that the person who said it was Ann Coulter.
(Laughter) (Applause) I mean, if you've got to have an enemy, do make it Ann Coulter.
(Laughter) But it's not a crazy concern, OK, because understanding behavior can lead to a kind of empathy, and it can make it a little harder to deliver tough love, and so on.
But I think we're a lot closer to erring on the side of not comprehending the situation clearly enough, than in comprehending it so clearly that we just can't, you know, get the army out to kill terrorists.
So I'm not really worried about it. So -- (Laughter) -- I mean, we're going to have to work on a lot of fronts, but if we succeed -- if we succeed -- then once again, non-zero-sumness and the recognition of non-zero-sum dynamics will have forced us to a higher moral level.
And a kind of saving higher moral level, something that kind of literally saves the world.
If you look at the word "salvation" in the Bible -- the Christian usage that we're familiar with -- saving souls, that people go to heaven -- that's actually a latecomer.
The original meaning of the word "salvation" in the Bible is about saving the social system.
"Yahweh is our Savior" means "He has saved the nation of Israel," which at the time, was a pretty high-level social organization.
Now, social organization has reached the global level, and I guess, if there's good news I can say I'm bringing you, it's just that all the salvation of the world requires is the intelligent pursuit of self-interests in a disciplined and careful way.
It's going to be hard. I say we give it a shot anyway because we've just come too far to screw it up now.
Thanks.
(Applause)
I believe that there are new, hidden tensions that are actually happening between people and institutions -- institutions that are the institutions that people inhabit in their daily life: schools, hospitals, workplaces, factories, offices, etc.
And something that I see happening is something that I would like to call a sort of "democratization of intimacy."
And what do I mean by that?
I mean that what people are doing is, in fact, they are sort of, with their communication channels, they are breaking an imposed isolation that these institutions are imposing on them.
How are they doing this? They're doing it in a very simple way, by calling their mom from work, by IMing from their office to their friends, by texting under the desk.
The pictures that you're seeing behind me are people that I visited in the last few months.
And I asked them to come along with the person they communicate with most.
And somebody brought a boyfriend, somebody a father.
One young woman brought her grandfather.
For 20 years, I've been looking at how people use channels such as email, the mobile phone, texting, etc.
What we're actually going to see is that, fundamentally, people are communicating on a regular basis with five, six, seven of their most intimate sphere.
Now, lets take some data. Facebook.
Recently some sociologists from Facebook -- Facebook is the channel that you would expect is the most enlargening of all channels.
And an average user, said Cameron Marlow, from Facebook, has about 120 friends.
But he actually talks to, has two-way exchanges with, about four to six people on a regular base, depending on his gender.
Academic research on instant messaging also shows 100 people on buddy lists, but fundamentally people chat with two, three, four -- anyway, less than five.
My own research on cellphones and voice calls shows that 80 percent of the calls are actually made to four people. 80 percent.
And when you go to Skype, it's down to two people.
A lot of sociologists actually are quite disappointed.
I mean, I've been a bit disappointed sometimes when I saw this data and all this deployment, just for five people.
And some sociologists actually feel that it's a closure, it's a cocooning, that we're disengaging from the public.
And I would actually, I would like to show you that if we actually look at who is doing it, and from where they're doing it, actually there is an incredible social transformation.
There are three stories that I think are quite good examples.
The first gentleman, he's a baker.
And so he starts working every morning at four o'clock in the morning.
And around eight o'clock he sort of sneaks away from his oven, cleans his hands from the flour and calls his wife.
He just wants to wish her a good day, because that's the start of her day.
And I've heard this story a number of times.
A young factory worker who works night shifts, who manages to sneak away from the factory floor, where there is CCTV by the way, and find a corner, where at 11 o'clock at night he can call his girlfriend and just say goodnight.
Or a mother who, at four o'clock, suddenly manages to find a corner in the toilet to check that her children are safely home.
Then there is another couple, there is a Brazilian couple.
They've lived in Italy for a number of years.
They Skype with their families a few times a week.
But once a fortnight, they actually put the computer on their dining table, pull out the webcam and actually have dinner with their family in Sao Paulo. And they have a big event of it.
And I heard this story the first time a couple of years ago from a very modest family of immigrants from Kosovo in Switzerland.
They had set up a big screen in their living room, and every morning they had breakfast with their grandmother.
But Danny Miller, who is a very good anthropologist who is working on Filipina migrant women who leave their children back in the Philippines, was telling me about how much parenting is going on through Skype, and how much these mothers are engaged with their children through Skype.
And then there is the third couple. They are two friends.
They chat to each other every day, a few times a day actually.
And finally, finally, they've managed to put instant messaging on their computers at work.
And now, obviously, they have it open.
Whenever they have a moment they chat to each other.
And this is exactly what we've been seeing with teenagers and kids doing it in school, under the table, and texting under the table to their friends.
So, none of these cases are unique.
I mean, I could tell you hundreds of them.
But what is really exceptional is the setting.
So, think of the three settings I've talked to you about: factory, migration, office.
But it could be in a school, it could be an administration, it could be a hospital.
Three settings that, if we just step back 15 years, if you just think back 15 years, when you clocked in, when you clocked in to an office, when you clocked in to a factory, there was no contact for the whole duration of the time, there was no contact with your private sphere.
If you were lucky there was a public phone hanging in the corridor or somewhere.
If you were in management, oh, that was a different story.
Maybe you had a direct line.
If you were not, you maybe had to go through an operator.
But basically, when you walked into those buildings, the private sphere was left behind you.
And this has become such a norm of our professional lives, such a norm and such an expectation.
And it had nothing to do with technical capability.
The phones were there. But the expectation was once you moved in there your commitment was fully to the task at hand, fully to the people around you.
That was where the focus had to be.
And this has become such a cultural norm that we actually school our children for them to be capable to do this cleavage.
If you think nursery, kindergarten, first years of school are just dedicated to take away the children, to make them used to staying long hours away from their family.
And then the school enacts perfectly well.
It mimics perfectly all the rituals that we will find in offices: rituals of entry, rituals of exit, the schedules, the uniforms in this country, things that identify you, team-building activities, team building that will allow you to basically be with a random group of kids, or a random group of people that you will have to be with for a number of time.
And of course, the major thing: learn to pay attention, to concentrate and focus your attention.
This only started about 150 years ago.
It only started with the birth of modern bureaucracy, and of industrial revolution.
When people basically had to go somewhere else to work and carry out the work.
And when with modern bureaucracy there was a very rational approach, where there was a clear distinction between the private sphere and the public sphere.
So, until then, basically people were living on top of their trades.
They were living on top of the land they were laboring.
They were living on top of the workshops where they were working.
And if you think, it's permeated our whole culture, even our cities.
If you think of medieval cities, medieval cities the boroughs all have the names of the guilds and professions that lived there.
Now we have sprawling residential suburbias that are well distinct from production areas and commercial areas.
And actually, over these 150 years, there has been a very clear class system that also has emerged.
So the lower the status of the job and of the person carrying out, the more removed he would be from his personal sphere.
People have taken this amazing possibility of actually being in contact all through the day or in all types of situations.
And they are doing it massively.
The Pew Institute, which produces good data on a regular basis on, for instance, in the States, says that -- and I think that this number is conservative -- 50 percent of anybody with email access at work is actually doing private email from his office.
I really think that the number is conservative.
In my own research, we saw that the peak for private email is actually 11 o'clock in the morning, whatever the country.
75 percent of people admit doing private conversations from work on their mobile phones.
100 percent are using text.
The point is that this re-appropriation of the personal sphere is not terribly successful with all institutions.
I'm always surprised the U.S. Army sociologists are discussing of the impact for instance, of soldiers in Iraq having daily contact with their families.
But there are many institutions that are actually blocking this access.
And every day, every single day, I read news that makes me cringe, like a $15 fine to kids in Texas, for using, every time they take out their mobile phone in school.
Immediate dismissal to bus drivers in New York, if seen with a mobile phone in a hand.
Companies blocking access to IM or to Facebook.
Behind issues of security and safety, which have always been the arguments for social control, in fact what is going on is that these institutions are trying to decide who, in fact, has a right to self determine their attention, to decide, whether they should, or not, be isolated.
And they are actually trying to block, in a certain sense, this movement of a greater possibility of intimacy.
A few years ago, my eyes were opened to the dark side of the construction industry.
In 2006, young Qatari students took me to go and see the migrant worker camps.
And since then I've followed the unfolding issue of worker rights.
In the last six months, more than 300 skyscrapers in the UAE have been put on hold or canceled.
Behind the headlines that lay behind these buildings is the fate of the often-indentured construction worker.
1.1 million of them.
Mainly Indian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan and Nepalese, these laborers risk everything to make money for their families back home.
They pay a middle-man thousands of dollars to be there.
And when they arrive, they find themselves in labor camps with no water, no air conditioning, and their passports taken away.
While it's easy to point the finger at local officials and higher authorities, 99 percent of these people are hired by the private sector, and so therefore we're equally, if not more, accountable.
Groups like Buildsafe UAE have emerged, but the numbers are simply overwhelming.
In August 2008, UAE public officials noted that 40 percent of the country's 1,098 labor camps had violated minimum health and fire safety regulations.
And last summer, more than 10,000 workers protested for the non-payment of wages, for the poor quality of food, and inadequate housing.
And then the financial collapse happened.
When the contractors have gone bust, as they've been overleveraged like everyone else, the difference is everything goes missing, documentation, passports, and tickets home for these workers.
Currently, right now, thousands of workers are abandoned.
There is no way back home.
And there is no way, and no proof of arrival.
These are the boom-and-bust refugees.
The question is, as a building professional, as an architect, an engineer, as a developer, if you know this is going on, as we go to the sights every single week, are you complacent or complicit in the human rights violations?
So let's forget your environmental footprint.
Let's think about your ethical footprint.
What good is it to build a zero-carbon, energy efficient complex, when the labor producing this architectural gem is unethical at best?
Now, recently I've been told I've been taking the high road.
But, quite frankly, on this issue, there is no other road.
So let's not forget who is really paying the price of this financial collapse.
And that as we worry about our next job in the office, the next design that we can get, to keep our workers.
Let's not forget these men, who are truly dying to work.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to talk to you today about the scale of the scientific effort that goes into making the headlines you see in the paper.
Headlines that look like this when they have to do with climate change; and like this when they have to do with air quality or smog.
They're two branches of the same field of atmospheric science.
Recently, the headlines looked like this when the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC, put out their report on the state of understanding of the atmospheric system.
That report was written by 620 scientists from 40 countries.
They wrote almost 1,000 pages on the topic, and all of those pages were reviewed by another 400-plus scientists and reviewers from 113 countries.
It's a big community; such a big community, in fact, that our annual gathering is the largest scientific meeting in the world.
Over 15,000 scientists go to San Francisco every year for that.
Every one of those scientists is in a research group, and every research group studies a wide variety of topics.
For us at Cambridge, it's as varied as the El Niño Oscillation, which affects weather and climate, to the assimilation of satellite data, to emissions from crops that produce biofuels, which is what I study.
And in each one of these research areas, of which there are even more, there are PhD students, like me, and we study incredibly narrow topics, things as narrow as a few processes or a few molecules.
And one of the molecules I study is called isoprene, which is here.
It's a small organic molecule.
The weight of a paper clip is approximately equal to 900 zeta-illion -- 10 to the 21st -- molecules of isoprene.
But despite its very small weight, enough of it is emitted into the atmosphere every year to equal the weight of all the people on the planet.
It's a huge amount of stuff. It's equal to the weight of methane.
And because it's so much stuff, it's really important for the atmospheric system.
Because it's important to the atmospheric system, we go to all lengths to study this thing.
We blow it up and look at the pieces.
This is the EUPHORE Smog Chamber in Spain.
Atmospheric explosions, or full combustion, takes about 15,000 times longer than what happens in your car.
But still, we look at the pieces.
We run enormous models on supercomputers; this is what I happen to do.
Our models have hundreds of thousands of grid boxes calculating hundreds of variables each, on minute timescales.
It takes weeks to perform our integrations, and we perform dozens of integrations in order to understand what's happening.
We also fly all over the world looking for this thing.
I recently joined a field campaign in Malaysia -- there are others.
We found a global atmospheric watchtower there in the middle of the rainforest, and hung hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of scientific equipment off this tower, to look for isoprene and other things while we were there.
This is the tower in the middle of the rainforest from above, and the tower from below.
On part of that field campaign we even brought an aircraft with us.
And this plane, the model BAe-146, which was run by FAAM, normally flies 120 to 130 people, so maybe you took a similar aircraft to get here today.
But we didn't just fly it.
We were flying at 100 meters above the top of the canopy to measure this molecule -- incredibly dangerous stuff.
We have to fly at a special incline to make the measurements; we hire military and test pilots to do the maneuvering; we need special flight clearance.
As you come around the banks in these valleys, the forces can get up to two Gs; the scientists must be completely harnessed in in order to make measurements while on board.
So as you can imagine, the inside of the aircraft doesn't look like one you'd take on vacation.
We do all this to understand the chemistry of one molecule.
And when one student like me has some sort of inclination or understanding about that molecule, they write one scientific paper on the subject.
And out of that field campaign we'll probably get a few dozen papers on a few dozen processes or molecules.
As a body of knowledge builds up, it will form one subsection, or one sub-subsection, of an assessment like the IPCC, although we have others.
And each one of the 11 chapters of the IPCC has six to ten subsections.
So you can imagine the scale of the effort.
In each one of the assessments we write, we always tag on a summary, and the summary is written for a non-scientific audience.
And we hand that summary to journalists and policy makers in order to make headlines like these.
Thank you very much.
I started my journey 30 years ago.
And I worked in mines. And I realized that this was a world unseen.
And I wanted, through color and large format cameras and very large prints, to make a body of work that somehow became symbols of our use of the landscape, how we use the land.
And to me this was a key component that somehow, through this medium of photography, which allows us to contemplate these landscapes, that I thought photography was perfectly suited to doing this type of work.
And after 17 years of photographing large industrial landscapes, it occurred to me that oil is underpinning the scale and speed.
Because that is what has changed, is the speed at which we're taking all our resources.
And so then I went out to develop a whole series on the landscape of oil.
And what I want to do is to kind of map an arc that there is extraction, where we're taking it from the ground, refinement. And that's one chapter.
The other chapter that I wanted to look at was how we use it -- our cities, our cars, our motorcultures, where people gather around the vehicle as a celebration.
And then the third one is this idea of the end of oil, this entropic end, where all of our parts of cars, our tires, oil filters, helicopters, planes -- where are the landscapes where all of that stuff ends up?
And to me, again, photography was a way in which I could explore and research the world, and find those places.
And another idea that I had as well, that was brought forward by an ecologist -- he basically did a calculation where he took one liter of gas and said, well, how much carbon it would take, and how much organic material?
It was 23 metric tons for one liter.
So whenever I fill up my gas, I think of that liter, and how much carbon.
And I know that oil comes from the ocean and phytoplankton, but he did the calculations for our Earth and what it had to do to produce that amount of energy.
From the photosynthetic growth, it would take 500 years of that growth to produce what we use, the 30 billion barrels we use per year.
And that also brought me to the fact that this poses such a risk to our society.
Looking at 30 billion per year, we look at our two largest suppliers, Saudi Arabia and now Canada, with its dirty oil.
And together they only form about 15 years of supply.
The whole world, at 1.2 trillion estimated reserves, only gives us about 45 years.
So, it's not a question of if, but a question of when peak oil will come upon us.
So, to me, using photography -- and I feel that all of us need to now begin to really take the task of using our talents, our ways of thinking, to begin to deal with what I think is probably one of the most challenging issues of our time, how to deal with our energy crisis.
And I would like to say that, on the other side of it, 30, 40 years from now, the children that I have, I can look at them and say, "We did everything we possibly, humanly could do, to begin to mitigate this, what I feel is one of the most important and critical moments in our time. Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to ask you, what do these three people have in common?
Well, you probably recognize the first person.
I'm sure you're all avid "American Idol" watchers.
But you might not recognize Aydah Al Jahani, who is a contestant, indeed a finalist, in the Poet of the Millions competition, which is broadcast out of Abu Dhabi, and seen throughout the Arab world.
In this contest people have to write and recite original poetry, in the Nabati form of poetry, which is the traditional Bedouin form.
And Lima Sahar was a finalist in the Afghan Star singing competition.
Now, before I go any further, yes, I know it all began with "Britain's Got Talent."
But my point in discussing this is to show you -- I hope I'll be able to show you how these merit-based competitions, with equal access to everyone, with the winner selected via voting by SMS, are changing tribal societies.
And I'm going to focus on Afghanistan and the Arab world with the UAE, how they're changing tribal societies, not by introducing Western ideas, but by being integrated into the language in those places.
It all begins with enjoyment.
Video: We are late to watch "Afghan Star."
We are going to watch "Afghan Star." We are late.
We are running late.
We must go to watch "Afghan Star."
Cynthia Schneider: These programs are reaching incredibly deeply into society.
In Afghanistan, people go to extraordinary lengths to be able to watch this program.
And you don't necessarily have to have your own TV set.
People watch it all over the country also in public places.
But it goes beyond watching, because also, part of this is campaigning.
People become so engaged that they have volunteers, just like political volunteers anyway, who fan out over the countryside, campaigning for their candidate.
Contestants also put themselves forward.
Now, of course there is a certain degree of ethnic allegiance, but not entirely.
Because each year the winner has come from a different tribal group.
This has opened up the door, particularly for women.
And in the last season there were two women in the finalists.
One of them, Lima Sahar, is a Pashtun from Kandahar, a very conservative part of the country.
And here she relates, in the documentary film "Afghan Star," how her friends urged her not to do this and told her that she was leaving them for democracy.
But she also confides that she knows that members of the Taliban are actually SMS-ing votes in for her.
Aydah Al Jahnani also took risks and put herself out, to compete in the Poet of the Millions competition.
I have to say, her husband backed her from the start.
But her tribe and family urged her not to compete and were very much against it.
But, once she started to win, then they got behind her again.
It turns out that competition and winning is a universal human value.
And she's out there.
Her poetry is about women, and the life of women in society.
So just by presenting herself and being in competition with men -- this shows the voting on the program -- it sets a very important example for young women -- these are young women in the audience of the program -- in Abu Dhabi, but also people in the viewing audience.
Now you'd think that "American Idol" would introduce a measure of Americanization.
But actually, just the opposite is happening.
By using this engaging popular format for traditional, local culture, it actually, in the Gulf, is precipitating a revival of interest in Nabati poetry, also in traditional dress and dance and music.
And for Afghanistan, where the Taliban banned music for many years, it is reintroducing their traditional music.
They don't sing pop songs, they sing Afghan music.
And they also have learned how to lose gracefully, without avenging the winner.
(Laughter) No small thing.
And the final, sort of, formulation of this "American Idol" format, which has just appeared in Afghanistan, is a new program called "The Candidate."
And in this program, people present policy platforms that are then voted on.
Many of them are too young to run for president, but by putting the issues out there, they are influencing the presidential race.
So for me, the substance of things unseen is how reality TV is driving reality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We grew up interacting with the physical objects around us.
There are an enormous number of them that we use every day.
Unlike most of our computing devices, these objects are much more fun to use.
When you talk about objects, one other thing automatically comes attached to that thing, and that is gestures: how we manipulate these objects, how we use these objects in everyday life.
We use gestures not only to interact with these objects, but we also use them to interact with each other.
A gesture of "Namaste!", maybe, to respect someone, or maybe, in India I don't need to teach a kid that this means "four runs" in cricket.
It comes as a part of our everyday learning.
So, I am very interested, from the beginning, how our knowledge about everyday objects and gestures, and how we use these objects, can be leveraged to our interactions with the digital world.
Rather than using a keyboard and mouse, why can I not use my computer in the same way that I interact in the physical world?
So, I started this exploration around eight years back, and it literally started with a mouse on my desk.
Rather than using it for my computer, I actually opened it.
Most of you might be aware that, in those days, the mouse used to come with a ball inside, and there were two rollers that actually guide the computer where the ball is moving, and, accordingly, where the mouse is moving.
So, I was interested in these two rollers, and I actually wanted more, so I borrowed another mouse from a friend -- never returned to him -- and I now had four rollers.
Interestingly, what I did with these rollers is, basically, I took them off of these mouses and then put them in one line.
It had some strings and pulleys and some springs.
What I got is basically a gesture-interface device that actually acts as a motion-sensing device made for two dollars.
So, here, whatever movement I do in my physical world is actually replicated inside the digital world just using this small device that I made, around eight years back, in 2000.
Because I was interested in integrating these two worlds, I thought of sticky notes.
I thought, "Why can I not connect the normal interface of a physical sticky note to the digital world?"
A message written on a sticky note to my mom, on paper, can come to an SMS, or maybe a meeting reminder automatically syncs with my digital calendar -- a to-do list that automatically syncs with you.
But you can also search in the digital world, or maybe you can write a query, saying, "What is Dr. Smith's address?"
and this small system actually prints it out -- so it actually acts like a paper input-output system, just made out of paper.
In another exploration, I thought of making a pen that can draw in three dimensions.
So, I implemented this pen that can help designers and architects not only think in three dimensions, but they can actually draw, so that it's more intuitive to use that way.
Then I thought, "Why not make a Google Map, but in the physical world?"
Rather than typing a keyword to find something, I put my objects on top of it.
If I put a boarding pass, it will show me where the flight gate is.
A coffee cup will show where you can find more coffee, or where you can trash the cup.
So, these were some of the earlier explorations I did because the goal was to connect these two worlds seamlessly.
Among all these experiments, there was one thing in common: I was trying to bring a part of the physical world to the digital world.
I was taking some part of the objects, or any of the intuitiveness of real life, and bringing them to the digital world, because the goal was to make our computing interfaces more intuitive.
But then I realized that we humans are not actually interested in computing.
What we are interested in is information.
We want to know about things.
We want to know about dynamic things going around.
So I thought, around last year -- in the beginning of the last year -- I started thinking, "Why can I not take this approach in the reverse way?"
Maybe, "How about I take my digital world and paint the physical world with that digital information?"
Because pixels are actually, right now, confined in these rectangular devices that fit in our pockets.
Why can I not remove this confine and take that to my everyday objects, everyday life so that I don't need to learn the new language for interacting with those pixels?
So, in order to realize this dream, I actually thought of putting a big-size projector on my head.
I think that's why this is called a head-mounted projector, isn't it?
I took it very literally, and took my bike helmet, put a little cut over there so that the projector actually fits nicely.
So now, what I can do -- I can augment the world around me with this digital information.
But later, I realized that I actually wanted to interact with those digital pixels, also.
So I put a small camera over there that acts as a digital eye.
Later, we moved to a much better, consumer-oriented pendant version of that, that many of you now know as the SixthSense device.
But the most interesting thing about this particular technology is that you can carry your digital world with you wherever you go.
You can start using any surface, any wall around you, as an interface.
The camera is actually tracking all your gestures.
Whatever you're doing with your hands, it's understanding that gesture.
And, actually, if you see, there are some color markers that in the beginning version we are using with it.
You can start painting on any wall.
You stop by a wall, and start painting on that wall.
But we are not only tracking one finger, here.
We are giving you the freedom of using all of both of your hands, so you can actually use both of your hands to zoom into or zoom out of a map just by pinching all present.
The camera is actually doing -- just, getting all the images -- is doing the edge recognition and also the color recognition and so many other small algorithms are going on inside.
So, technically, it's a little bit complex, but it gives you an output which is more intuitive to use, in some sense.
But I'm more excited that you can actually take it outside.
Rather than getting your camera out of your pocket, you can just do the gesture of taking a photo, and it takes a photo for you.
(Applause) Thank you.
And later I can find a wall, anywhere, and start browsing those photos or maybe, "OK, I want to modify this photo a little bit and send it as an email to a friend."
So, we are looking for an era where computing will actually merge with the physical world.
And, of course, if you don't have any surface, you can start using your palm for simple operations.
Here, I'm dialing a phone number just using my hand.
The camera is actually not only understanding your hand movements, but, interestingly, is also able to understand what objects you are holding in your hand.
For example, in this case, the book cover is matched with so many thousands, or maybe millions of books online, and checking out which book it is.
Once it has that information, it finds out more reviews about that, or maybe New York Times has a sound overview on that, so you can actually hear, on a physical book, a review as sound.
(Video) Famous talk at Harvard University -- This was Obama's visit last week to MIT.
(Video) And particularly I want to thank two outstanding MIT -- Pranav Mistry: So, I was seeing the live [video] of his talk, outside, on just a newspaper.
Your newspaper will show you live weather information rather than having it updated.
You have to check your computer in order to do that, right?
(Applause) When I'm going back, I can just use my boarding pass to check how much my flight has been delayed, because at that particular time, I'm not feeling like opening my iPhone, and checking out a particular icon.
And I think this technology will not only change the way -- (Laughter) Yes.
It will change the way we interact with people, also, not only the physical world.
The fun part is, I'm going to the Boston metro, and playing a pong game inside the train on the ground, right?
(Laughter) And I think the imagination is the only limit of what you can think of when this kind of technology merges with real life.
But many of you argue, actually, that all of our work is not only about physical objects.
We actually do lots of accounting and paper editing and all those kinds of things; what about that?
And many of you are excited about the next-generation tablet computers to come out in the market.
So, rather than waiting for that, I actually made my own, just using a piece of paper.
So, what I did here is remove the camera -- All the webcam cameras have a microphone inside the camera.
I removed the microphone from that, and then just pinched that -- like I just made a clip out of the microphone -- and clipped that to a piece of paper, any paper that you found around.
So now the sound of the touch is getting me when exactly I'm touching the paper.
But the camera is actually tracking where my fingers are moving.
You can of course watch movies.
(Video) Good afternoon. My name is Russell, and I am a Wilderness Explorer in Tribe 54."
PM: And you can of course play games.
(Car engine) Here, the camera is actually understanding how you're holding the paper and playing a car-racing game.
(Applause) Many of you already must have thought, OK, you can browse.
Yeah. Of course you can browse to any websites or you can do all sorts of computing on a piece of paper wherever you need it.
So, more interestingly, I'm interested in how we can take that in a more dynamic way.
When I come back to my desk, I can just pinch that information back to my desktop so I can use my full-size computer.
(Applause) And why only computers? We can just play with papers.
Paper world is interesting to play with.
Here, I'm taking a part of a document, and putting over here a second part from a second place, and I'm actually modifying the information that I have over there.
Yeah. And I say, "OK, this looks nice, let me print it out, that thing."
So I now have a print-out of that thing.
So the workflow is more intuitive, the way we used to do it maybe 20 years back, rather than now switching between these two worlds.
So, as a last thought, I think that integrating information to everyday objects will not only help us to get rid of the digital divide, the gap between these two worlds, but will also help us, in some way, to stay human, to be more connected to our physical world.
And it will actually help us not end up being machines sitting in front of other machines.
That's all. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So, Pranav, first of all, you're a genius.
This is incredible, really.
What are you doing with this? Is there a company being planned?
Or is this research forever, or what?
Pranav Mistry: So, there are lots of companies, sponsor companies of Media Lab interested in taking this ahead in one or another way.
Companies like mobile-phone operators want to take this in a different way than the NGOs in India, thinking, "Why can we only have 'Sixth Sense'?
We should have a 'Fifth Sense' for missing-sense people who cannot speak.
This technology can be used for them to speak out in a different way maybe a speaker system."
CA: What are your own plans? Are you staying at MIT, or are you going to do something with this?
PM: I'm trying to make this more available to people so that anyone can develop their own SixthSense device, because the hardware is actually not that hard to manufacture or hard to make your own.
We will provide all the open source software for them, maybe starting next month.
CA: Open source? Wow.
(Applause) CA: Are you going to come back to India with some of this, at some point?
PM: Yeah. Yes, yes, of course.
CA: What are your plans? MIT? India?
How are you going to split your time going forward?
PM: There is a lot of energy here. Lots of learning.
All of this work that you have seen is all about my learning in India.
And now, if you see, it's more about the cost-effectiveness: this system costs you $300 compared to the $20,000 surface tables, or anything like that.
Or maybe even the $2 mouse gesture system at that time was costing around $5,000?
I showed that, at a conference, to President Abdul Kalam, at that time, and then he said, "OK, we should use this in Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for some use of that."
So I'm excited about how I can bring the technology to the masses rather than just keeping that technology in the lab environment.
(Applause) CA: Based on the people we've seen at TED, I would say you're truly one of the two or three best inventors in the world right now.
It's an honor to have you at TED.
Thank you so much.
That's fantastic.
(Applause)
¿Hablas español? Parlez-vous français? 你会说中文吗？ If you answered, "sí," "oui," or "会" and you're watching this in English, chances are you belong to the world's bilingual and multilingual majority.
And besides having an easier time traveling or watching movies without subtitles, knowing two or more languages means that your brain may actually look and work differently than those of your monolingual friends.
So what does it really mean to know a language?
Language ability is typically measured in two active parts, speaking and writing, and two passive parts, listening and reading.
While a balanced bilingual has near equal abilities across the board in two languages, most bilinguals around the world know and use their languages in varying proportions.
And depending on their situation and how they acquired each language, they can be classified into three general types.
For example, let's take Gabriella, whose family immigrates to the US from Peru when she's two-years old.
As a compound bilingual, Gabriella develops two linguistic codes simultaneously, with a single set of concepts, learning both English and Spanish as she begins to process the world around her.
Her teenage brother, on the other hand, might be a coordinate bilingual, working with two sets of concepts, learning English in school, while continuing to speak Spanish at home and with friends.
Finally, Gabriella's parents are likely to be subordinate bilinguals who learn a secondary language by filtering it through their primary language.
Because all types of bilingual people can become fully proficient in a language regardless of accent or pronunciation, the difference may not be apparent to a casual observer.
But recent advances in brain imaging technology have given neurolinguists a glimpse into how specific aspects of language learning affect the bilingual brain.
It's well known that the brain's left hemisphere is more dominant and analytical in logical processes, while the right hemisphere is more active in emotional and social ones, though this is a matter of degree, not an absolute split.
The fact that language involves both types of functions while lateralization develops gradually with age, has lead to the critical period hypothesis.
According to this theory, children learn languages more easily because the plasticity of their developing brains lets them use both hemispheres in language acquisition, while in most adults, language is lateralized to one hemisphere, usually the left.
If this is true, learning a language in childhood may give you a more holistic grasp of its social and emotional contexts.
Conversely, recent research showed that people who learned a second language in adulthood exhibit less emotional bias and a more rational approach when confronting problems in the second language than in their native one.
But regardless of when you acquire additional languages, being multilingual gives your brain some remarkable advantages.
Some of these are even visible, such as higher density of the grey matter that contains most of your brain's neurons and synapses, and more activity in certain regions when engaging a second language.
The heightened workout a bilingual brain receives throughout its life can also help delay the onset of diseases, like Alzheimer's and dementia by as much as five years.
The idea of major cognitive benefits to bilingualism may seem intuitive now, but it would have surprised earlier experts.
Before the 1960s, bilingualism was considered a handicap that slowed a child's development by forcing them to spend too much energy distinguishing between languages, a view based largely on flawed studies.
And while a more recent study did show that reaction times and errors increase for some bilingual students in cross-language tests, it also showed that the effort and attention needed to switch between languages triggered more activity in, and potentially strengthened, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
This is the part of the brain that plays a large role in executive function, problem solving, switching between tasks, and focusing while filtering out irrelevant information.
So, while bilingualism may not necessarily make you smarter, it does make your brain more healthy, complex and actively engaged, and even if you didn't have the good fortune of learning a second language as a child, it's never too late to do yourself a favor and make the linguistic leap from, "Hello," to, "Hola," "Bonjour" or "你好’s" because when it comes to our brains a little exercise can go a long way.
To understand the business of mythology and what a Chief Belief Officer is supposed to do, you have to hear a story of Ganesha, the elephant-headed god who is the scribe of storytellers, and his brother, the athletic warlord of the gods, Kartikeya.
The two brothers one day decided to go on a race, three times around the world.
Kartikeya leapt on his peacock and flew around the continents and the mountains and the oceans.
He went around once, he went around twice, he went around thrice.
But his brother, Ganesha, simply walked around his parents once, twice, thrice, and said, "I won."
"How come?" said Kartikeya.
And Ganesha said, "You went around 'the world.' I went around 'my world.'" What matters more?
If you understand the difference between 'the world' and 'my world,' you understand the difference between logos and mythos.
'The world' is objective, logical, universal, factual, scientific.
'My world' is subjective.
It's emotional. It's personal.
It's perceptions, thoughts, feelings, dreams.
It is the belief system that we carry.
It's the myth that we live in.
'The world' tells us how the world functions, how the sun rises, how we are born.
'My world' tells us why the sun rises, why we were born.
Every culture is trying to understand itself: "Why do we exist?"
And every culture comes up with its own understanding of life, its own customized version of mythology.
Culture is a reaction to nature, and this understanding of our ancestors is transmitted generation from generation in the form of stories, symbols and rituals, which are always indifferent to rationality.
And so, when you study it, you realize that different people of the world have a different understanding of the world.
Different people see things differently -- different viewpoints.
There is my world and there is your world, and my world is always better than your world, because my world, you see, is rational and yours is superstition.
Yours is faith.
Yours is illogical.
This is the root of the clash of civilizations.
It took place, once, in 326 B.C.
on the banks of a river called the Indus, now in Pakistan.
This river lends itself to India's name.
India. Indus.
Alexander, a young Macedonian, met there what he called a "gymnosophist," which means "the naked, wise man."
We don't know who he was.
Perhaps he was a Jain monk, like Bahubali over here, the Gomateshwara Bahubali whose image is not far from Mysore.
Or perhaps he was just a yogi who was sitting on a rock, staring at the sky and the sun and the moon.
Alexander asked, "What are you doing?"
and the gymnosophist answered, "I'm experiencing nothingness."
Then the gymnosophist asked, "What are you doing?"
and Alexander said, "I am conquering the world."
And they both laughed.
Each one thought that the other was a fool.
The gymnosophist said, "Why is he conquering the world?
It's pointless."
And Alexander thought, "Why is he sitting around, doing nothing?
What a waste of a life."
To understand this difference in viewpoints, we have to understand the subjective truth of Alexander -- his myth, and the mythology that constructed it.
Alexander's mother, his parents, his teacher Aristotle told him the story of Homer's "Iliad."
They told him of a great hero called Achilles, who, when he participated in battle, victory was assured, but when he withdrew from the battle, defeat was inevitable.
"Achilles was a man who could shape history, a man of destiny, and this is what you should be, Alexander."
That's what he heard.
"What should you not be?
You should not be Sisyphus, who rolls a rock up a mountain all day only to find the boulder rolled down at night.
Don't live a life which is monotonous, mediocre, meaningless.
Be spectacular! -- like the Greek heroes, like Jason, who went across the sea with the Argonauts and fetched the Golden Fleece.
Be spectacular like Theseus, who entered the labyrinth and killed the bull-headed Minotaur.
When you play in a race, win! -- because when you win, the exhilaration of victory is the closest you will come to the ambrosia of the gods."
Because, you see, the Greeks believed you live only once, and when you die, you have to cross the River Styx.
And if you have lived an extraordinary life, you will be welcomed to Elysium, or what the French call "Champs-Élysées" -- (Laughter) -- the heaven of the heroes.
But these are not the stories that the gymnosophist heard.
He heard a very different story.
He heard of a man called Bharat, after whom India is called Bhārata.
Bharat also conquered the world.
And then he went to the top-most peak of the greatest mountain of the center of the world called Meru.
And he wanted to hoist his flag to say, "I was here first."
But when he reached the mountain peak, he found the peak covered with countless flags of world-conquerors before him, each one claiming "'I was here first' ...
that's what I thought until I came here."
And suddenly, in this canvas of infinity, Bharat felt insignificant.
This was the mythology of the gymnosophist.
You see, he had heroes, like Ram -- Raghupati Ram and Krishna, Govinda Hari.
But they were not two characters on two different adventures.
They were two lifetimes of the same hero.
When the Ramayana ends the Mahabharata begins.
When Ram dies, Krishna is born.
When Krishna dies, eventually he will be back as Ram.
You see, the Indians also had a river that separates the land of the living from the land of the dead.
But you don't cross it once.
You go to and fro endlessly.
It was called the Vaitarani.
You go again and again and again.
Because, you see, nothing lasts forever in India, not even death.
And so, you have these grand rituals where great images of mother goddesses are built and worshiped for 10 days ...
And what do you do at the end of 10 days?
You dunk it in the river.
Because it has to end.
And next year, she will come back.
What goes around always comes around, and this rule applies not just to man, but also the gods.
You see, the gods have to come back again and again and again as Ram, as Krishna.
Not only do they live infinite lives, but the same life is lived infinite times till you get to the point of it all.
"Groundhog Day."
(Laughter) Two different mythologies.
Which is right?
Two different mythologies, two different ways of looking at the world.
One linear, one cyclical.
One believes this is the one and only life.
The other believes this is one of many lives.
And so, the denominator of Alexander's life was one.
So, the value of his life was the sum total of his achievements.
The denominator of the gymnosophist's life was infinity.
So, no matter what he did, it was always zero.
And I believe it is this mythological paradigm that inspired Indian mathematicians to discover the number zero.
Who knows?
And that brings us to the mythology of business.
If Alexander's belief influenced his behavior, if the gymnosophist's belief influences his behavior, then it was bound to influence the business they were in.
You see, what is business but the result of how the market behaves and how the organization behaves?
And if you look at cultures around the world, all you have to do is understand the mythology and you will see how they behave and how they do business.
Take a look.
If you live only once, in one-life cultures around the world, you will see an obsession with binary logic, absolute truth, standardization, absoluteness, linear patterns in design.
But if you look at cultures which have cyclical and based on infinite lives, you will see a comfort with fuzzy logic, with opinion, with contextual thinking, with everything is relative, sort of -- (Laughter) mostly.
(Laughter) You look at art. Look at the ballerina, how linear she is in her performance.
And then look at the Indian classical dancer, the Kuchipudi dancer, the Bharatanatyam dancer, curvaceous.
(Laughter) And then look at business.
Standard business model: vision, mission, values, processes.
Sounds very much like the journey through the wilderness to the promised land, with the commandments held by the leader.
And if you comply, you will go to heaven.
But in India there is no "the" promised land.
There are many promised lands, depending on your station in society, depending on your stage of life.
You see, businesses are not run as institutions, by the idiosyncrasies of individuals.
It's always about taste.
It's always about my taste.
You see, Indian music, for example, does not have the concept of harmony.
There is no orchestra conductor.
There is one performer standing there, and everybody follows.
And you can never replicate that performance twice.
It is not about documentation and contract.
It's about conversation and faith.
It's not about compliance. It's about setting, getting the job done, by bending or breaking the rules -- just look at your Indian people around here, you'll see them smile; they know what it is.
(Laughter) And then look at people who have done business in India, you'll see the exasperation on their faces.
(Laughter) (Applause) You see, this is what India is today. The ground reality is based on a cyclical world view.
So, it's rapidly changing, highly diverse, chaotic, ambiguous, unpredictable.
And people are okay with it.
And then globalization is taking place.
The demands of modern institutional thinking is coming in.
Which is rooted in one-life culture.
And a clash is going to take place, like on the banks of the Indus.
It is bound to happen.
I have personally experienced it. I'm trained as a medical doctor.
I did not want to study surgery. Don't ask me why.
I love mythology too much.
I wanted to learn mythology. But there is nowhere you can study.
So, I had to teach it to myself.
And mythology does not pay, well, until now.
(Laughter) So, I had to take up a job. And I worked in the pharma industry.
And I worked in the healthcare industry.
And I worked as a marketing guy, and a sales guy, and a knowledge guy, and a content guy, and a training guy.
I even was a business consultant, doing strategies and tactics.
And I would see the exasperation between my American and European colleagues, when they were dealing with India.
Example: Please tell us the process to invoice hospitals.
Step A. Step B. Step C. Mostly.
(Laughter) How do you parameterize "mostly"?
How do you put it in a nice little software? You can't.
I would give my viewpoints to people.
But nobody was interested in listening to it, you see, until I met Kishore Biyani of the Future group.
You see, he has established the largest retail chain, called Big Bazaar.
And there are more than 200 formats, across 50 cities and towns of India.
And he was dealing with diverse and dynamic markets.
And he knew very intuitively, that best practices, developed in Japan and China and Europe and America will not work in India.
He knew that institutional thinking doesn't work in India. Individual thinking does.
He had an intuitive understanding of the mythic structure of India.
So, he had asked me to be the Chief Belief Officer, and said, "All I want to do is align belief."
Sounds so simple.
But belief is not measurable.
You can't measure it. You can't manage it.
So, how do you construct belief?
How do you enhance the sensitivity of people to Indian-ness.
Even if you are Indian, it is not very explicit, it is not very obvious.
So, I tried to work on the standard model of culture, which is, develop stories, symbols and rituals.
And I will share one of the rituals with you.
You see it is based on the Hindu ritual of Darshan.
Hindus don't have the concept of commandments.
So, there is nothing right or wrong in what you do in life.
So, you're not really sure how you stand in front of God.
So, when you go to the temple, all you seek is an audience with God.
You want to see God.
And you want God to see you, and hence the gods have very large eyes, large unblinking eyes, sometimes made of silver, so they look at you.
Because you don't know whether you're right or wrong, and so all you seek is divine empathy.
"Just know where I came from, why I did the Jugaad."
(Laughter) "Why did I do the setting, why I don't care for the processes. Just understand me, please."
And based on this, we created a ritual for leaders.
After a leader completes his training and is about to take over the store, we blindfold him, we surround him with the stakeholders, the customer, his family, his team, his boss.
You read out his KRA, his KPI, you give him the keys, and then you remove the blindfold.
And invariably, you see a tear, because the penny has dropped.
He realizes that to succeed, he does not have to be a "professional," he does not have to cut out his emotions, he has to include all these people in his world to succeed, to make them happy, to make the boss happy, to make everyone happy.
The customer is happy, because the customer is God.
That sensitivity is what we need. Once this belief enters, behavior will happen, business will happen.
And it has.
So, then we come back to Alexander and to the gymnosophist.
And everybody asks me, "Which is the better way, this way or that way?"
And it's a very dangerous question, because it leads you to the path of fundamentalism and violence.
So, I will not answer the question.
What I will give you is an Indian answer, the Indian head-shake.
(Laughter) (Applause) Depending on the context, depending on the outcome, choose your paradigm.
You see, because both the paradigms are human constructions.
They are cultural creations, not natural phenomena.
And so the next time you meet someone, a stranger, one request: Understand that you live in the subjective truth, and so does he.
Understand it.
And when you understand it you will discover something spectacular.
You will discover that within infinite myths lies the eternal truth.
Who sees it all?
Varuna has but a thousand eyes.
Indra, a hundred.
You and I, only two.
Thank you. Namaste.
(Applause)
One day a one-eyed monkey came into the forest.
Under a tree she saw a woman meditating furiously.
The one-eyed monkey recognized the woman, a Sekhri.
She was the wife of an even more famous Brahmin.
To watch her better, the one-eyed monkey climbed onto the tree.
Just then, with a loud bang, the heavens opened. (Claps) And the god Indra jumped into the clearing.
Indra saw the woman, a Sekhri.
Ah-hah.
The woman paid him no heed.
So, Indra, attracted, threw her onto the floor, and proceeded to rape her.
Then Indra disappeared. (Clap! Clap!) And the woman's husband, the Brahmin, appeared.
He realized at once what had happened.
So, he petitioned the higher gods so that he may have justice.
So, the god Vishnu arrived.
"Are there any witnesses?"
"Just a one-eyed monkey," said the Brahmin.
Now, the one-eyed monkey really wanted for the woman, a Sekhri, to get justice, so she retold events exactly as they had happened.
Vishnu gave his judgment.
"The god Indra has sinned, in that he has sinned against ... a Brahmin.
May he be called to wash away his sins."
So, Indra arrived, and performed the sacrifice of the horse.
And so it transpired that a horse was killed, a god was made sin-free, a Brahmin's ego was appeased, a woman ... was ruined, and a one-eyed monkey was left ...
very confused at what we humans call justice.
In India there is a rape every three minutes.
In India, only 25 percent of rapes come to a police station, and of these 25 percent that come to a police station, convictions are only in four percent of the cases.
That's a lot of women who don't get justice.
And it's not only about women.
Look around you, look at your own countries.
There is a certain pattern in who gets charged with crimes.
If you're in Australia, it's mostly aboriginals who are in jail.
If you're in India, it's either Muslims or Adivasis, our tribals, the Naxalites.
If you're in the U.S., it's mostly the blacks.
There is a trend here.
And the Brahmins and the gods, like in my story, always get to tell their truth as The Truth.
So, have we all become one-eyed -- two-eyed instead of one-eyed -- monkeys?
Have we stopped seeing injustice?
Good morning.
(Applause) You know, I have told this story close to 550 times, in audiences in 40 countries, to school students, to black-tie dinners at the Smithsonian, and so on and so forth, and every time it hits something.
Now, if I were to go into the same crowd and say, "I want to lecture you about justice and injustice," they would say, "Thank you very much, we have other things to do."
And that is the astonishing power of art.
Art can go through where other things can't.
You can't have barriers, because it breaks through your prejudices, breaks through everything that you have as your mask, that says, "I am this, I am that, I am that."
No. It breaks through those.
And it reaches somewhere where other things don't.
And in a world where attitudes are so difficult to change, we need a language that reaches through.
Hitler knew it; he used Wagner to make all the Nazis feel wonderful and Aryan.
And Mr. Berlusconi knows it, as he sits atop this huge empire of media and television and so on and so forth.
And all of the wonderful creative minds who are in all the advertising agencies, and who help corporate sell us things we absolutely don't require, they also know the power of the arts.
For me it came very early.
When I was a young child, my mother, who was a choreographer, came upon a phenomenon that worried her.
It was a phenomenon where young brides were committing suicide in rural Gujarat, because they were being forced to bring more and more money for their in-laws' families.
And she created a dance piece which then Prime Minister Nehru saw.
He came to talk to her and said, "What is this about?"
She told him and he set out the first inquiry into what today we call Dowry Dance.
Imagine a dance piece for the first inquiry into something that even today kills thousands of women.
Many years later, when I was working with the director Peter Brook in "The Mahabharata" playing this feisty feminine feminist called Draupadi, I had similar experiences.
Big fat black mamas in the Bronx used to come and say, "Hey girl, that's it!"
And then these trendy young things in the Sorbonne would say, "Madame Draupadi, on n'est pas feministe, mais ça? Ça!"
And then aboriginal women in Africa would come and say, "This is it!"
And I thought, "This is what we need, as a language."
We had somebody from public health. And Devdutt also mentioned public health.
Well, millions of people around the world die of waterborne disease every year.
And that's because there is no clean water to drink, or in countries like India, people don't know that they need to soap their hands before defecation.
So, what do they do?
They drink the water they know is dirty, they get cholera, they get diarrhea, they get jaundice and they die.
And governments have not been able to provide clean water.
They try and build it. They try and build pipelines; it doesn't happen.
And the MNCs give them machines that they cannot afford.
So what do you do? Do you let them die?
Well, somebody had a great idea.
And it was a simple idea. It was an idea that could not profit anybody but would help health in every field.
Most houses in Asia and India have a cotton garment.
And it was discovered, and WHO endorses this, that a clean cotton garment folded eight times over, can reduce bacteria up to 80 percent from water sieved through.
So, why aren't governments blaring this on television?
Why isn't it on every poster across the third world?
Because there is no profit in it.
Because nobody can get a kickback.
But it still needs to get to people.
And here is one of the ways we get it to people.
[Video] Woman: Then get me one of those fancy water purifiers.
Man: You know how expensive those are.
I have a solution that requires neither machine, nor wood, nor cooking gas.
Woman: What solution?
Man: Listen, go fetch that cotton sari you have.
Boy: Grand-dad, tell me the solution please.
Man: I will tell all of you. Just wait.
Woman: Here father. (Man: Is it clean?) Woman: Yes, of course.
Man: Then do as I tell you. Fold the sari into eight folds.
Woman: All right, father.
Man: And you, you count that she does it right. (Boy: All right, grand-dad.) Man: One, two, three, four folds we make.
All the germs from the water we take.
Chorus: One, two, three, four folds we make.
All the germs from the water we take.
Five, six, seven, eight folds we make.
Our drinking water safe we make.
Five, six, seven, eight folds we make.
Our drinking water safe we make.
Woman: Here, father, your eight-times folded cotton sari.
Man: So this is the cotton sari.
And through this we will have clean water.
(Applause) I think it's safe to say that all of us here are deeply concerned about the escalating violence in our daily lives.
While universities are trying to devise courses in conflict resolution, and governments are trying to stop skirmishes at borders, we are surrounded by violence, whether it's road rage, or whether it's domestic violence, whether it's a teacher beating up a student and killing her because she hasn't done her homework, it's everywhere.
So, why are we not doing something to actually attend that problem on a day to day basis?
What are we doing to try and make children and young people realize that violence is something that we indulge in, that we can stop, and that there are other ways of actually taking violence, taking anger, taking frustrations into different things that do not harm other people.
Well, here is one such way.
(Video) (Laughs) You are peaceful people.
Your parents were peaceful people.
Your grandparents were peaceful people.
So much peace in one place?
How could it be otherwise?
(Music) But, what if ...
Yes. What if ...
One little gene in you has been trying to get through?
From your beginnings in Africa, through each generation, may be passed on to you, in your creation. It's a secret urge, hiding deep in you.
And if it's in you, then it's in me too. Oh, dear.
It's what made you smack your baby brother, stamp on a cockroach, scratch your mother.
It's the feeling that wells up from deep inside, when your husband comes home drunk and you wanna tan his hide.
Want to kill that cyclist on the way to work, and string up your cousin 'cause she's such a jerk. Oh, dear.
And as for outsiders, white, black or brown, tar and feather them, and whip them out of town.
It's that little gene. It's small and it's mean.
Too small for detection, it's your built-in protection.
Adrenaline, kill. It'll give you the will.
Yes, you'd better face it 'cause you can't displace it.
You're V-I-O-L-E-N-T.
Cause you're either a victim, or on top, like me.
Goodbye, Abraham Lincoln.
Goodbye, Mahatma Gandhi.
Goodbye, Martin Luther King.
Hello, gangs from this neighborhood killing gangs from that neighborhood.
Hello governments of rich countries selling arms to governments of poor countries who can't even afford to give them food.
Hello civilization. Hello, 21st century.
Look what we've ...
look what they've done.
(Applause) Mainstream art, cinema, has been used across the world to talk about social issues.
A few years ago we had a film called Rang De Basanti, which suddenly spawned thousands of young people wanting to volunteer for social change.
In Venezuela, one of the most popular soap operas has a heroine called Crystal.
And when, onscreen, Crystal got breast cancer, 75,000 more young women went to have mammographies done.
And of course, "The Vagina Monologues" we know about.
And there are stand-up comics who are talking about racial issues, about ethnic issues.
So, why is it, that if we think that we all agree that we need a better world, we need a more just world, why is it that we are not using the one language that has consistently showed us that we can break down barriers, that we can reach people?
What I need to say to the planners of the world, the governments, the strategists is, "You have treated the arts as the cherry on the cake.
It needs to be the yeast."
Because, any future planning, if 2048 is when we want to get there, unless the arts are put with the scientists, with the economists, with all those who prepare for the future, badly, we're not going to get there.
And unless this is actually internalized, it won't happen.
So, what is it that we require? What is it that we need?
We need to break down our vision of what planners are, of what the correct way of a path is.
And to say all these years of trying to make a better world, and we have failed.
There are more people being raped. There are more wars.
There are more people dying of simple things.
So, something has got to give. And that is what I want.
Can I have my last audio track please?
Once there was a princess who whistled beautifully.
(Whistling) Her father the king said, "Don't whistle."
Her mother the queen said, "Hai, don't whistle."
But the princess continued whistling.
(Whistling) The years went by and the princess grew up into a beautiful young woman, who whistled even more beautifully.
(Whistling) Her father the king said, "Who will marry a whistling princess?"
Her mother the queen said, "Who will marry a whistling princess?"
But the king had an idea.
He announced a Swayamvara.
He invited all the princes to come and defeat his daughter at whistling.
"Whoever defeats my daughter shall have half my kingdom and her hand in marriage!"
Soon the palace filled with princes whistling.
(Whistling) Some whistled badly.
Some whistled well.
But nobody could defeat the princess.
"Now what shall we do?" said the king.
"Now what shall we do?" said the queen.
But the princess said, "Father, Mother, don't worry.
I have an idea. I am going to go to each of these young men and I am going to ask them if they defeated correctly.
And if somebody answers, that shall be my wish."
So she went up to each and said, "Do you accept that I have defeated you?"
And they said, "Me? Defeated by a woman?
No way, that's impossible! No no no no no! That's not possible."
Till finally one prince said, "Princess, I accept, you have defeated me."
"Uh-huh ..." she said.
"Father, mother, this man shall be my wife."
(Whistling) Thank you.
(Applause)
As an Indian, and now as a politician and a government minister, I've become rather concerned about the hype we're hearing about our own country, all this talk about India becoming a world leader, even the next superpower.
In fact, the American publishers of my book, "The Elephant, The Tiger and the Cell Phone," added a gratuitous subtitle saying, "India: The next 21st-century power."
And I just don't think that's what India's all about, or should be all about.
Indeed, what worries me is the entire notion of world leadership seems to me terribly archaic.
It's redolent of James Bond movies and Kipling ballads.
After all, what constitutes a world leader?
If it's population, we're on course to top the charts.
We will overtake China by 2034.
Is it military strength? Well, we have the world's fourth largest army.
Is it nuclear capacity? We know we have that.
The Americans have even recognized it, in an agreement.
Is it the economy? Well, we have now the fifth-largest economy in the world in purchasing power parity terms.
And we continue to grow. When the rest of the world took a beating last year, we grew at 6.7 percent.
But, somehow, none of that adds up to me, to what I think India really can aim to contribute in the world, in this part of the 21st century.
And so I wondered, could what the future beckons for India to be all about be a combination of these things allied to something else, the power of example, the attraction of India's culture, what, in other words, people like to call "soft power."
Soft power is a concept invented by a Harvard academic, Joseph Nye, a friend of mine.
And, very simply, and I'm really cutting it short because of the time limits here, it's essentially the ability of a country to attract others because of its culture, its political values, its foreign policies.
And, you know, lots of countries do this. He was writing initially about the States, but we know the Alliance Francaise is all about French soft power, the British Council.
The Beijing Olympics were an exercise in Chinese soft power.
Americans have the Voice of America and the Fulbright scholarships.
But, the fact is, in fact, that probably Hollywood and MTV and McDonalds have done more for American soft power around the world than any specifically government activity.
So soft power is something that really emerges partly because of governments, but partly despite governments.
And in the information era we all live in today, what we might call the TED age, I'd say that countries are increasingly being judged by a global public that's been fed on an incessant diet of Internet news, of televised images, of cellphone videos, of email gossip.
In other words, all sorts of communication devices are telling us the stories of countries, whether or not the countries concerned want people to hear those stories.
Now, in this age, again, countries with access to multiple channels of communication and information have a particular advantage.
And of course they have more influence, sometimes, about how they're seen.
India has more all-news TV channels than any country in the world, in fact in most of the countries in this part of the world put together.
But, the fact still is that it's not just that.
In order to have soft power, you have to be connected.
One might argue that India has become an astonishingly connected country.
I think you've already heard the figures.
We've been selling 15 million cellphones a month.
Currently there are 509 million cellphones in Indian hands, in India.
And that makes us larger than the U.S. as a telephone market.
In fact, those 15 million cellphones are the most connections that any country, including the U.S. and China, has ever established in the history of telecommunications.
But, what perhaps some of you don't realize is how far we've come to get there.
You know, when I grew up in India, telephones were a rarity.
In fact, they were so rare that elected members of Parliament had the right to allocate 15 telephone lines as a favor to those they deemed worthy.
If you were lucky enough to be a wealthy businessman or an influential journalist, or a doctor or something, you might have a telephone.
But sometimes it just sat there.
I went to high school in Calcutta.
And we would look at this instrument sitting in the front foyer.
But half the time we would pick it up with an expectant look on our faces, there would be no dial tone.
If there was a dial tone and you dialed a number, the odds were two in three you wouldn't get the number you were intending to reach.
In fact the words "wrong number" were more popular than the word "Hello."
(Laughter) If you then wanted to connect to another city, let's say from Calcutta you wanted to call Delhi, you'd have to book something called a trunk call, and then sit by the phone all day, waiting for it to come through.
Or you could pay eight times the going rate for something called a lightning call.
But, lightning struck rather slowly in our country in those days, so, it was like about a half an hour for a lightning call to come through.
In fact, so woeful was our telephone service that a Member of Parliament stood up in 1984 and complained about this.
And the Then-Communications Minister replied in a lordly manner that in a developing country communications are a luxury, not a right, that the government had no obligation to provide better service, and if the honorable Member wasn't satisfied with his telephone, could he please return it, since there was an eight-year-long waiting list for telephones in India.
Now, fast-forward to today and this is what you see: the 15 million cell phones a month.
But what is most striking is who is carrying those cell phones.
You know, if you visit friends in the suburbs of Delhi, on the side streets you will find a fellow with a cart that looks like it was designed in the 16th century, wielding a coal-fired steam iron that might have been invented in the 18th century.
He's called an isthri wala. But he's carrying a 21st-century instrument.
He's carrying a cell phone because most incoming calls are free, and that's how he gets orders from the neighborhood, to know where to collect clothes to get them ironed.
The other day I was in Kerala, my home state, at the country farm of a friend, about 20 kilometers away from any place you'd consider urban.
And it was a hot day and he said, "Hey, would you like some fresh coconut water?"
And it's the best thing and the most nutritious and refreshing thing you can drink on a hot day in the tropics, so I said sure.
And he whipped out his cellphone, dialed the number, and a voice said, "I'm up here."
And right on top of the nearest coconut tree, with a hatchet in one hand and a cell phone in the other, was a local toddy tapper, who proceeded to bring down the coconuts for us to drink.
Fishermen are going out to sea and carrying their cell phones.
When they catch the fish they call all the market towns along the coast to find out where they get the best possible prices.
Farmers now, who used to have to spend half a day of backbreaking labor to find out if the market town was open, if the market was on, whether the product they'd harvested could be sold, what price they'd fetch.
They'd often send an eight year old boy all the way on this trudge to the market town to get that information and come back, then they'd load the cart.
Today they're saving half a day's labor with a two minute phone call.
So this empowerment of the underclass is the real result of India being connected.
And that transformation is part of where India is heading today.
But, of course that's not the only thing about India that's spreading.
You've got Bollywood. My attitude to Bollywood is best summarized in the tale of the two goats at a Bollywood garbage dump -- Mr. Shekhar Kapur, forgive me -- and they're chewing away on cans of celluloid discarded by a Bollywood studio.
And the first goat, chewing away, says, "You know, this film is not bad."
And the second goat says, "No, the book was better."
(Laughter) I usually tend to think that the book is usually better, but, having said that, the fact is that Bollywood is now taking a certain aspect of Indian-ness and Indian culture around the globe, not just in the Indian diaspora in the U.S. and the U.K., but to the screens of Arabs and Africans, of Senegalese and Syrians.
I've met a young man in New York whose illiterate mother in a village in Senegal takes a bus once a month to the capital city of Dakar, just to watch a Bollywood movie.
She can't understand the dialogue.
She's illiterate, so she can't read the French subtitles.
But these movies are made to be understood despite such handicaps, and she has a great time in the song and the dance and the action.
She goes away with stars in her eyes about India, as a result.
And this is happening more and more.
Afghanistan, we know what a serious security problem Afghanistan is for so many of us in the world.
India doesn't have a military mission there.
You know what was India's biggest asset in Afghanistan in the last seven years?
One simple fact: you couldn't try to call an Afghan at 8:30 in the evening.
Why? Because that was the moment when the Indian television soap opera, "Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi," dubbed into Dari, was telecast on Tolo T.V.
And it was the most popular television show in Afghan history.
Every Afghan family wanted to watch it.
They had to suspend functions at 8:30.
Weddings were reported to be interrupted so guests could cluster around the T.V. set, and then turn their attention back to the bride and groom.
Crime went up at 8:30. I have read a Reuters dispatch -- so this is not Indian propaganda, a British news agency -- about how robbers in the town of Musarri Sharif* stripped a vehicle of its windshield wipers, its hubcaps, its sideview mirrors, any moving part they could find, at 8:30, because the watchmen were busy watching the T.V. rather than minding the store.
And they scrawled on the windshield in a reference to the show's heroine, "Tulsi Zindabad": "Long live Tulsi."
(Laughter) That's soft power. And that is what India is developing through the "E" part of TED: its own entertainment industry.
The same is true, of course -- we don't have time for too many more examples -- but it's true of our music, of our dance, of our art, yoga, ayurveda, even Indian cuisine.
I mean, the proliferation of Indian restaurants since I first went abroad as a student, in the mid '70s, and what I see today, you can't go to a mid-size town in Europe or North America and not find an Indian restaurant. It may not be a very good one.
But, today in Britain, for example, Indian restaurants in Britain employ more people than the coal mining, ship building and iron and steel industries combined.
So the empire can strike back.
(Applause) But, with this increasing awareness of India, with yoga and ayurveda, and so on, with tales like Afghanistan, comes something vital in the information era, the sense that in today's world it's not the side of the bigger army that wins, it's the country that tells a better story that prevails.
And India is, and must remain, in my view, the land of the better story.
Stereotypes are changing. I mean, again, having gone to the U.S.
as a student in the mid '70s, I knew what the image of India was then, if there was an image at all.
Today, people in Silicon Valley and elsewhere speak of the IITs, the Indian Institutes of Technology with the same reverence they used to accord to MIT.
This can sometimes have unintended consequences. OK.
I had a friend, a history major like me, who was accosted at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam, by an anxiously perspiring European saying, "You're Indian, you're Indian! Can you help me fix my laptop?"
(Laughter) We've gone from the image of India as land of fakirs lying on beds of nails, and snake charmers with the Indian rope trick, to the image of India as a land of mathematical geniuses, computer wizards, software gurus.
But that too is transforming the Indian story around the world.
But, there is something more substantive to that.
The story rests on a fundamental platform of political pluralism.
It's a civilizational story to begin with.
Because India has been an open society for millennia.
India gave refuge to the Jews, fleeing the destruction of the first temple by the Babylonians, and said thereafter by the Romans.
In fact, legend has is that when Doubting Thomas, the Apostle, Saint Thomas, landed on the shores of Kerala, my home state, somewhere around 52 A.D., he was welcomed on shore by a flute-playing Jewish girl.
And to this day remains the only Jewish diaspora in the history of the Jewish people, which has never encountered a single incident of anti-semitism.
(Applause) That's the Indian story.
Islam came peacefully to the south, slightly more differently complicated history in the north.
But all of these religions have found a place and a welcome home in India.
You know, we just celebrated, this year, our general elections, the biggest exercise in democratic franchise in human history.
And the next one will be even bigger, because our voting population keeps growing by 20 million a year.
But, the fact is that the last elections, five years ago, gave the world extraordinary phenomenon of an election being won by a woman political leader of Italian origin and Roman Catholic faith, Sonia Gandhi, who then made way for a Sikh, Mohan Singh, to be sworn in as Prime Minister by a Muslim, President Abdul Kalam, in a country 81 percent Hindu.
(Applause) This is India, and of course it's all the more striking because it was four years later that we all applauded the U.S., the oldest democracy in the modern world, more than 220 years of free and fair elections, which took till last year to elect a president or a vice president who wasn't white, male or Christian.
So, maybe -- oh sorry, he is Christian, I beg your pardon -- and he is male, but he isn't white.
All the others have been all those three.
(Laughter) All his predecessors have been all those three, and that's the point I was trying to make.
(Laughter) But, the issue is that when I talked about that example, it's not just about talking about India, it's not propaganda.
Because ultimately, that electoral outcome had nothing to do with the rest of the world.
It was essentially India being itself.
And ultimately, it seems to me, that always works better than propaganda.
Governments aren't very good at telling stories.
But people see a society for what it is, and that, it seems to me, is what ultimately will make a difference in today's information era, in today's TED age.
So India now is no longer the nationalism of ethnicity or language or religion, because we have every ethnicity known to mankind, practically, we've every religion know to mankind, with the possible exception of Shintoism, though that has some Hindu elements somewhere.
We have 23 official languages that are recognized in our Constitution.
And those of you who cashed your money here might be surprised to see how many scripts there are on the rupee note, spelling out the denominations.
We've got all of that.
We don't even have geography uniting us, because the natural geography of the subcontinent framed by the mountains and the sea was hacked by the partition with Pakistan in 1947.
In fact, you can't even take the name of the country for granted, because the name "India" comes from the river Indus, which flows in Pakistan.
But, the whole point is that India is the nationalism of an idea.
It's the idea of an ever-ever-land, emerging from an ancient civilization, united by a shared history, but sustained, above all, by pluralist democracy.
That is a 21st-century story as well as an ancient one.
And it's the nationalism of an idea that essentially says you can endure differences of caste, creed, color, culture, cuisine, custom and costume, consonant, for that matter, and still rally around a consensus.
And the consensus is of a very simple principle, that in a diverse plural democracy like India you don't really have to agree on everything all the time, so long as you agree on the ground rules of how you will disagree.
The great success story of India, a country that so many learned scholars and journalists assumed would disintegrate, in the '50s and '60s, is that it managed to maintain consensus on how to survive without consensus.
Now, that is the India that is emerging into the 21st century.
And I do want to make the point that if there is anything worth celebrating about India, it isn't military muscle, economic power.
All of that is necessary, but we still have huge amounts of problems to overcome.
Somebody said we are super poor, and we are also super power.
We can't really be both of those.
We have to overcome our poverty. We have to deal with the hardware of development, the ports, the roads, the airports, all the infrastructural things we need to do, and the software of development, the human capital, the need for the ordinary person in India to be able to have a couple of square meals a day, to be able to send his or her children to a decent school, and to aspire to work a job that will give them opportunities in their lives that can transform themselves.
But, it's all taking place, this great adventure of conquering those challenges, those real challenges which none of us can pretend don't exist.
But, it's all taking place in an open society, in a rich and diverse and plural civilization, in one that is determined to liberate and fulfill the creative energies of its people.
That's why India belongs at TED, and that's why TED belongs in India.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
You know, one of the intense pleasures of travel and one of the delights of ethnographic research is the opportunity to live amongst those who have not forgotten the old ways, who still feel their past in the wind, touch it in stones polished by rain, taste it in the bitter leaves of plants.
Just to know that Jaguar shamans still journey beyond the Milky Way, or the myths of the Inuit elders still resonate with meaning, or that in the Himalaya, the Buddhists still pursue the breath of the Dharma, is to really remember the central revelation of anthropology, and that is the idea that the world in which we live does not exist in some absolute sense, but is just one model of reality, the consequence of one particular set of adaptive choices that our lineage made, albeit successfully, many generations ago.
And of course, we all share the same adaptive imperatives.
We're all born. We all bring our children into the world.
We go through initiation rites.
We have to deal with the inexorable separation of death, so it shouldn't surprise us that we all sing, we all dance, we all have art.
But what's interesting is the unique cadence of the song, the rhythm of the dance in every culture.
And whether it is the Penan in the forests of Borneo, or the Voodoo acolytes in Haiti, or the warriors in the Kaisut desert of Northern Kenya, the Curandero in the mountains of the Andes, or a caravanserai in the middle of the Sahara -- this is incidentally the fellow that I traveled into the desert with a month ago -- or indeed a yak herder in the slopes of Qomolangma, Everest, the goddess mother of the world.
All of these peoples teach us that there are other ways of being, other ways of thinking, other ways of orienting yourself in the Earth.
And this is an idea, if you think about it, can only fill you with hope.
Now, together the myriad cultures of the world make up a web of spiritual life and cultural life that envelops the planet, and is as important to the well-being of the planet as indeed is the biological web of life that you know as a biosphere.
And you might think of this cultural web of life as being an ethnosphere, and you might define the ethnosphere as being the sum total of all thoughts and dreams, myths, ideas, inspirations, intuitions brought into being by the human imagination since the dawn of consciousness.
The ethnosphere is humanity's great legacy.
It's the symbol of all that we are and all that we can be as an astonishingly inquisitive species.
And just as the biosphere has been severely eroded, so too is the ethnosphere -- and, if anything, at a far greater rate.
No biologists, for example, would dare suggest that 50 percent of all species or more have been or are on the brink of extinction because it simply is not true, and yet that -- the most apocalyptic scenario in the realm of biological diversity -- scarcely approaches what we know to be the most optimistic scenario in the realm of cultural diversity.
And the great indicator of that, of course, is language loss.
When each of you in this room were born, there were 6,000 languages spoken on the planet.
Now, a language is not just a body of vocabulary or a set of grammatical rules.
A language is a flash of the human spirit.
It's a vehicle through which the soul of each particular culture comes into the material world.
Every language is an old-growth forest of the mind, a watershed, a thought, an ecosystem of spiritual possibilities.
And of those 6,000 languages, as we sit here today in Monterey, fully half are no longer being whispered into the ears of children.
They're no longer being taught to babies, which means, effectively, unless something changes, they're already dead.
What could be more lonely than to be enveloped in silence, to be the last of your people to speak your language, to have no way to pass on the wisdom of the ancestors or anticipate the promise of the children?
And yet, that dreadful fate is indeed the plight of somebody somewhere on Earth roughly every two weeks, because every two weeks, some elder dies and carries with him into the grave the last syllables of an ancient tongue.
And I know there's some of you who say, "Well, wouldn't it be better, wouldn't the world be a better place if we all just spoke one language?" And I say, "Great, let's make that language Yoruba. Let's make it Cantonese.
Let's make it Kogi."
And you'll suddenly discover what it would be like to be unable to speak your own language.
And so, what I'd like to do with you today is sort of take you on a journey through the ethnosphere, a brief journey through the ethnosphere, to try to begin to give you a sense of what in fact is being lost.
Now, there are many of us who sort of forget that when I say "different ways of being," I really do mean different ways of being.
Take, for example, this child of a Barasana in the Northwest Amazon, the people of the anaconda who believe that mythologically they came up the milk river from the east in the belly of sacred snakes.
Now, this is a people who cognitively do not distinguish the color blue from the color green because the canopy of the heavens is equated to the canopy of the forest upon which the people depend.
They have a curious language and marriage rule which is called "linguistic exogamy:" you must marry someone who speaks a different language.
And this is all rooted in the mythological past, yet the curious thing is in these long houses, where there are six or seven languages spoken because of intermarriage, you never hear anyone practicing a language.
They simply listen and then begin to speak.
Or, one of the most fascinating tribes I ever lived with, the Waorani of northeastern Ecuador, an astonishing people first contacted peacefully in 1958.
In 1957, five missionaries attempted contact and made a critical mistake.
They dropped from the air 8 x 10 glossy photographs of themselves in what we would say to be friendly gestures, forgetting that these people of the rainforest had never seen anything two-dimensional in their lives.
They picked up these photographs from the forest floor, tried to look behind the face to find the form or the figure, found nothing, and concluded that these were calling cards from the devil, so they speared the five missionaries to death.
But the Waorani didn't just spear outsiders.
They speared each other.
54 percent of their mortality was due to them spearing each other.
We traced genealogies back eight generations, and we found two instances of natural death and when we pressured the people a little bit about it, they admitted that one of the fellows had gotten so old that he died getting old, so we speared him anyway. (Laughter) But at the same time they had a perspicacious knowledge of the forest that was astonishing.
Their hunters could smell animal urine at 40 paces and tell you what species left it behind.
In the early '80s, I had a really astonishing assignment when I was asked by my professor at Harvard if I was interested in going down to Haiti, infiltrating the secret societies which were the foundation of Duvalier's strength and Tonton Macoutes, and securing the poison used to make zombies.
In order to make sense out of sensation, of course, I had to understand something about this remarkable faith of Vodoun. And Voodoo is not a black magic cult.
On the contrary, it's a complex metaphysical worldview.
It's interesting.
Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Judaism, whatever.
There's always one continent left out, the assumption being that sub-Saharan Africa had no religious beliefs. Well, of course, they did and Voodoo is simply the distillation of these very profound religious ideas that came over during the tragic Diaspora of the slavery era.
But, what makes Voodoo so interesting is that it's this living relationship between the living and the dead.
So, the living give birth to the spirits.
The spirits can be invoked from beneath the Great Water, responding to the rhythm of the dance to momentarily displace the soul of the living, so that for that brief shining moment, the acolyte becomes the god.
That's why the Voodooists like to say that "You white people go to church and speak about God.
We dance in the temple and become God."
And because you are possessed, you are taken by the spirit -- how can you be harmed?
So you see these astonishing demonstrations: Voodoo acolytes in a state of trance handling burning embers with impunity, a rather astonishing demonstration of the ability of the mind to affect the body that bears it when catalyzed in the state of extreme excitation.
Now, of all the peoples that I've ever been with, the most extraordinary are the Kogi of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta in northern Colombia.
Descendants of the ancient Tairona civilization which once carpeted the Caribbean coastal plain of Colombia, in the wake of the conquest, these people retreated into an isolated volcanic massif that soars above the Caribbean coastal plain.
In a bloodstained continent, these people alone were never conquered by the Spanish.
To this day, they remain ruled by a ritual priesthood but the training for the priesthood is rather extraordinary.
The young acolytes are taken away from their families at the age of three and four, sequestered in a shadowy world of darkness in stone huts at the base of glaciers for 18 years: two nine-year periods deliberately chosen to mimic the nine months of gestation they spend in their natural mother's womb; now they are metaphorically in the womb of the great mother.
And for this entire time, they are inculturated into the values of their society, values that maintain the proposition that their prayers and their prayers alone maintain the cosmic -- or we might say the ecological -- balance.
And at the end of this amazing initiation, one day they're suddenly taken out and for the first time in their lives, at the age of 18, they see a sunrise. And in that crystal moment of awareness of first light as the Sun begins to bathe the slopes of the stunningly beautiful landscape, suddenly everything they have learned in the abstract is affirmed in stunning glory. And the priest steps back and says, "You see? It's really as I've told you.
It is that beautiful. It is yours to protect."
They call themselves the "elder brothers" and they say we, who are the younger brothers, are the ones responsible for destroying the world.
Now, this level of intuition becomes very important.
Whenever we think of indigenous people and landscape, we either invoke Rousseau and the old canard of the "noble savage," which is an idea racist in its simplicity, or alternatively, we invoke Thoreau and say these people are closer to the Earth than we are.
Well, indigenous people are neither sentimental nor weakened by nostalgia.
There's not a lot of room for either in the malarial swamps of the Asmat or in the chilling winds of Tibet, but they have, nevertheless, through time and ritual, forged a traditional mystique of the Earth that is based not on the idea of being self-consciously close to it, but on a far subtler intuition: the idea that the Earth itself can only exist because it is breathed into being by human consciousness.
Now, what does that mean?
It means that a young kid from the Andes who's raised to believe that that mountain is an Apu spirit that will direct his or her destiny will be a profoundly different human being and have a different relationship to that resource or that place than a young kid from Montana raised to believe that a mountain is a pile of rock ready to be mined.
Whether it's the abode of a spirit or a pile of ore is irrelevant.
What's interesting is the metaphor that defines the relationship between the individual and the natural world.
I was raised in the forests of British Columbia to believe those forests existed to be cut.
That made me a different human being than my friends amongst the Kwagiulth who believe that those forests were the abode of Huxwhukw and the Crooked Beak of Heaven and the cannibal spirits that dwelled at the north end of the world, spirits they would have to engage during their Hamatsa initiation.
Now, if you begin to look at the idea that these cultures could create different realities, you could begin to understand some of their extraordinary discoveries. Take this plant here.
It's a photograph I took in the Northwest Amazon just last April.
This is ayahuasca, which many of you have heard about, the most powerful psychoactive preparation of the shaman's repertoire.
What makes ayahuasca fascinating is not the sheer pharmacological potential of this preparation, but the elaboration of it. It's made really of two different sources: on the one hand, this woody liana which has in it a series of beta-carbolines, harmine, harmaline, mildly hallucinogenic -- to take the vine alone is rather to have sort of blue hazy smoke drift across your consciousness -- but it's mixed with the leaves of a shrub in the coffee family called Psychotria viridis.
This plant had in it some very powerful tryptamines, very close to brain serotonin, dimethyltryptamine, 5-methoxydimethyltryptamine.
If you've ever seen the Yanomami blowing that snuff up their noses, that substance they make from a different set of species also contains methoxydimethyltryptamine.
To have that powder blown up your nose is rather like being shot out of a rifle barrel lined with baroque paintings and landing on a sea of electricity. (Laughter) It doesn't create the distortion of reality; it creates the dissolution of reality.
In fact, I used to argue with my professor, Richard Evan Shultes -- who is a man who sparked the psychedelic era with his discovery of the magic mushrooms in Mexico in the 1930s -- I used to argue that you couldn't classify these tryptamines as hallucinogenic because by the time you're under the effects there's no one home anymore to experience a hallucination. (Laughter) But the thing about tryptamines is they cannot be taken orally because they're denatured by an enzyme found naturally in the human gut called monoamine oxidase.
They can only be taken orally if taken in conjunction with some other chemical that denatures the MAO.
Now, the fascinating things are that the beta-carbolines found within that liana are MAO inhibitors of the precise sort necessary to potentiate the tryptamine. So you ask yourself a question.
How, in a flora of 80,000 species of vascular plants, do these people find these two morphologically unrelated plants that when combined in this way, created a kind of biochemical version of the whole being greater than the sum of the parts?
Well, we use that great euphemism, "trial and error," which is exposed to be meaningless.
But you ask the Indians, and they say, "The plants talk to us."
Well, what does that mean?
This tribe, the Cofan, has 17 varieties of ayahuasca, all of which they distinguish a great distance in the forest, all of which are referable to our eye as one species.
And then you ask them how they establish their taxonomy and they say, "I thought you knew something about plants.
I mean, don't you know anything?" And I said, "No."
Well, it turns out you take each of the 17 varieties in the night of a full moon, and it sings to you in a different key.
Now, that's not going to get you a Ph.D. at Harvard, but it's a lot more interesting than counting stamens. (Laughter) Now -- (Applause) -- the problem -- the problem is that even those of us sympathetic with the plight of indigenous people view them as quaint and colorful but somehow reduced to the margins of history as the real world, meaning our world, moves on.
Well, the truth is the 20th century, 300 years from now, is not going to be remembered for its wars or its technological innovations, but rather as the era in which we stood by and either actively endorsed or passively accepted the massive destruction of both biological and cultural diversity on the planet. Now, the problem isn't change.
All cultures through all time have constantly been engaged in a dance with new possibilities of life.
And the problem is not technology itself.
The Sioux Indians did not stop being Sioux when they gave up the bow and arrow any more than an American stopped being an American when he gave up the horse and buggy.
It's not change or technology that threatens the integrity of the ethnosphere. It is power, the crude face of domination.
Wherever you look around the world, you discover that these are not cultures destined to fade away; these are dynamic living peoples being driven out of existence by identifiable forces that are beyond their capacity to adapt to: whether it's the egregious deforestation in the homeland of the Penan -- a nomadic people from Southeast Asia, from Sarawak -- a people who lived free in the forest until a generation ago, and now have all been reduced to servitude and prostitution on the banks of the rivers, where you can see the river itself is soiled with the silt that seems to be carrying half of Borneo away to the South China Sea, where the Japanese freighters hang light in the horizon ready to fill their holds with raw logs ripped from the forest -- or, in the case of the Yanomami, it's the disease entities that have come in, in the wake of the discovery of gold.
Or if we go into the mountains of Tibet, where I'm doing a lot of research recently, you'll see it's a crude face of political domination.
You know, genocide, the physical extinction of a people is universally condemned, but ethnocide, the destruction of people's way of life, is not only not condemned, it's universally, in many quarters, celebrated as part of a development strategy.
And you cannot understand the pain of Tibet until you move through it at the ground level.
I once travelled 6,000 miles from Chengdu in Western China overland through southeastern Tibet to Lhasa with a young colleague, and it was only when I got to Lhasa that I understood the face behind the statistics you hear about: 6,000 sacred monuments torn apart to dust and ashes, 1.2 million people killed by the cadres during the Cultural Revolution.
This young man's father had been ascribed to the Panchen Lama.
That meant he was instantly killed at the time of the Chinese invasion.
His uncle fled with His Holiness in the Diaspora that took the people to Nepal.
His mother was incarcerated for the crime of being wealthy.
He was smuggled into the jail at the age of two to hide beneath her skirt tails because she couldn't bear to be without him.
The sister who had done that brave deed was put into an education camp.
One day she inadvertently stepped on an armband of Mao, and for that transgression, she was given seven years of hard labor.
The pain of Tibet can be impossible to bear, but the redemptive spirit of the people is something to behold.
And in the end, then, it really comes down to a choice: do we want to live in a monochromatic world of monotony or do we want to embrace a polychromatic world of diversity?
Margaret Mead, the great anthropologist, said, before she died, that her greatest fear was that as we drifted towards this blandly amorphous generic world view not only would we see the entire range of the human imagination reduced to a more narrow modality of thought, but that we would wake from a dream one day having forgotten there were even other possibilities.
And it's humbling to remember that our species has, perhaps, been around for [150,000] years.
The Neolithic Revolution -- which gave us agriculture, at which time we succumbed to the cult of the seed; the poetry of the shaman was displaced by the prose of the priesthood; we created hierarchy specialization surplus -- is only 10,000 years ago.
The modern industrial world as we know it is barely 300 years old.
Now, that shallow history doesn't suggest to me that we have all the answers for all of the challenges that will confront us in the ensuing millennia.
When these myriad cultures of the world are asked the meaning of being human, they respond with 10,000 different voices.
And it's within that song that we will all rediscover the possibility of being what we are: a fully conscious species, fully aware of ensuring that all peoples and all gardens find a way to flourish. And there are great moments of optimism.
This is a photograph I took at the northern tip of Baffin Island when I went narwhal hunting with some Inuit people, and this man, Olayuk, told me a marvelous story of his grandfather.
The Canadian government has not always been kind to the Inuit people, and during the 1950s, to establish our sovereignty, we forced them into settlements.
This old man's grandfather refused to go.
The family, fearful for his life, took away all of his weapons, all of his tools.
Now, you must understand that the Inuit did not fear the cold; they took advantage of it.
The runners of their sleds were originally made of fish wrapped in caribou hide.
So, this man's grandfather was not intimidated by the Arctic night or the blizzard that was blowing.
He simply slipped outside, pulled down his sealskin trousers and defecated into his hand. And as the feces began to freeze, he shaped it into the form of a blade.
He put a spray of saliva on the edge of the shit knife and as it finally froze solid, he butchered a dog with it.
He skinned the dog and improvised a harness, took the ribcage of the dog and improvised a sled, harnessed up an adjacent dog, and disappeared over the ice floes, shit knife in belt.
Talk about getting by with nothing. (Laughter) And this, in many ways -- (Applause) -- is a symbol of the resilience of the Inuit people and of all indigenous people around the world.
The Canadian government in April of 1999 gave back to total control of the Inuit an area of land larger than California and Texas put together.
It's our new homeland. It's called Nunavut.
It's an independent territory. They control all mineral resources.
An amazing example of how a nation-state can seek restitution with its people.
And finally, in the end, I think it's pretty obvious at least to all of all us who've traveled in these remote reaches of the planet, to realize that they're not remote at all.
They're homelands of somebody.
They represent branches of the human imagination that go back to the dawn of time. And for all of us, the dreams of these children, like the dreams of our own children, become part of the naked geography of hope.
So, what we're trying to do at the National Geographic, finally, is, we believe that politicians will never accomplish anything.
We think that polemics -- (Applause) -- we think that polemics are not persuasive, but we think that storytelling can change the world, and so we are probably the best storytelling institution in the world. We get 35 million hits on our website every month.
156 nations carry our television channel.
Our magazines are read by millions.
And what we're doing is a series of journeys to the ethnosphere where we're going to take our audience to places of such cultural wonder that they cannot help but come away dazzled by what they have seen, and hopefully, therefore, embrace gradually, one by one, the central revelation of anthropology: that this world deserves to exist in a diverse way, that we can find a way to live in a truly multicultural, pluralistic world where all of the wisdom of all peoples can contribute to our collective well-being.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One morning, in the year 1957, the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield saw himself like this, a weird freak with huge hands, huge mouth, and a tiny bottom.
Actually this creature is the result of the Penfield research.
He named it homunculus.
Basically the homunculus is the visualization of a human being where each part of the body is proportional to the surface it takes in the brain.
So, of course, homunculus is definitely not a freak.
It's you. It's me.
It's our invisible reality.
This visualization could explain, for example, why newborns, or smokers, put, instinctively, their fingers in the mouth.
Unfortunately it doesn't explain why so many designers remain mainly interested in designing chairs.
So anyway, even if I do not understand science entirely, for my design I essentially refer to it.
I'm fascinated by its ability to deeply investigate the human being, its way of working, its way of feeling.
And it really helps me to understand how we see, how we hear, how we breathe, how our brain can inform or mislead us.
It's a great tool for me to understand what could be our real needs.
Marketing people have never been able to do that.
Marketing reduces things. Marketing simplifies.
Marketing creates user groups.
And scientists, amidst complexity, amidst fluctuation and uniqueness.
What could be our real needs?
Maybe the silence.
In our daily life we are continuously disturbed by aggressive sounds.
And you know all those kind of sound puts us in a kind of stressful state, and prevent us from being quiet and focused.
So I wanted to create a kind of sound filter, able to preserve ourselves from noise pollution.
But I didn't want it to make it by isolating people, without any earmuffs or those kind of things.
Or neither with including complex technology.
I just wanted to, using the complexity and the technology of the brain, of the human brain.
So I worked with white noise.
dB is basically -- dB is the name of the product, basically a white noise diffuser.
This is white noise.
The white noise is the sum of all frequencies that are audible by the human being, brought to the same intensity.
And this noise is like a "shhhhhhhhhhhhh," like that.
And this noise is the most neutral.
It is the perfect sound for our ears and our brain.
So when you hear this sound you feel like a kind of shelter, preserved from noise pollution.
And when you hear the white noise, your brain is immediately focused on it.
And do not be disturbed any more by the other aggressive sound.
It seems to be magic.
But it is just physiology. It's just in your brain.
And in mine, I hope.
So in order to make this white noise a little bit active and reactive, I create a ball, a rolling ball able to analyze and find where does aggressive sound come from, and roll, at home or at work, towards aggressive noise, and emits white noise in order to neutralize it.
(Laughter) It works.
You feel the effect of the white noise?
It's too in silence.
If you make some noise you can feel the effect.
So even if this object, even if this product includes some technology, it includes some speakers, it includes some microphones and some electronic devices, this object is not a very smart object.
And I don't want to make a very smart object.
I don't want to create a perfect object like a perfect robot.
I want to create an object like you and me.
So, definitely not perfect.
So imagine, for instance, you are at home.
A loving dispute with your girl or boyfriend.
You shout. You say, "Blah blah blah, Blah blah blah. Who is this guy?"
And dB will probably roll toward you.
And turning around you is "shhhhhhh," like that.
(Laughter) Definitely not perfect. So you would probably shut it, at this point.
(Laughter) Anyway, in this same kind of approach, I designed K.
K is a daylight receiver transmitter.
So this object is supposed to be displayed on your desk, or on your piano, where you are supposed to spend most of your time in the day.
And this object will be able to know exactly the quantity of light you receive during the day, and able to give you the quantity of light you need.
This object is completely covered by fiber opticals.
And the idea of those fiber opticals is to inform the object, for sure, but creates the idea of an eye sensibility of the object.
I want, by this design feel, when you see it, you see, instinctively, this object seems to be very sensitive, very reactive.
And this object knows, better than you and probably before you, what you really need.
You have to know that the lack of daylight can provoke some problem of energy, or problem of libido.
So, a huge problem.
(Laughter) Most of the projects I work on -- I live in collaboration with scientists.
I'm just a designer. So I need them.
So there can be some biologists, psychiatrists, mathematicians, and so on.
And I submit them, my intuitions, my hypothesis, my first ideas.
And they react. They told me what is possible, what is impossible.
And together we improve the original concept.
And we build the project to the end.
And this kind of relationship between designer and scientist started when I was at school.
Indeed in my studies I was a guinea pig for a pharmaceutical industry.
And the irony for me was of course, I didn't do that for the sake of science progress.
I just do that to make money.
Anyway, this project, or this experience, make me start a new project on the design of medicine.
You have to know that today, roughly one or two every drug pills is not taken correctly.
So even if the active constituents in pharmaceuticals made constant progress in terms of chemistry, target of stability, the behavior of the patients goes more and more unstable.
So we took too many of them.
We took irregular dosage.
We do not follow instructions. And so on.
So I wanted to create a new kind of medicine, in order to create a new kind of relationship between the patient and the treatment.
So I turned traditional pills into this.
I'm going to give you some example.
This one is an antibiotic.
And its purpose is to help patient to go to the end of the treatment.
And the concept is to create a kind of onion, a kind of structure in layers.
So, you start with the darkest one.
And you are helped to visualize the duration of the treatment.
And you are helped to visualize the decrease of the infection.
So the first day, this is the big one.
And you have to peel and eat one layer a day.
And your antibiotic goes smaller and clearer.
And you're waiting for recovery as you were waiting for the Christmas day.
And you follow the treatment like that, to the end of the treatment.
And here you can get the white core.
And it means, right, you are in the recovery.
(Applause) Thank you.
This one is a "third lung," a pharmaceutical device for long-term asthma treatment.
I designed it to help kids to follow the treatment.
So the idea of this one is to create a relationship between the patient of the treatment but a relationship of dependency.
But in this case it is not the medication that is dependent on the patient.
This is, the kids will feel the therapeutic object needs him.
So the idea is, all night long the elastic skin of the third lung will slowly inflate itself, including air and molecules, for sure.
And when the kids wake up, he can see the object needs him. And he take him to his mouth, and breathe the air it contains.
So by this way, the kid, to take care of himself, is to take care of this living object.
And he does not feel anymore it's relies on asthma treatment, as the asthma treatment needs him.
(Applause) In this guise of living object approach, I like the idea of a kind of invisible design, as if the function of the object exists in a kind of invisible field just around the objects themselves.
We could talk about a kind of soul, of a ghost accompanying them.
And almost a kind of poltergeist effect.
So when a passive object like this one seems to be alive, because it is -- woosh -- starting to move.
And I remember an exhibition design I made for John Maeda, and for the Fondation Cartier in Paris.
And John Maeda was supposed to show several graphic animations in this exhibition.
And my idea for this exhibition design was to create a real pong game, like this one.
And the idea was to create some self-moving benches in the main exhibition room.
So the living benches would be exactly like the ball.
And John was so excited by this idea. He said to me, "Okay let's go."
I remember the day of the opening.
I was a little bit late.
When I bring the 10 living and self-moving benches in the exhibition room, John was just beside me, and was like, "Hmm. Hmm."
And he told me, after a long silence, "I wonder, Mathieu, if people won't be more fascinated by your benches than by my videos."
(Laughter) It would be a great honor, a great compliment for me, if he hadn't decided to take all them off two hours before the opening.
So, huge tragedy.
I guess you won't be surprised if I tell you that Pinocchio is one of my great influences.
Pinocchio is probably one of my best design products, my favorite one.
Because it is a kind of object with a conscience, able to be modified by its surroundings, and able to modify it as well.
The other great influence is the mine's canary.
In coal mines, this canary was supposed to be close to the miners.
And it was singing all day long. And when it stops it means that it just died.
So this canary was a living alarm, and a very efficient one.
A very natural technology, in order to say to the miners, "The air is too bad. You have to go. It's an emergency."
So it's, for me, a great product.
And I tried to design a kind of canary.
Andrea is one.
Andrea is a living air filter that absorbs toxic gasses from air, contaminated indoor air.
So it uses some plants to do this job, selected for their gas-filtering ability.
You have to know, or you probably already know, that indoor air pollution is more toxic than outdoor one.
So while I'm talking to you, the seats you are sitting on are currently emitting some invisible and odorless toxic gas. Sorry for that. (Laughter) So you are currently breathing formaldehyde.
It's the same for me with the carpet.
And this is exactly the same at home.
Because all the product we get constantly give away the volatile component of which they're made of.
So let's have a look at your home.
So your sofa, your plastic chair, your kid's toys give their own invisible reality. And this one is very toxic.
This is the reason why I created, with David Edward, a scientist of Harvard University, an object able to absorb the toxic elements using those kind of plants.
But the idea is to force the air to go in the effective part of the plants.
Because the roots of the plant are not very effective.
Bill Wolverton from NASA analyzed it cleverly in the '70s.
So the idea is to create an object able to force the air, and to be in contact at the right speed at the right place, in all the effective parts of the plant.
So this is the final object.
It will be launched next September.
(Applause) This one is kind of the same approach because I include, in a product like Andrea, some plants.
And in this one, plants are used for the water filtration ability.
And it includes some fishes as well.
But here, unlike Andrea, here are supposed to be eaten.
Indeed, this object is a domestic farm, for fishes and green.
So the idea of this object is to be able to get at home very local food.
The locavores used to get food taken in a radius of 100 miles.
Local River is able to provide you food directly in your living room.
So the principle of this object is to create an ecosystem called aquaponics.
And the aquaponics is the dirty water of the fish, by a water pump, feeds the plants above.
And the plants will filter, by the roots, the dirty water of the fish.
After, it goes back into the fish tank.
After that you have two options.
Or you sit down in front of it like you would do in front your TV set.
Amazing channel.
Or you start fishing.
And you make some sushis with a fish and the aromatic plants above.
Because you can grow some potatoes.
No, not potatoes, but tomatoes, aromatic plants and so on.
So now we can breathe safely.
Now we can eat local food.
Now we can be treated by smart medicine.
Now we can be well-balanced in our biorhythm with daylight.
But it was important to create a perfect place, so I tried to, in order to work and create.
So I designed, for an American scientist based in Paris, a very stimulative, brain-stimulative office.
I wanted to create a perfect place where you can work and play, and where your body and your brain can work together.
So, in this office, you do not work anymore at your desk, like a politician.
Your seat, your sleep and your play on a big geodesic island made of leather.
See, like this one?
In this office you do not work and write and draw on a sheet of paper, but you draw directly on a kind of huge whiteboard cave, like a prehistoric scientist.
So you, like that, can make some sport during your work.
In this office you do not need to go out in order to be in contact with nature.
You include, directly, the nature in the floor of the office.
You can see it there.
This is an inspiration image to lead this project of the office.
It really helped me to design it.
I never show it to my client. He would be so afraid.
(Laughter) Just for my workshop.
I guess it may be the revenge of the guinea pig I was.
But it's maybe the conviction as monkey and homunculus we are.
All of us need to be considered according to our real nature.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk about some of my discoveries around the world through my work.
These are not discoveries of planets or new technologies or science.
They're discoveries of people and the way people are, and new leadership.
This is Benki.
Benki is a leader of the Ashaninka Nation.
His people live in Brazil and in Peru.
Benki comes from a village so remote up in the Amazon that to get there, either you have to fly and land on water, or go by canoe for several days.
I met Benki three years ago in Sao Paulo when I'd brought him and other leaders from indigenous peoples to meet with me and leaders from around the world, because we wanted to learn from each other.
We wanted to share our stories with each other.
The Ashaninka people are known throughout South America for their dignity, their spirit and their resistance, starting with the Incas and continuing through the 19th century with the rubber tappers.
Today's biggest threat to the Ashaninka people and to Benki comes from illegal logging -- the people who come into the beautiful forest and cut down ancient mahogany trees, float them down the river to world markets.
Benki knew this.
He could see what was happening to his forest, to his environment, because he was taken under his grandfather's wing when he was only two years old to begin to learn about the forest and the way of life of his people.
His grandfather died when he was only 10.
And at that young age, 10 years old, Benki became the paje of his community.
Now, in the Ashaninka tradition and culture, the paje is the most important person in the community.
This is the person who contains within him all the knowledge, all the wisdom of centuries and centuries of life, and not just about his people, but about everything that his people's survival depended on: the trees, the birds, the water, the soil, the forest.
So when he was only 10 and he became the paje, he began to lead his people.
He began to talk to them about the forest that they needed to protect, the way of life they needed to nurture.
He explained to them that it was not a question of survival of the fittest; it was a question of understanding what they needed to survive and to protect that.
Eight years later, when he was a young man of 18, Benki left the forest for the first time.
He went 3,000 miles on an odyssey to Rio to the Earth Summit to tell the world what was happening in his tiny, little corner.
And he went because he hoped the world would listen.
Some did, not everybody.
But if you can imagine this young man with his headdress and his flowing robe, learning a new language, Portuguese, not to mention English, going to Rio, building a bridge to reach out to people he'd never met before -- a pretty hostile world.
But he wasn't dismayed.
Benki came back to his village full of ideas -- new technologies, new research, new ways of understanding what was going on.
Since that time, he's continued to work with his people, and not only the Ashaninka Nation, but all the peoples of the Amazon and beyond.
He's built schools to teach children to care for the forest.
Together, he's led the reforestation of over 25 percent of the land that had been destroyed by the loggers.
He's created a cooperative to help people diversify their livelihoods.
And he's brought the internet and satellite technology to the forest -- both so that people themselves could monitor the deforestation, but also that he could speak from the forest to the rest of the world.
If you were to meet Benki and ask him, "Why are you doing this?
Why are you putting yourself at risk?
Why are you making yourself vulnerable to what is often a hostile world?"
he would tell you, as he told me, "I asked myself," he said, "What did my grandparents and my great-grandparents do to protect the forest for me?
And what am I doing?"
So when I think of that, I wonder what our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren, when they ask themselves that question, I wonder how they will answer.
For me, the world is veering towards a future we don't much want when we really think about it deep inside.
It's a future we don't know the details of, but it's a future that has signs, just like Benki saw the signs around him.
We know we are running out of what we need.
We're running out of fresh water.
We're running out of fossil fuels.
We're running out of land.
We know climate change is going to affect all of us.
We don't know how, but we know it will.
And we know that there will be more of us than ever before -- five times as many people in 40 years than 60 years ago.
We are running out of what we need.
And we also know that the world has changed in other ways, that since 1960 there are one-third as many new countries that exist as independent entities on the planet.
Egos, systems of government -- figuring it out -- massive change.
And in addition to that, we know that five other really big countries are going to have a say in the future, a say we haven't even really started to hear yet -- China, India, Russia, South Africa and Benki's own Brazil, where Benki got his civil rights only in the 1988 constitution.
But you know all that.
You know more than Benki knew when he left his forest and went 3,000 miles.
You also know that we can't just keep doing what we've always done, because we'll get the results we've always gotten.
And this reminds me of something I understand Lord Salisbury said to Queen Victoria over a hundred years ago, when she was pressing him, "Please change."
He said, "Change?
Why change?
Things are bad enough as they are."
We have to change.
It's imperative to me, when I look around the world, that we need to change ourselves.
We need new models of what it means to be a leader.
We need new models of being a leader and a human in the world.
I started life as a banker.
Now I don't admit to that to anybody but my very close friends.
But for the past eight years, I've done something completely different.
My work has taken me around the world, where I've had the real privilege of meeting people like Benki and many others who are making change happen in their communities -- people who see the world differently, who are asking different questions, who have different answers, who understand the filters that they wear when they go out into the world.
This is Sanghamitra.
Sanghamitra comes from Bangalore.
I met Sanghamitra eight years ago when I was in Bangalore organizing a workshop with leaders of different NGO's working in some of the hardest aspects of society.
Sanghamitra didn't start life as a leader of an NGO, she started her career as university professor, teaching English literature.
But she realized that she was much too detached from the world doing that.
She loved it, but she was too detached.
And so in 1993, a long time ago, she decided to start a new organization called Samraksha focused on one of the hardest areas, one of the hardest issues in India -- anywhere in the world at the time -- HIV/AIDS.
Since that time, Samraksha has grown from strength to strength and is now one of the leading health NGO's in India.
But if you just think about the state of the world and knowledge of HIV/AIDS in 1993 -- in India at that time it was skyrocketing and nobody understood why, and everyone was actually very, very afraid.
Today there are still three million HIV-positive people in India.
That's the second largest population in the world.
When I asked Sanghamitra, "How did you get from English literature to HIV/AIDS?"
not an obvious path, she said to me, "It's all connected.
Literature makes one sensitive, sensitive to people, to their dreams and to their ideas."
Since that time, under her leadership, Samraksha has been a pioneer in all fields related to HIV/AIDS.
They have respite homes, the first, the first care centers, the first counseling services -- and not just in urban, 7-million-population Bangalore, but in the hardest to reach villages in the state of Karnataka.
Even that wasn't enough.
She wanted to change policy at the government level.
10 of their programs that she pioneered are now government policy and funded by the government.
They take care of 20,000-odd people today in over 1,000 villages around Karnataka.
She works with people like Murali Krishna.
Murali Krishna comes from one of those villages.
He lost his wife to AIDS a couple of years ago, and he's HIV-positive.
But he saw the work, the care, the compassion that Sanghamitra and her team brought to the village, and he wanted to be part of it.
He's a Leaders' Quest fellow, and that helps him with his work.
They've pioneered a different approach to villages.
Instead of handing out information in pamphlets, as is so often the case, they bring theater troupes, songs, music, dance.
And they sit around, and they talk about dreams.
Sanghamitra told me just last week -- she had just come back from two weeks in the villages, and she had a real breakthrough.
They were sitting in a circle, talking about the dreams for the village.
And the young women in the village spoke up and said, "We've changed our dream.
Our dream is for our partners, our husbands, not to be given to us because of a horoscope, but to be given to us because they've been tested for HIV."
If you are lucky enough to meet Sanghamitra and ask her why and how, how have you achieved so much?
She would look at you and very quietly, very softly say, "It just happened.
It's the spirit inside."
This is Dr. Fan Jianchuan.
Jianchuan comes from Sichuan Province in southwest China.
He was born in 1957, and you can imagine what his childhood looked like and felt like, and what his life has been like over the last 50 tumultuous years.
He's been a soldier, a teacher, a politician, a vice-mayor and a business man.
But if you sat down and asked him, "Who are you really, and what do you do?"
He would tell you, "I'm a collector, and I curate a museum."
I was lucky; I had heard about him for years, and I finally met him earlier this year at his museum in Chengdu.
He's been a collector all of his life, starting when he was four or five in the early 1960's.
Now, just think of the early 1960's in China.
Over a lifetime, through everything, through the Cultural Revolution and everything afterward, he's kept collecting, so that he now has over eight million pieces in his museums documenting contemporary Chinese history.
These are pieces that you won't find anywhere else in the world, in part because they document parts of history Chinese choose to forget.
For example, he's got over one million pieces documenting the Sino-Japanese War, a war that's not talked about in China very much and whose heroes are not honored.
Why did he do all this?
Because he thought a nation should never repeat the mistakes of the past.
So, from commissioning slightly larger than life bronze statues of the heroes of the Sino-Japanese War, including those Chinese who then fought with each other and left mainland China to go to Taiwan, to commemorating all the unknown, ordinary soldiers who survived, by asking them to take prints of their hands, he is making sure -- one man is making sure -- that history is not forgotten.
But it's not just Chinese heroes he cares about.
This building contains the world's largest collection of documents and artifacts commemorating the U.S. role in fighting on the Chinese side in that long war -- the Flying Tigers.
He has nine other buildings -- that are already open to the public -- filled to the rafters with artifacts documenting contemporary Chinese history.
Two of the most sensitive buildings include a lifetime of collection about the Cultural Revolution, a period that actually most Chinese would prefer to forget.
But he doesn't want his nation ever to forget.
These people inspire me, and they inspire me because they show us what is possible when you change the way you look at the world, change the way you look at your place in the world.
They looked outside, and then they changed what was on the inside.
They didn't go to business school.
They didn't read a manual, "How to Be a Good Leader in 10 Easy Steps."
But they have qualities we'd all recognize.
They have drive, passion, commitment.
They've gone away from what they did before, and they've gone to something they didn't know.
They've tried to connect worlds they didn't know existed before.
They've built bridges, and they've walked across them.
They have a sense of the great arc of time and their tiny place in it.
They know people have come before them and will follow them.
And they know that they're part of a whole, that they depend on other people.
It's not about them, they know that, but it has to start with them.
And they have humility.
It just happens.
But we know it doesn't just happen, don't we?
We know it takes a lot to make it happen, and we know the direction the world is going in.
So I think we need succession planning on a global basis.
We can't wait for the next generation, the new joiners, to come in and learn how to be the good leaders we need.
I think it has to start with us.
And we know, just like they knew, how hard it is.
But the good news is that we don't have to figure it out as we go along; we have models, we have examples, like Benki and Sanghamitra and Jianchuan.
We can look at what they've done, if we look.
We can learn from what they've learned.
We can change the way we see ourselves in the world.
And if we're lucky, we can change the way our great-grandchildren will answer Benki's question.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As technology progresses, and as it advances, many of us assume that these advances make us more intelligent, make us smarter and more connected to the world.
And what I'd like to argue is that that's not necessarily the case, as progress is simply a word for change, and with change you gain something, but you also lose something.
And to really illustrate this point, what I'd like to do is to show you how technology has dealt with a very simple, a very common, an everyday question.
And that question is this.
What time is it? What time is it?
If you glance at your iPhone, it's so simple to tell the time.
But, I'd like to ask you, how would you tell the time if you didn't have an iPhone?
How would you tell the time, say, 600 years ago?
How would you do it?
Well, the way you would do it is by using a device that's called an astrolabe.
So, an astrolabe is relatively unknown in today's world.
But, at the time, in the 13th century, it was the gadget of the day.
It was the world's first popular computer.
And it was a device that, in fact, is a model of the sky.
So, the different parts of the astrolabe, in this particular type, the rete corresponds to the positions of the stars.
The plate corresponds to a coordinate system.
And the mater has some scales and puts it all together.
If you were an educated child, you would know how to not only use the astrolabe, you would also know how to make an astrolabe.
And we know this because the first treatise on the astrolabe, the first technical manual in the English language, was written by Geoffrey Chaucer.
Yes, that Geoffrey Chaucer, in 1391, to his little Lewis, his 11-year-old son.
And in this book, little Lewis would know the big idea.
And the central idea that makes this computer work is this thing called stereographic projection.
And basically, the concept is, how do you represent the three-dimensional image of the night sky that surrounds us onto a flat, portable, two-dimensional surface.
The idea is actually relatively simple.
Imagine that that Earth is at the center of the universe, and surrounding it is the sky projected onto a sphere.
Each point on the surface of the sphere is mapped through the bottom pole, onto a flat surface, where it is then recorded.
So the North Star corresponds to the center of the device.
The ecliptic, which is the path of the sun, moon, and planets correspond to an offset circle.
The bright stars correspond to little daggers on the rete.
And the altitude corresponds to the plate system.
Now, the real genius of the astrolabe is not just the projection.
The real genius is that it brings together two coordinate systems so they fit perfectly.
There is the position of the sun, moon and planets on the movable rete.
And then there is their location on the sky as seen from a certain latitude on the back plate. Okay?
So how would you use this device?
Well, let me first back up for a moment.
This is an astrolabe. Pretty impressive, isn't it?
And so, this astrolabe is on loan from us from the Oxford School of -- Museum of History.
And you can see the different components.
This is the mater, the scales on the back.
This is the rete. Okay. Do you see that?
That's the movable part of the sky.
And in the back you can see a spider web pattern.
And that spider web pattern corresponds to the local coordinates in the sky.
This is a rule device. And on the back are some other devices, measuring tools and scales, to be able to make some calculations. Okay?
You know, I've always wanted one of these.
For my thesis I actually built one of these out of paper.
And this one, this is a replica from a 15th-century device.
And it's worth probably about three MacBook Pros.
But a real one would cost about as much as my house, and the house next to it, and actually every house on the block, on both sides of the street, maybe a school thrown in, and some -- you know, a church.
They are just incredibly expensive.
But let me show you how to work this device.
So let's go to step one.
First thing that you do is you select a star in the night sky, if you're telling time at night.
So, tonight, if it's clear you'll be able to see the summer triangle.
And there is a bright star called Deneb. So let's select Deneb.
Second, is you measure the altitude of Deneb.
So, step two, I hold the device up, and then I sight its altitude there so I can see it clearly now.
And then I measure its altitude.
So, it's about 26 degrees. You can't see it from over there.
Step three is identify the star on the front of the device.
Deneb is there. I can tell.
Step four is I then move the rete, move the sky, so the altitude of the star corresponds to the scale on the back.
Okay, so when that happens everything lines up.
I have here a model of the sky that corresponds to the real sky. Okay?
So, it is, in a sense, holding a model of the universe in my hands.
And then finally, I take a rule, and move the rule to a date line which then tells me the time here.
Right. So, that's how the device is used.
(Laughter) So, I know what you're thinking: "That's a lot of work, isn't it? Isn't it a ton of work to be able to tell the time?"
as you glance at your iPod to just check out the time.
But there is a difference between the two, because with your iPod you can tell -- or your iPhone, you can tell exactly what the time is, with precision.
The way little Lewis would tell the time is by a picture of the sky.
He would know where things would fit in the sky.
He would not only know what time it was, he would also know where the sun would rise, and how it would move across the sky.
He would know what time the sun would rise, and what time it would set.
And he would know that for essentially every celestial object in the heavens.
So, in computer graphics and computer user interface design, there is a term called affordances.
So, affordances are the qualities of an object that allow us to perform an action with it.
And what the astrolabe does is it allows us, it affords us, to connect to the night sky, to look up into the night sky and be much more -- to see the visible and the invisible together.
So, that's just one use. Incredible, there is probably 350, 400 uses.
In fact, there is a text, and that has over a thousand uses of this first computer.
On the back there is scales and measurements for terrestrial navigation.
You can survey with it. The city of Baghdad was surveyed with it.
It can be used for calculating mathematical equations of all different types.
And it would take a full university course to illustrate it.
Astrolabes have an incredible history.
They are over 2,000 years old.
The concept of stereographic projection originated in 330 B.C.
And the astrolabes come in many different sizes and shapes and forms.
There is portable ones. There is large display ones.
And I think what is common to all astrolabes is that they are beautiful works of art.
There is a quality of craftsmanship and precision that is just astonishing and remarkable.
Astrolabes, like every technology, do evolve over time.
So, the earliest retes, for example, were very simple and primitive.
And advancing retes became cultural emblems.
This is one from Oxford.
And I find this one really extraordinary because the rete pattern is completely symmetrical, and it accurately maps a completely asymmetrical, or random sky.
How cool is that? This is just amazing.
So, would little Lewis have an astrolabe?
Probably not one made of brass. He would have one made out of wood, or paper. And the vast majority of this first computer was a portable device that you could keep in the back of your pocket.
So, what does the astrolabe inspire?
Well, I think the first thing is that it reminds us just how resourceful people were, our forebears were, years and years ago.
It's just an incredible device.
Every technology advances.
Every technology is transformed and moved by others.
And what we gain with a new technology, of course, is precision and accuracy.
But what we lose, I think, is an accurate -- a felt sense of the sky, a sense of context.
Knowing the sky, knowing your relationship with the sky, is the center of the real answer to knowing what time it is.
So, it's -- I think astrolabes are just remarkable devices.
And so, what can you learn from these devices?
Well, primarily that there is a subtle knowledge that we can connect with the world.
And astrolabes return us to this subtle sense of how things all fit together, and also how we connect to the world.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
Once upon a time, at the age of 24, I was a student at St. John's Medical College in Bangalore.
I was a guest student during one month of a public health course.
And that changed my mindset forever.
The course was good, but it was not the course content in itself that changed the mindset.
It was the brutal realization, the first morning, that the Indian students were better than me.
(Laughter) You see, I was a study nerd.
I loved statistics from a young age.
And I studied very much in Sweden.
I used to be in the upper quarter of all courses I attended.
But in St. John's, I was in the lower quarter.
And the fact was that Indian students studied harder than we did in Sweden.
They read the textbook twice, or three times or four times.
In Sweden we read it once and then we went partying.
(Laugher) And that, to me, that personal experience was the first time in my life that the mindset I grew up with was changed.
And I realized that perhaps the Western world will not continue to dominate the world forever.
And I think many of you have the same sort of personal experience.
It's that realization of someone you meet that really made you change your ideas about the world.
It's not the statistics, although I tried to make it funny.
And I will now, here, onstage, try to predict when that will happen -- that Asia will regain its dominant position as the leading part of the world, as it used to be, over thousands of years.
And I will do that by trying to predict precisely at what year the average income per person in India, in China, will reach that of the West.
And I don't mean the whole economy, because to grow an economy of India to the size of U.K. -- that's a piece of cake, with one billion people.
But I want to see when will the average pay, the money for each person, per month, in India and China, when will that have reached that of U.K. and the United States?
But I will start with a historical background.
And you can see my map if I get it up here. You know?
I will start at 1858.
1858 was a year of great technological advancement in the West.
That was the year when Queen Victoria was able, for the first time, to communicate with President Buchanan, through the Transatlantic Telegraphic Cable.
And they were the first to "Twitter" transatlantically.
(Laughter) (Applause) And I've been able, through this wonderful Google and Internet, to find the text of the telegram sent back from President Buchanan to Queen Victoria.
And it ends like this: "This telegraph is a fantastic instrument to diffuse religion, civilization, liberty and law throughout the world."
Those are nice words. But I got sort of curious of what he meant with liberty, and liberty for whom.
And we will think about that when we look at the wider picture of the world in 1858.
Because 1858 was also watershed year in the history of Asia.
1858 was the year when the courageous uprising against the foreign occupation of India was defeated by the British forces.
And India was up to 89 years more of foreign domination.
1858 in China was the victory in the Opium War by the British forces.
And that meant that foreigners, as it said in the treaty, were allowed to trade freely in China.
It meant paying with opium for Chinese goods.
And 1858 in Japan was the year when Japan had to sign the Harris Treaty and accept trade on favorable condition for the U.S.
And they were threatened by those black ships there, that had been in Tokyo harbor over the last year.
But, Japan, in contrast to India and China, maintained its national sovereignty.
And let's see how much difference that can make.
And I will do that by bringing these bubbles back to a Gapminder graph here, where you can see each bubble is a country.
The size of the bubble here is the population.
On this axis, as I used to have income per person in comparable dollar.
And on that axis I have life expectancy, the health of people.
And I also bring an innovation here.
I have transformed the laser beam into an ecological, recyclable version here, in green India.
(Applause) And we will see, you know.
Look here, 1858, India was here, China was here, Japan was there, United States and United Kingdom was richer over there.
And I will start the world like this.
India was not always like this level.
Actually if we go back into the historical record, there was a time hundreds of years ago when the income per person in India and China was even above that of Europe.
But 1850 had already been many, many years of foreign domination, and India had been de-industrialized.
And you can see that the countries who were growing their economy was United States and United Kingdom.
And they were also, by the end of the century, getting healthy, and Japan was starting to catch up.
India was trying down here.
Can you see how it starts to move there?
But really, really natural sovereignty was good for Japan.
And Japan is trying to move up there.
And it's the new century now. Health is getting better, United Kingdom, United States.
But careful now -- we are approaching the First World War.
And the First World War, you know, we'll see a lot of deaths and economical problems here.
United Kingdom is going down.
And now comes the Spanish flu also.
And then after the First World War, they continue up.
Still under foreign domination, and without sovereignty, India and China are down in the corner.
Not much has happened.
They have grown their population but not much more.
In the 1930's now, you can see that Japan is going to a period of war, with lower life expectancy.
And the Second World War was really a terrible event, also economically for Japan.
But they did recover quite fast afterwards.
And we are moving into the new world.
In 1947 India finally gained its independence.
And they could raise the Indian flag and become a sovereign nation, but in very big difficulties down there.
(Applause) In 1949 we saw the emergence of the modern China in a way which surprised the world.
And what happened?
What happens in the after independence?
You can see that the health started to improve.
Children started to go to school.
Health services were provided.
This is the Great Leap Forward, when China fell down.
It was central planning by Mao Tse Tung.
China recovered. Then they said, "Nevermore, stupid central planning."
But they went up here, and India was trying to follow.
And they were catching up indeed.
And both countries had the better health, but still a very low economy.
And we came to 1978, and Mao Tse Tung died, and a new guy turned up from the left.
And it was Deng Xiaoping coming out here.
And he said, "Doesn't matter if a cat is white or black, as long as it catches mice."
Because catching mice is what the two cats wanted to do.
And you can see the two cats being here, China and India, wanting to catch the mices over there, you know.
And they decided to go not only for health and education, but also starting to grow their economy.
And the market reformer was successful there.
In '92 India follows with a market reform.
And they go quite closely together, and you can see that the similarity with India and China, in many ways, are greater than the differences with them.
And here they march on. And will they catch up?
This is the big question today.
There they are today.
Now what does it mean that the -- (Applause) the averages there -- this is the average of China.
If I would split China, look here, Shanghai has already catched up.
Shanghai is already there.
And it's healthier than the United States.
But on the other hand, Guizhou, one of the poorest inland provinces of China, is there.
And if I split Guizhou into urban and rural, the rural part of Guizhou goes down there.
You see this enormous inequity in China, in the midst of fast economic growth.
And if I would also look at India, you have another type of inequity, actually, in India.
The geographical, macro-geographical difference is not so big.
Uttar Pradesh, the biggest of the states here, is poorer and has a lower health than the rest of India.
Kerala is flying on top there, matching United States in health, but not in economy.
And here, Maharashtra, with Mumbai, is forging forward.
Now in India, the big inequities are within the state, rather than between the states.
And that is not a bad thing, in itself.
If you have a lot inequity, macro-geographical inequities can be more difficult in the long term to deal with, than if it is in the same area where you have a growth center relatively close to where poor people are living.
No, there is one more inequity. Look there, United States.
(Laughter) Oh, they broke my frame.
Washington, D.C. went out here.
My friends at Gapminder wanted me to show this because there is a new leader in Washington who is really concerned about the health system.
And I can understand him, because Washington, D.C.
is so rich over there but they are not as healthy as Kerala.
It's quite interesting, isn't it?
(Applause) I can see a business opportunity for Kerala, helping fix the health system in the United States.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now here we have the whole world. You have the legend down there.
And when you see the two giant cats here, pushing forward, you see that in between them and ahead of them, is the whole emerging economies of the world, which Thomas Friedman so correctly called the "flat world."
You can see that in health and education, a large part of the world population is putting forward, but in Africa, and other parts, as in rural Guizhou in China, there is still people with low health and very low economy.
We have an enormous disparity in the world.
But most of the world in the middle are pushing forwards very fast.
Now, back to my projections.
When will it catch up? I have to go back to very conventional graph.
I will show income per person on this axis instead, poor down here, rich up there.
And then time here, from 1858 I start the world.
And we shall see what will happen with these countries.
You see, China under foreign domination actually lowered their income and came down to the Indian level here.
Whereas U.K. and United States is getting richer and richer.
And after Second World War, United States is richer than U.K.
But independence is coming here.
Growth is starting, economic reform.
Growth is faster, and with projection from IMF you can see where you expect them to be in 2014.
Now, the question is, "When will the catch up take place?"
Look at, look at the United States.
Can you see the bubble?
The bubbles, not my bubbles, but the financial bubbles.
That's the dot com bubble. This is the Lehman Brothers doorstep there.
You see it came down there.
And it seems this is another rock coming down there, you know.
So they doesn't seem to go this way, these countries.
They seem to go in a more humble growth way, you know.
And people interested in growth are turning their eyes towards Asia.
I can compare to Japan. This is Japan coming up.
You see, Japan did it like that.
We add Japan to it.
And there is no doubt that fast catch up can take place.
Can you see here what Japan did?
Japan did it like this, until full catch up, and then they follow with the other high-income economies.
But the real projections for those ones, I would like to give it like this.
Can be worse, can be better.
It's always difficult to predict, especially about the future.
Now, a historian tells me it's even more difficult to predict about the past.
(Laughter) I think I'm in a difficult position here.
Inequalities in China and India I consider really the big obstacle because to bring the entire population into growth and prosperity is what will create a domestic market, what will avoid social instability, and which will make use of the entire capacity of the population.
So, social investments in health, education and infrastructure, and electricity is really what is needed in India and China.
You know the climate. We have great international experts within India telling us that the climate is changing, and actions has to be taken, otherwise China and India would be the countries most to suffer from climate change.
And I consider India and China the best partners in the world in a good global climate policy.
But they ain't going to pay for what others, who have more money, have largely created, and I can agree on that.
But what I'm really worried about is war.
Will the former rich countries really accept a completely changed world economy, and a shift of power away from where it has been the last 50 to 100 to 150 years, back to Asia?
And will Asia be able to handle that new position of being in charge of being the most mighty, and the governors of the world?
So, always avoid war, because that always pushes human beings backward.
Now if these inequalities, climate and war can be avoided, get ready for a world in equity, because this is what seems to be happening.
And that vision that I got as a young student, 1972, that Indians can be much better than Swedes, is just about to happen.
And it will happen precisely the year 2048 in the later part of the summer, in July, more precisely, the 27th of July.
(Applause) The 27th of July, 2048 is my 100th birthday.
(Laughter) And I expect to speak in the first session of the 39th TED India.
Get your bookings in time. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
As a culture, we tell ourselves lots of stories about the future, and where we might move forward from this point.
Some of those stories are that somebody is just going to sort everything out for us.
Other stories are that everything is on the verge of unraveling.
But I want to tell you a different story here today.
Like all stories, it has a beginning.
My work, for a long time, has been involved in education, in teaching people practical skills for sustainability, teaching people how to take responsibility for growing some of their own food, how to build buildings using local materials, how to generate their own energy, and so on.
I lived in Ireland, built the first straw-bale houses in Ireland, and some cob buildings and all this kind of thing.
But all my work for many years was focused around the idea that sustainability means basically looking at the globalized economic growth model, and moderating what comes in at one end, and moderating the outputs at the other end.
And then I came into contact with a way of looking at things which actually changed that profoundly.
And in order to introduce you to that, I've got something here that I'm going to unveil, which is one of the great marvels of the modern age.
And it's something so astounding and so astonishing that I think maybe as I remove this cloth a suitable gasp of amazement might be appropriate.
If you could help me with that it would be fantastic.
(Laughter) This is a liter of oil.
This bottle of oil, distilled over a hundred million years of geological time, ancient sunlight, contains the energy equivalent of about five weeks hard human manual labor -- equivalent to about 35 strong people coming round and working for you.
We can turn it into a dazzling array of materials, medicine, modern clothing, laptops, a whole range of different things.
It gives us an energy return that's unimaginable, historically.
We've based the design of our settlements, our business models, our transport plans, even the idea of economic growth, some would argue, on the assumption that we will have this in perpetuity.
Yet, when we take a step back, and look over the span of history, at what we might call the petroleum interval, it's a short period in history where we've discovered this extraordinary material, and then based a whole way of life around it.
But as we straddle the top of this energy mountain, at this stage, we move from a time where our economic success, our sense of individual prowess and well-being is directly linked to how much of this we consume, to a time when actually our degree of oil dependency is our degree of vulnerability.
And it's increasingly clear that we aren't going to be able to rely on the fact that we're going to have this at our disposal forever.
For every four barrels of oil that we consume, we only discover one.
And that gap continues to widen.
There is also the fact that the amount of energy that we get back from the oil that we discover is falling.
In the 1930s we got 100 units of energy back for every one that we put in to extract it.
Completely unprecedented, historically.
Already that's fallen to about 11.
And that's why, now, the new breakthroughs, the new frontiers in terms of oil extraction are scrambling about in Alberta, or at the bottom of the oceans.
There are 98 oil-producing nations in the world.
But of those, 65 have already passed their peak.
The moment when the world on average passes this peak, people wonder when that's going to happen.
And there is an emerging case that maybe that was what happened last July when the oil prices were so high.
But are we to assume that the same brilliance and creativity and adaptability that got us up to the top of that energy mountain in the first place is somehow mysteriously going to evaporate when we have to design a creative way back down the other side?
No. But the thinking that we have to come up with has to be based on a realistic assessment of where we are.
There is also the issue of climate change, is the other thing that underpins this transition approach.
But the thing that I notice, as I talk to climate scientists, is the increasingly terrified look they have in their eyes, as the data that's coming in, which is far ahead of what the IPCC are talking about.
So the IPCC said that we might see significant breakup of the arctic ice in 2100, in their worst case scenario.
Actually, if current trends continue, it could all be gone in five or 10 years' time.
If just three percent of the carbon locked up in the arctic permafrost is released as the world warms, it would offset all the savings that we need to make, in carbon, over the next 40 years to avoid runaway climate change.
We have no choice other than deep and urgent decarbonization.
But I'm always very interested to think about what might the stories be that the generations further down the slope from us are going to tell about us.
"The generation that lived at the top of the mountain, that partied so hard, and so abused its inheritance."
And one of the ways I like to do that is to look back at the stories people used to tell before we had cheap oil, before we had fossil fuels, and people relied on their own muscle, animal muscle energy, or a little bit of wind, little bit of water energy.
We had stories like "The Seven-League Boots": the giant who had these boots, where, once you put them on, with every stride you could cover seven leagues, or 21 miles, a kind of travel completely unimaginable to people without that kind of energy at their disposal.
Stories like The Magic Porridge Pot, where you had a pot where if you knew the magic words, this pot would just make as much food as you liked, without you having to do any work, provided you could remember the other magic word to stop it making porridge.
Otherwise you'd flood your entire town with warm porridge.
There is the story of "The Elves and the Shoemaker."
The people who make shoes go to sleep, wake up in the morning, and all the shoes are magically made for them.
It's something that was unimaginable to people then.
Now we have the seven-league boots in the form of Ryanair and Easyjet.
We have the magic porridge pot in the form of Walmart and Tesco.
And we have the elves in the form of China.
But we don't appreciate what an astonishing thing that has been.
And what are the stories that we tell ourselves now, as we look forward about where we're going to go.
And I would argue that there are four. There is the idea of business as usual, that the future will be like the present, just more of it.
But as we've seen over the last year, I think that's an idea that is increasingly coming into question.
And in terms of climate change, is something that is not actually feasible.
There is the idea of hitting the wall, that actually somehow everything is so fragile that it might just all unravel and collapse.
This is a popular story in some places.
The third story is the idea that technology can solve everything, that technology can somehow get us through this completely.
And it's an idea that I think is very prevalent at these TED Talks, the idea that we can invent our way out of a profound economic and energy crisis, that a move to a knowledge economy can somehow neatly sidestep those energy constraints, the idea that we'll discover some fabulous new source of energy that will mean we can sweep all concerns about energy security to one side, the idea that we can step off neatly onto a completely renewable world.
But the world isn't Second Life.
We can't create new land and new energy systems at the click of a mouse.
And as we sit, exchanging free ideas with each other, there are still people mining coal in order to power the servers, extracting the minerals to make all of those things.
The breakfast that we eat as we sit down to check our email in the morning is still transported at great distances, usually at the expense of the local, more resilient food systems that would have supplied that in the past, which we've so effectively devalued and dismantled.
We can be astonishingly inventive and creative.
But we also live in a world with very real constraints and demands.
Energy and technology are not the same thing.
What I'm involved with is the transition response.
And this is really about looking the challenges of peak oil and climate change square in the face, and responding with a creativity and an adaptability and an imagination that we really need.
It's something which has spread incredibly fast.
And it is something which has several characteristics.
It's viral. It seems to spread under the radar very, very quickly.
It's open source. It's something which everybody who's involved with it develops and passes on as they work with it.
It's self-organizing. There is no great central organization that pushes this; people just pick up an idea and they run with it, and they implement it where they are.
It's solutions-focused. It's very much looking at what people can do where they are, to respond to this.
It's sensitive to place and to scale.
Transitional is completely different.
Transition groups in Chile, transition groups in the U.S., transition groups here, what they're doing looks very different in every place that you go to.
It learns very much from its mistakes.
And it feels historic. It tries to create a sense that this is a historic opportunity to do something really extraordinary.
And it's a process which is really joyful.
People have a huge amount of fun doing this, reconnecting with other people as they do it.
One of the things that underpins it is this idea of resilience.
And I think, in many ways, the idea of resilience is a more useful concept than the idea of sustainability.
The idea of resilience comes from the study of ecology.
And it's really about how systems, settlements, withstand shock from the outside.
When they encounter shock from the outside that they don't just unravel and fall to pieces.
And I think it's a more useful concept than sustainability, as I said.
When our supermarkets have only two or three days' worth of food in them at any one time, often sustainability tends to focus on the energy efficiency of the freezers and on the packaging that the lettuces are wrapped up in.
Looking through the lens of resilience, we really question how we've let ourselves get into a situation that's so vulnerable.
Resilience runs much deeper: it's about building modularity into what we do, building surge breakers into how we organize the basic things that support us.
This is a photograph of the Bristol and District Market Gardeners Association, in 1897.
This is at a time when the city of Bristol, which is quite close to here, was surrounded by commercial market gardens, which provided a significant amount of the food that was consumed in the town, and created a lot of employment for people, as well.
There was a degree of resilience, if you like, at that time, which we can now only look back on with envy.
So how does this transition idea work?
So basically, you have a group of people who are excited by the idea.
They pick up some of the tools that we've developed.
They start to run an awareness-raising program looking at how this might actually work in the town.
They show films, they give talks, and so on.
It's a process which is playful and creative and informative.
Then they start to form working groups, looking at different aspects of this, and then from that, there emerge a whole lot of projects which then the transition project itself starts to support and enable.
So it started out with some work I was involved in in Ireland, where I was teaching, and has since spread.
There are now over 200 formal transition projects.
And there are thousands of others who are at what we call the mulling stage.
They are mulling whether they're going to take it further.
And actually a lot of them are doing huge amounts of stuff.
But what do they actually do? You know, it's a kind of nice idea, but what do they actually do on the ground?
Well, I think it's really important to make the point that actually you know, this isn't something which is going to do everything on its own.
We need international legislation from Copenhagen and so on.
We need national responses. We need local government responses.
But all of those things are going to be much easier if we have communities that are vibrant and coming up with ideas and leading from the front, making unelectable policies electable, over the next 5 to 10 years.
Some of the things that emerge from it are local food projects, like community-supported agriculture schemes, urban food production, creating local food directories, and so on.
A lot of places now are starting to set up their own energy companies, community-owned energy companies, where the community can invest money into itself, to start putting in place the kind of renewable energy infrastructure that we need.
A lot of places are working with their local schools.
Newent in the Forest of Dean: big polytunnel they built for the school; the kids are learning how to grow food.
Promoting recycling, things like garden-share, that matches up people who don't have a garden who would like to grow food, with people who have gardens they aren't using anymore.
Planting productive trees throughout urban spaces.
And also starting to play around with the idea of alternative currencies.
This is Lewes in Sussex, who have recently launched the Lewes Pound, a currency that you can only spend within the town, as a way of starting to cycle money within the local economy.
You take it anywhere else, it's not worth anything.
But actually within the town you start to create these economic cycles much more effectively.
Another thing that they do is what we call an energy descent plan, which is basically to develop a plan B for the town.
Most of our local authorities, when they sit down to plan for the next five, 10, 15, 20 years of a community, still start by assuming that there will be more energy, more cars, more housing, more jobs, more growth, and so on.
What does it look like if that's not the case? And how can we embrace that and actually come up with something that was actually more likely to sustain everybody?
As a friend of mine says, "Life is a series of things you're not quite ready for."
And that's certainly been my experience with transition.
From three years ago, it just being an idea, this has become something that has virally swept around the world.
We're getting a lot of interest from government. Ed Miliband, the energy minister of this country, was invited to come to our recent conference as a keynote listener.
Which he did -- (Laughter) (Applause) -- and has since become a great advocate of the whole idea.
There are now two local authorities in this country who have declared themselves transitional local authorities, Leicestershire and Somerset. And in Stroud, the transition group there, in effect, wrote the local government's food plan.
And the head of the council said, "If we didn't have Transition Stroud, we would have to invent all of that community infrastructure for the first time."
As we see the spread of it, we see national hubs emerging.
In Scotland, the Scottish government's climate change fund has funded Transition Scotland as a national organization supporting the spread of this.
And we see it all over the place as well now.
But the key to transition is thinking not that we have to change everything now, but that things are already inevitably changing, and what we need to do is to work creatively with that, based on asking the right questions.
I think I'd like to just return at the end to the idea of stories.
Because I think stories are vital here.
And actually the stories that we tell ourselves, we have a huge dearth of stories about how to move forward creatively from here.
And one of the key things that transition does is to pull those stories out of what people are doing.
Stories about the community that's produced its own 21 pound note, for example, the school that's turned its car park into a food garden, the community that's founded its own energy company.
And for me, one of the great stories recently was the Obamas digging up the south lawn of the White House to create a vegetable garden. Because the last time that was done, when Eleanor Roosevelt did it, it led to the creation of 20 million vegetable gardens across the United States.
So the question I'd like to leave you with, really, is -- for all aspects of the things that your community needs in order to thrive, how can it be done in such a way that drastically reduces its carbon emissions, while also building resilience?
Personally, I feel enormously grateful to have lived through the age of cheap oil.
I've been astonishingly lucky, we've been astonishingly lucky.
But let us honor what it has bought us, and move forward from this point.
Because if we cling to it, and continue to assume that it can underpin our choices, the future that it presents to us is one which is really unmanageable.
And by loving and leaving all that oil has done for us, and that the Oil Age has done for us, we are able to then begin the creation of a world which is more resilient, more nourishing, and in which, we find ourselves fitter, more skilled and more connected to each other.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
It's a bit funny to be at a conference dedicated to things not seen, and present my proposal to build a 6,000-kilometer-long wall across the entire African continent.
About the size of the Great Wall of China, this would hardly be an invisible structure.
And yet it's made from parts that are invisible, or near-invisible, to the naked eye: bacteria and grains of sand.
Now, as architects we're trained to solve problems.
But I don't really believe in architectural problems; I only believe in opportunities.
Which is why I'll show you a threat, and an architectural response.
The threat is desertification.
My response is a sandstone wall made from bacteria and solidified sand, stretching across the desert.
Now, sand is a magical material of beautiful contradictions.
It is simple and complex.
It is peaceful and violent.
It is always the same, never the same, endlessly fascinating.
One billion grains of sand come into existence in the world each second.
That's a cyclical process.
As rocks and mountains die, grains of sand are born.
Some of those grains may then cement naturally into sandstone.
And as the sandstone weathers, new grains break free.
Some of those grains may then accumulate on a massive scale, into a sand dune.
In a way, the static, stone mountain becomes a moving mountain of sand.
But, moving mountains can be dangerous. Let me try and explain why.
Dry areas cover more than one third of the Earth's land surfaces.
Some are already deserts; others are being seriously degraded by the sand.
Just south of the Sahara we find the Sahel.
The name means "edge of the desert."
And this is the region most closely associated with desertification.
It was here in the late '60s and early '70s that major droughts brought three million people to become dependent upon emergency food aid, with about up to 250,000 dying.
This is a catastrophe waiting to happen again.
And it's one that gets very little attention.
In our accelerated media culture, desertification is simply too slow to reach the headlines.
It's nothing like a tsunami or a Katrina: too few crying children and smashed up houses.
And yet desertification is a major threat on all continents, affecting some 110 countries and about 70 percent of the world's agricultural drylands.
It seriously threatens the livelihoods of millions of people, and especially in Africa and China.
And it is largely an issue that we've created for ourselves through unsustainable use of scarce resources.
So, we get climate change.
We get droughts, increased desertification, crashing food systems, water scarcity, famine, forced migration, political instability, warfare, crisis.
That's a potential scenario if we fail to take this seriously.
But, how far away is it?
I went to Sokoto in northern Nigeria to try and find out how far away it is.
The dunes here move southward at a pace of around 600 meters a year.
That's the Sahara eating up almost [two meters] a day of the arable land, physically pushing people away from their homes.
Here I am -- I'm the second person on the left -- (Laughter) with the elders in Gidan-Kara, a tiny village outside of Sokoto.
They had to move this village in 1987 as a huge dune threatened to swallow it.
So, they moved the entire village, hut by hut.
This is where the village used to be.
It took us about 10 minutes to climb up to the top of that dune, which goes to show why they had to move to a safer location.
That's the kind of forced migration that desertification can lead to.
If you happen to live close to the desert border, you can pretty much calculate how long it will be before you have to carry your kids away, and abandon your home and your life as you know it.
Now, sand dunes cover only about one fifth of our deserts.
And still, those extreme environments are very good places if we want to stop the shifting sands.
Four years ago, 23 African countries came together to create the Great Green Wall Sahara.
A fantastic project, the initial plan called for a shelter belt of trees to be planted right across the African continent, from Mauritania in the west, all the way to Djibouti in the east.
If you want to stop a sand dune from moving, what you need to make sure to do is to stop the grains from avalanching over its crest.
And a good way of doing that, the most efficient way, is to use some kind of sand catcher.
Trees or cacti are good for this.
But, one of the problems with planting trees is that the people in these regions are so poor that they chop them down for firewood.
Now there is an alternative to just planting trees and hoping that they won't get chopped down.
This sandstone wall that I'm proposing essentially does three things.
It adds roughness to the dune's surface, to the texture of the dune's surface, binding the grains.
It provides a physical support structure for the trees, and it creates physical spaces, habitable spaces inside of the sand dunes.
If people live inside of the green barrier they can help support the trees, protect them from humans, and from some of the forces of nature.
Inside of the dunes we find shade.
We can start harvesting condensation, and start greening the desert from within.
Sand dunes are almost like ready-made buildings in a way.
All we need to do is solidify the parts that we need to be solid, and then excavate the sand, and we have our architecture.
We can either excavate it by hand or we can have the wind excavate it for us.
So, the wind carries the sand onto the site and then it carries the redundant sand away from the structure for us.
But, by now, you're probably asking, how am I planning to solidify a sand dune?
How do we glue those grains of sand together?
And the answer is, perhaps, that you use these guys, Bacillus pasteurii, a micro-organism that is readily available in wetlands and marshes, and does precisely that.
It takes a pile of loose sand and it creates sandstone out of it.
These images from the American Society for Microbiology show us the process.
What happens is, you pour Bacillus pasteurii onto a pile of sand, and it starts filling up the voids in between the grains.
A chemical process produces calcite, which is a kind of natural cement that binds the grains together.
The whole cementation process takes about 24 hours.
I learned about this from a professor at U.C. Davis called Jason DeJong.
He managed to do it in a mere 1,400 minutes.
Here I am, playing the part of the mad scientist, working with the bugs at UCL in London, trying to solidify them.
So, how much would this cost?
I'm not an economist, very much not, but I did, quite literally, a back of the envelope calculation -- (Laughter) -- and it seems that for a cubic meter of concrete we would have to pay in the region of 90 dollars.
And, after an initial cost of 60 bucks to buy the bacteria, which you'll never have to pay again, one cubic meter of bacterial sand would be about 11 dollars.
How do we construct something like this?
Well, I'll quickly show you two options.
The first is to create a kind of balloon structure, fill it with bacteria, then allow the sand to wash over the balloon, pop the balloon, as it were, disseminating the bacteria into the sand and solidifying it.
Then, a few years afterwards, using permacultural strategies, we green that part of the desert.
The second alternative would be to use injection piles.
So, we pushed the piles down through the dune, and we create an initial bacterial surface.
We then pull the piles up through the dune and we're able to create almost any conceivable shape inside of the sand with the sand acting as a mold as we go up.
So, we have a way of turning sand into sandstone, and then creating these habitable spaces inside of the desert dunes.
But, what should they look like?
Well, I was inspired, for my architectural form, by tafoni, which look a little bit like this, this is a model representation of it.
These are cavernous rock structures that I found on the site in Sokoto.
And I realized that if I scaled them up, they would provide me with good spatial qualities, for ventilation, for thermal comfort, and for other things.
Now, part of the formal control over this structure would be lost to nature, obviously, as the bacteria do their work.
And I think this creates a kind of boundless beauty actually.
I think there is really something in that articulation that is quite nice.
We see the result, the traces, if you like, of the Bacillus pasteurii being harnessed to sculpt the desert into these habitable environments.
Some people believe that this would spread uncontrollably, and that the bacteria would kill everything in its way.
That's not true at all.
It's a natural process. It goes on in nature today, and the bacteria die as soon as we stop feeding them.
So, there it is -- architectural anti-desertification structures made from the desert itself.
Sand-stopping devices, made from sand.
The world is likely to lose one third of its arable land by the end of the century.
In a period of unprecedented population growth and increased food demands, this could prove disastrous.
And quite frankly, we're putting our heads in the sand.
If nothing else, I would like for this scheme to initiate a discussion.
But, if I had something like a TED wish, it would be to actually get it built, to start building this habitable wall, this very, very long, but very narrow city in the desert, built into the dunescape itself.
It's not only something that supports trees, but something that connects people and countries together.
I would like to conclude by showing you an animation of the structure, and leave you with a sentence by Jorge Luis Borges.
Borges said that "nothing is built on stone, everything is built on sand, but we must build as if the sand were stone."
Now, there are many details left to explore in this scheme -- political, practical, ethical, financial.
My design, as it takes you down the rabbit hole, is fraught with many challenges and difficulties in the real world.
But, it's a beginning, it's a vision.
As Borges would have it, it's the sand.
And I think now is really the time to turn it into stone. Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music: "The Sound of Silence," Simon &amp; Garfunkel) Hello voice mail, my old friend.
(Laughter) I've called for tech support again.
I ignored my boss's warning.
Now it's evening, and my dinner first grew cold, and then grew mold.
I'm still on hold.
I don't think you understand.
I punched every touch tone I was told, but I've still spent 18 hours on hold.
It's not enough your software crashed my Mac, and it constantly hangs and bombs -- it erased my ROMs!
Now the Mac makes the sounds of silence.
In my dreams I fantasize of wreaking vengeance on you guys.
Say your motorcycle crashes.
Blood comes gushing from your gashes.
With your fading strength, you call 9-1-1 and you pray for a trained MD.
(Laughter) And you listen to the sounds of silence.
(Music) (Applause) Thank you.
Good evening and welcome to: "Spot the TED Presenter Who Used to Be a Broadway Accompanist."
(Laughter) When I was offered the Times column six years ago, the deal was like this: you'll be sent the coolest, hottest, slickest new gadgets.
Every week, it'll arrive at your door.
You get to try them out, play with them, evaluate them until the novelty wears out, before you have to send them back, and you'll get paid for it.
So, I've always been a technology nut, and I absolutely love it.
The job, though, came with one small downside, and that is, they intended to publish my email address at the end of every column.
And what I've noticed is -- first of all, you get an incredible amount of email.
If you ever are feeling lonely, get a New York Times column, because you will get hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of emails.
And the email I'm getting a lot today is about frustration.
People are feeling like things -- Ok, I just had an alarm come up on my screen.
People are feeling overwhelmed.
It may be good technology, but I feel like there's not enough of a support structure.
There's not enough help.
There's not enough thought put into the design of it to make it easy and enjoyable to use.
One time I wrote a column about my efforts to reach Dell Technical Support, and within 12 hours, there were 700 messages from readers on the feedback boards on the Times website, from users saying, ""Me too, and here's my tale of woe."
And man, let me tell you, whoever figures out how to make money off of this frustration will -- Oh, how did that get up there? Just kidding.
(Laughter) Ok, so why is the problem accelerating?
And part of the problem is, ironically, because the industry has put so much thought into making things easier to use.
I'll show you what I mean.
This is what the computer interface used to look like, DOS.
Over the years, it's gotten easier to use.
This is the original Mac operating system.
Reagan was President. Madonna was still a brunette.
And the entire operating system -- this is the good part -- the entire operating system fit in 211 k.
You couldn't put the Mac OS X logo in 211 k!
(Laughter) So the irony is, that as these things became easier to use, a less technical, broader audience was coming into contact with this equipment for the first time.
I once had the distinct privilege of sitting in on the Apple call center for a day.
The guy had a duplicate headset for me to listen to.
And the calls that -- you know how they say, "Your call may be recorded for quality assurance?"
Uh-uh.
Your call may be recorded so that they can collect the funniest dumb user stories and pass them around on a CD.
(Laughter) Which they do.
(Laughter) And I have a copy.
(Laughter) It's in your gift bag. No, no.
With your voices on it!
So, some of the stories are just so classic, and yet so understandable.
A woman called Apple to complain that her mouse was squeaking.
And the technician said, "Well, ma'am, what do you mean your mouse is squeaking?"
She says, "All I can tell you is that it squeaks louder, the faster I move it across the screen."
(Laughter) And the technician's like, "Ma'am, you've got the mouse up against the screen?"
She goes, "Well, the message said, 'Click here to continue.'" (Laughter) Well, if you like that one -- how much time have we got?
Another one, a guy called -- this is absolutely true -- his computer had crashed, and he told the technician he couldn't restart it, no matter how many times he typed "11."
And the technician said, "What? Why are you typing 11?"
He said, "The message says, 'Error Type 11.'" (Laughter) So, we must admit that some of the blame falls squarely at the feet of the users.
But why is the technical overload crisis, the complexity crisis, accelerating now?
In the hardware world, it's because we the consumers want everything to be smaller, smaller, smaller.
So the gadgets are getting tinier and tinier, but our fingers are essentially staying the same size.
So it gets to be more and more of a challenge.
Software is subject to another primal force: the mandate to release more and more versions.
When you buy a piece of software, it's not like buying a vase or a candy bar, where you own it.
It's more like joining a club, where you pay dues every year, and every year, they say, "We've added more features, and we'll sell it to you for $99."
I know one guy who's spent $4,000 just on Photoshop over the years.
And software companies make 35 percent of their revenue from just these software upgrades.
I call it the Software Upgrade Paradox -- which is that if you improve a piece of software enough times, you eventually ruin it.
I mean, Microsoft Word was last just a word processor in, you know, the Eisenhower administration.
(Laughter) But what's the alternative?
They said, "Well, wait a minute.
Everyone complains that we're adding so many features.
Let's create a word processor that's just a word processor: Simple, pure; does not do web pages, is not a database."
And it came out, and it was called Microsoft Write.
And none of you are nodding in acknowledgment, because it died.
It tanked. No one ever bought it.
I call this the Sport Utility Principle.
People like to surround themselves with unnecessary power, right?
They don't need the database and the website, but they're like, "Well, I'll upgrade, because, I might, you know, I might need that someday."
So the problem is: as you add more features, where are they going to go?
Where are you going to stick them? You only have so many design tools.
You can do buttons, you can do sliders, pop-up menus, sub-menus.
But if you're not careful about how you choose, you wind up with this.
(Laughter) This is an un-retouched -- this is not a joke -- un-retouched photo of Microsoft Word, the copy that you have, with all the toolbars open.
You've obviously never opened all the toolbars, but all you have to type in is this little, teeny window down here.
(Laughter) And we've arrived at the age of interface matrices, where there are so many features and options, you have to do two dimensions, you know: a vertical and a horizontal.
You guys all complain about how Microsoft Word is always bulleting your lists and underlining your links automatically.
The off switch is in there somewhere.
I'm telling you -- it's there.
Part of the art of designing a simple, good interface, is knowing when to use which one of these features.
So, here is the log-off dialogue box for Windows 2000.
There are only four choices, so why are they in a pop-up menu?
It's not like the rest of the screen is so full of other components that you need to collapse the choices.
They could have put them all out in view.
Here's Apple's take on the exact same dialogue box.
(Applause) Thank you -- yes, I designed the dialogue box. No, no.
Already, we can see that Apple and Microsoft have a severely divergent approach to software design.
Microsoft's approach to simplicity tends to be: let's break it down; let's just make it more steps.
There are these "wizards" everywhere.
And you know, there's a new version of Windows coming out this fall.
If they continue at this pace, there's absolutely no telling where they might wind up.
[Welcome to the Type a Word Wizard] (Laughter) (Applause) "Welcome to the Type a Word Wizard."
(Laughter) (Applause) From the drop-down menu, choose the first letter you want to type. Ok.
(Laughter) So there is a limit that we don't want to cross.
So what is the answer?
I believe in consistency, when possible, real-world equivalents, trash can folder, when possible, label things, mostly.
But I beg of the designers here to break all those rules if they violate the biggest rule of all, which is intelligence.
I'm going to give you some examples where intelligence makes something not consistent, but it's better.
If you are buying something on the web, you're supposed to put in your address, and you're supposed to choose what country you're from, ok?
There are 200 countries in the world.
I'm sorry; it's not one yet.
It's mainly like, the United States, Europe, and Japan.
So why is "United States" in the "U"s?
(Laughter) You have to scroll, like, seven screensful to get to it.
Now, it would be inconsistent to put "United States" first, but it would be intelligent.
This one's been touched on before, but why in God's name do you shut down a Windows PC by clicking a button called "Start?"
(Laughter) Here's another pet one of mine: you have a printer.
Most of the time, you want to print one copy of your document, in page order, on that printer.
So why in God's name do you see this every time you print?
It's like a 747 shuttle cockpit.
(Laughter) And one of the buttons at the bottom, you'll notice, is not "Print."
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, I'm not saying that Apple is the only company who has embraced the cult of simplicity.
Palm is also, especially in the old days, wonderful about this.
I actually got to speak to Palm when they were flying high in the '90s, and after the talk, I met one of the employees.
He says, "Nice talk." And I said, "Thank you. What do you do here?"
He said, "I'm a tap counter." I'm like, "You're a what?"
He goes, "Well Jeff Hawkins, the CEO, says, 'If any task on the Palm Pilot takes more than three taps of the stylus, it's too long, and it has to be redesigned.' So I'm the tap counter."
So, I'm going to show you an example of a company that does not have a tap counter.
(Laughter) This is Microsoft Word.
Ok, when you want to create a new blank document in Word -- it could happen.
(Laughter) You go up to the "File" menu and you choose "New."
Now, what happens when you choose "New?"
You do not.
On the opposite side of the monitor, a task bar appears, and somewhere in those links -- by the way, not at the top -- somewhere in those links is a button that makes you a new document.
Ok, so that is a company not counting taps.
You know, I don't want to just stand here and make fun of Microsoft ...
Yes, I do.
(Laughter) (Applause) The Bill Gates song!
(Piano music) I've been a geek forever and I wrote the very first DOS.
I put my software and IBM together; I got profit and they got the loss.
(Laughter) I write the code that makes the whole world run.
I'm getting royalties from everyone.
Sometimes it's garbage, but the press is snowed.
You buy the box; I'll sell the code.
Every software company is doing Microsoft's R&amp;D.
You can't keep a good idea down these days.
Even Windows is a hack.
So it's big, so it's slow. You've got nowhere to go.
I write the code that fits the world today.
Big mediocrity in every way.
We've entered planet domination mode.
You'll have no choice; you'll buy my code.
I am Bill Gates and I write the code.
(Applause) But actually, I believe there are really two Microsofts.
There's the old one, responsible for Windows and Office.
They're dying to throw the whole thing out and start fresh, but they can't.
They're locked in, because so many add-ons and other company stuff locks into the old 1982 chassis.
But there's also a new Microsoft, that's really doing good, simple interface designs.
I liked the Media Center PC.
I liked the Microsoft SPOT Watch.
The Wireless Watch flopped miserably in the market, but it wasn't because it wasn't simply and beautifully designed.
But let's put it this way: would you pay $10 a month to have a watch that has to be recharged every night like your cell phone, and stops working when you leave your area code?
(Laughter) So, the signs might indicate that the complexity crunch is only going to get worse.
So is there any hope?
The screens are getting smaller, people are illuminating, putting manuals in the boxes, things are coming out at a faster pace.
It's funny -- when Steve Jobs came back to Apple in 1997, after 12 years away, it was the MacWorld Expo -- he came to the stage in that black turtleneck and jeans, and he sort of did this.
The crowd went wild, but I had just seen -- I'm like, where have I seen this before?
I had just seen the movie "Evita" -- (Laughter) with Madonna, and I'm like, you know what?
(Music) It won't be easy. You'll think I'm strange.
(Laughter) When I try to explain why I'm back, after telling the press Apple's future is black.
You won't believe me.
All that you see is a kid in his teens who started out in a garage with only a buddy named Woz.
(Laughter) You try rhyming with garage!
(Laughter) Don't cry for me, Cupertino.
(Laughter) The truth is, I never left you.
I know the ropes now, know what the tricks are.
I made a fortune over at Pixar.
(Laughter) Don't cry for me, Cupertino.
I still wear sandals in any weather.
It's just that these days, they're Gucci leather.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
So Steve Jobs had always believed in simplicity and elegance and beauty.
And the truth is, for years I was a little depressed, because Americans obviously did not value it, because the Mac had three percent market share, Windows had 95 percent market share -- people did not think it was worth putting a price on it.
So I was a little depressed.
And then I heard Al Gore's talk, and I realized I didn't know the meaning of depressed.
(Laughter) But it turns out I was wrong, right?
Because the iPod came out, and it violated every bit of common wisdom.
Other products cost less; other products had more features, they had voice recorders and FM transmitters.
The other products were backed by Microsoft, with an open standard, not Apple's propriety standard.
But the iPod won -- this is the one they wanted.
The lesson was: simplicity sells.
And there are signs that the industry is getting the message.
This is a little company that's done very well with simplicity and elegance.
The Sonos thing -- it's catching on.
I've got just a couple examples.
Physically, a really cool, elegant thinking coming along lately.
When you have a digital camera, how do you get the pictures back to your computer?
Well, you either haul around a USB cable, or you buy a card reader and haul that around.
Either one, you're going to lose.
What I do is, I take out the memory card, and I fold it in half, revealing USB contacts.
I just stick it in the computer, offload the pictures, put it right back in the camera.
Here's another example.
Chris, you're the source of all power. Will you be my power plug?
Chris Anderson: Oh yeah. DP: Hold that and don't let go.
You might've seen this, this is Apple's new laptop.
This the power cord. It hooks on like this.
And I'm sure every one of you has done this at some point in your lives, or one of your children.
You walk along -- and I'm about to pull this onto the floor.
I don't care. It's a loaner.
(Applause) In my very last example -- I do a lot of my work using speech recognition software.
And I'll just -- you have to be kind of quiet because the software is nervous.
Speech recognition software is really great for doing emails very quickly; period.
Like, I get hundreds of them a day; period.
And it's not just what I dictate that it writes down; period.
I also use this feature called voice macros; period.
Correct "dissuade."
Ok, this is not an ideal situation, because it's getting the echo from the hall and stuff.
The point is, I can respond to people very quickly by saying a short word, and having it write out a much longer thing.
So if somebody sends me a fan letter, I'll say, "Thanks for that."
[Thank you so much for taking the time to write ...] (Laughter) (Applause) And conversely, if somebody sends me hate mail -- which happens daily -- I say, "Piss off."
(Laughter) [I admire your frankness ...] (Laughter) (Applause) So that's my dirty little secret. Don't tell anyone.
(Laughter) So the point is -- this is a really interesting story.
This is version eight of this software, and do you know what they put in version eight?
No new features. It's never happened before in software!
The company put no new features.
They just said, "We'll make this software work right." Right?
Because for years, people had bought this software, tried it out -- 95 percent accuracy was all they got, which means one in 20 words is wrong -- and they'd put it in their drawer.
And the company got sick of that, so they said, "This version, we're not going to do anything, but make sure it's darned accurate."
And so that's what they did.
This cult of doing things right is starting to spread.
So, my final advice for those of you who are consumers of this technology: remember, if it doesn't work, it's not necessarily you, ok?
It could be the design of the thing you're using.
Be aware in life of good design and bad design.
And if you're among the people who create this stuff: Easy is hard.
Pre-sweat the details for your audience.
Remember, the hard part is not deciding what features to add, it's deciding what to leave out.
And best of all, your motivation is: simplicity sells.
CA: Bravo. DP: Thank you very much.
CA: Hear, hear!
This is really a two-hour presentation I give to high school students, cut down to three minutes.
And it all started one day on a plane, on my way to TED, seven years ago.
And in the seat next to me was a high school student, a teenager, and she came from a really poor family.
And she wanted to make something of her life, and she asked me a simple little question.
She said, "What leads to success?"
And I felt really badly, because I couldn't give her a good answer.
So I get off the plane, and I come to TED.
And I think, jeez, I'm in the middle of a room of successful people!
So why don't I ask them what helped them succeed, and pass it on to kids?
So here we are, seven years, 500 interviews later, and I'm going to tell you what really leads to success and makes TEDsters tick.
And the first thing is passion.
Freeman Thomas says, "I'm driven by my passion."
TEDsters do it for love; they don't do it for money.
Carol Coletta says, "I would pay someone to do what I do."
And the interesting thing is: if you do it for love, the money comes anyway.
Work! Rupert Murdoch said to me, "It's all hard work.
Nothing comes easily. But I have a lot of fun."
Did he say fun? Rupert? Yes!
(Laughter) TEDsters do have fun working. And they work hard.
I figured, they're not workaholics. They're workafrolics.
(Laughter) Good!
(Applause) Alex Garden says, "To be successful, put your nose down in something and get damn good at it."
And it's focus.
Norman Jewison said to me, "I think it all has to do with focusing yourself on one thing."
And push!
Physically, mentally, you've got to push, push, push."
You've got to push through shyness and self-doubt.
Goldie Hawn says, "I always had self-doubts.
I wasn't good enough; I wasn't smart enough.
I didn't think I'd make it."
Now it's not always easy to push yourself, and that's why they invented mothers.
(Laughter) (Applause) Frank Gehry said to me, "My mother pushed me."
(Laughter) Serve!
A lot of kids want to be millionaires.
The first thing I say is: "OK, well you can't serve yourself; you've got to serve others something of value.
Because that's the way people really get rich."
Ideas!
TEDster Bill Gates says, "I had an idea: founding the first micro-computer software company."
I'd say it was a pretty good idea.
And there's no magic to creativity in coming up with ideas -- it's just doing some very simple things.
And I give lots of evidence.
Persist!
Joe Kraus says, "Persistence is the number one reason for our success."
You've got to persist through failure. You've got to persist through crap!
Which of course means "Criticism, Rejection, Assholes and Pressure."
(Laughter) So, the answer to this question is simple: Pay 4,000 bucks and come to TED.
(Laughter) Or failing that, do the eight things -- and trust me, these are the big eight things that lead to success.
Thank you TEDsters for all your interviews!
Chris Anderson: Thank you so much, Prime Minister, that was both fascinating and quite inspiring.
So, you're calling for a global ethic.
Would you describe that as global citizenship?
Is that an idea that you believe in, and how would you define that?
Gordon Brown: It is about global citizenship and recognizing our responsibilities to others.
There is so much to do over the next few years that is obvious to so many of us to build a better world.
And there is so much shared sense of what we need to do, that it is vital that we all come together.
But we don't necessarily have the means to do so.
So there are challenges to be met.
I believe the concept of global citizenship will simply grow out of people talking to each other across continents.
But of course the task is to create the institutions that make that global society work.
But I don't think we should underestimate the extent to which massive changes in technology make possible the linking up of people across the world.
CA: But people get excited about this idea of global citizenship, but then they get confused a bit again when they start thinking about patriotism, and how to combine these two.
I mean, you're elected as Prime Minister with a brief to bat for Britain.
How do you reconcile the two things?
GB: Well, of course national identity remains important.
But it's not at the expense of people accepting their global responsibilities.
And I think one of the problems of recession is that people become more protectionist, they look in on themselves, they try to protect their own nation, perhaps at the expense of other nations.
When you actually look at the motor of the world economy, it cannot move forward unless there is trade between the different countries.
And any nation that would become protectionist over the next few years would deprive itself of the chance of getting the benefits of growth in the world economy.
So, you've got to have a healthy sense of patriotism; that's absolutely important.
But you've got to realize that this world has changed fundamentally, and the problems we have cannot be solved by one nation and one nation alone.
CA: Well, indeed.
But what do you do when the two come into conflict and you're forced to make a decision that either is in Britain's interest, or the interest of Britons, or citizens elsewhere in the world?
GB: Well I think we can persuade people that what is necessary for Britain's long-term interests, what is necessary for America's long-term interests, is proper engagement with the rest of the world, and taking the action that is necessary.
There is a great story, again, told about Richard Nixon.
1958, Ghana becomes independent, so it is just over 50 years ago.
Richard Nixon goes to represent the United States government at the celebrations for independence in Ghana.
And it's one of his first outings as Vice President to an African country.
He doesn't quite know what to do, so he starts going around the crowd and starts talking to people and he says to people in this rather unique way, "How does it feel to be free?"
And he's going around, "How does it feel to be free?"
"How does it feel to be free?"
And then someone says, "How should I know? I come from Alabama."
(Laughter) And that was the 1950s.
Now, what is remarkable is that civil rights in America were achieved in the 1960s.
But what is equally remarkable is socioeconomic rights in Africa have not moved forward very fast even since the age of colonialism.
And yet, America and Africa have got a common interest.
And we have got to realize that if we don't link up with those people who are sensible voices and democratic voices in Africa, to work together for common causes, then the danger of Al Qaeda and related groups making progress in Africa is very big.
So, I would say that what seems sometimes to be altruism, in relation to Africa, or in relation to developing countries, is more than that.
It is enlightened self-interest for us to work with other countries.
And I would say that national interest and, if you like, what is the global interest to tackle poverty and climate change do, in the long run, come together.
And whatever the short-run price for taking action on climate change or on security, or taking action to provide opportunities for people for education, these are prices that are worth paying so that you build a stronger global society where people feel able to feel comfortable with each other and are able to communicate with each other in such a way that you can actually build stronger links between different countries.
CA: I still just want to draw out on this issue.
So, you're on vacation at a nice beach, and word comes through that there's been a massive earthquake and that there is a tsunami advancing on the beach.
One end of the beach, there is a house containing a family of five Nigerians.
And at the other end of the beach there is a single Brit.
You have time to -- (Laughter) you have time to alert one house.
What do you do?
(Laughter) GB: Modern communications.
(Applause) Alert both.
(Applause) I do agree that my responsibility is first of all to make sure that people in our country are safe.
And I wouldn't like anything that is said today to suggest that I am diminishing the importance of the responsibility that each leader has for their own country.
But I'm trying to suggest that there is a huge opportunity open to us that was never open to us before.
But the power to communicate across borders allows us to organize the world in a different way.
And I think, look at the tsunami, it's a classic example.
Where was the early warning systems?
Where was the world acting together to deal with the problems that they knew arose from the potential for earthquakes, as well as the potential for climate change?
And when the world starts to work together, with better early-warning systems, you can deal with some of these problems in a better way.
I just think we're not seeing, at the moment, the huge opportunities open to us by the ability of people to cooperate in a world where either there was isolationism before or there was limited alliances based on convenience which never actually took you to deal with some of the central problems.
CA: But I think this is the frustration that perhaps a lot of people have, like people in the audience here, where we love the kind of language that you're talking about.
It is inspiring.
A lot of us believe that that has to be the world's future.
And yet, when the situation changes, you suddenly hear politicians talking as if, you know, for example, the life of one American soldier is worth countless numbers of Iraqi civilians.
When the pedal hits the metal, the idealism can get moved away.
I'm just wondering whether you can see that changing over time, whether you see in Britain that there are changing attitudes, and that people are actually more supportive of the kind of global ethic that you talk about.
GB: I think every religion, every faith, and I'm not just talking here to people of faith or religion -- it has this global ethic at the center of its credo.
And whether it's Jewish or whether it's Muslim or whether it's Hindu, or whether it's Sikh, the same global ethic is at the heart of each of these religions.
So, I think you're dealing with something that people instinctively see as part of their moral sense.
So you're building on something that is not pure self-interest.
You're building on people's ideas and values -- that perhaps they're candles that burn very dimly on certain occasions.
But it is a set of values that cannot, in my view, be extinguished.
Then the question is, how do you make that change happen?
How do you persuade people that it is in their interest to build strong -- After the Second World War, we built institutions, the United Nations, the IMF, the World Bank, the World Trade Organization, the Marshall Plan.
There was a period in which people talked about an act of creation, because these institutions were so new.
But they are now out of date. They don't deal with the problems.
You can't deal with the environmental problem through existing institutions.
You can't deal with the security problem in the way that you need to.
You can't deal with the economic and financial problem.
So we have got to rebuild our global institutions, build them in a way that is suitable to the challenges of this time.
And I believe that if you look at the biggest challenge we face, it is to persuade people to have the confidence that we can build a truly global society with the institutions that are founded on these rules.
So, I come back to my initial point.
Sometimes you think things are impossible.
Nobody would have said 50 years ago that apartheid would have gone in 1990, or that the Berlin wall would have fallen at the turn of the '80s and '90s, or that polio could be eradicated, or perhaps 60 years ago, nobody would have said a man could gone to the Moon.
All these things have happened.
By tackling the impossible, you make the impossible possible.
CA: And we have had a speaker who said that very thing, and swallowed a sword right after that, which was quite dramatic.
(Laughter) GB: Followed my sword and swallow.
CA: But, surely a true global ethic is for someone to say, "I believe that the life of every human on the planet is worth the same, equal consideration, regardless of nationality and religion."
And you have politicians who have -- you're elected.
In a way, you can't say that.
Even if, as a human being, you believe that, you can't say that.
You're elected for Britain's interests.
GB: We have a responsibility to protect.
I mean look, 1918, the Treaty of Versailles, and all the treaties before that, the Treaty of Westphalia and everything else, were about protecting the sovereign right of countries to do what they want.
Since then, the world has moved forward, partly as a result of what happened with the Holocaust, and people's concern about the rights of individuals within territories where they need protection, partly because of what we saw in Rwanda, partly because of what we saw in Bosnia.
The idea of the responsibility to protect all individuals who are in situations where they are at humanitarian risk is now being established as a principle which governs the world.
So, while I can't automatically say that Britain will rush to the aid of any citizen of any country, in danger, I can say that Britain is in a position where we're working with other countries so that this idea that you have a responsibility to protect people who are victims of either genocide or humanitarian attack, is something that is accepted by the whole world.
Now, in the end, that can only be achieved if your international institutions work well enough to be able to do so.
And that comes back to what the future role of the United Nations, and what it can do, actually is.
But, the responsibility to protect is a new idea that is, in a sense, taken over from the idea of self-determination as the principle governing the international community.
CA: Can you picture, in our lifetimes, a politician ever going out on a platform of the kind of full-form global ethic, global citizenship?
And basically saying, "I believe that all people across the planet have equal consideration, and if in power we will act in that way.
And we believe that the people of this country are also now global citizens and will support that ethic."
GB: Is that not what we're doing in the debate about climate change?
We're saying that you cannot solve the problem of climate change in one country; you've got to involve all countries.
You're saying that you must, and you have a duty to help those countries that cannot afford to deal with the problems of climate change themselves.
You're saying you want a deal with all the different countries of the world where we're all bound together to cutting carbon emissions in a way that is to the benefit of the whole world.
We've never had this before because Kyoto didn't work.
If you could get a deal at Copenhagen, where people agreed, A, that there was a long-term target for carbon emission cuts, B, that there was short-range targets that had to be met so this wasn't just abstract; it was people actually making decisions now that would make a difference now, and if you could then find a financing mechanism that meant that the poorest countries that had been hurt by our inability to deal with climate change over many, many years and decades are given special help so that they can move to energy-efficient technologies, and they are in a position financially to be able to afford the long-term investment that is associated with cutting carbon emissions, then you are treating the world equally, by giving consideration to every part of the planet and the needs they have.
It doesn't mean that everybody does exactly the same thing, because we've actually got to do more financially to help the poorest countries, but it does mean there is equal consideration for the needs of citizens in a single planet.
CA: Yes.
And then of course the theory is still that those talks get rent apart by different countries fighting over their own individual interests.
GB: Yes, but I think Europe has got a position, which is 27 countries have already come together.
I mean, the great difficulty in Europe is if you're at a meeting and 27 people speak, it takes a very, very long time.
But we did get an agreement on climate change.
America has made its first disposition on this with the bill that President Obama should be congratulated for getting through Congress.
Japan has made an announcement.
China and India have signed up to the scientific evidence.
And now we've got to move them to accept a long-term target, and then short-term targets.
But more progress has been made, I think, in the last few weeks than had been made for some years.
And I do believe that there is a strong possibility that if we work together, we can get that agreement to Copenhagen.
I certainly have been putting forward proposals that would have allowed the poorest parts of the world to feel that we have taken into account their specific needs.
And we would help them adapt.
And we would help them make the transition to a low-carbon economy.
I do think a reform of the international institutions is vital to this.
When the IMF was created in the 1940s, it was created with resources that were five percent or so of the world's GDP.
The IMF now has limited resources, one percent.
It can't really make the difference that ought to be made in a period of crisis.
So, we've got to rebuild the world institutions.
And that's a big task: persuading all the different countries with the different voting shares in these institutions to do so.
There is a story told about the three world leaders of the day getting a chance to get some advice from God.
And the story is told that Bill Clinton went to God and he asked when there will be successful climate change and a low-carbon economy.
And God shook his head and said, "Not this year, not this decade, perhaps not even in [your] lifetime."
And Bill Clinton walked away in tears because he had failed to get what he wanted.
And then the story is that Barroso, the president of the European Commission, went to God and he asked, "When will we get a recovery of global growth?"
And God said, "Not this year, not in this decade, perhaps not in your lifetime."
So Barroso walked away crying and in tears.
And then the Secretary-General of the United Nations came up to speak to God and said, "When will our international institutions work?"
And God cried.
(Laughter) It is very important to recognize that this reform of institutions is the next stage after agreeing upon ourselves that there is a clear ethic upon which we can build.
CA: Prime Minister, I think there are many in the audience who are truly appreciative of the efforts you made in terms of the financial mess we got ourselves into.
And there are certainly many people in the audience who will be cheering you on as you seek to advance this global ethic.
Thank you so much for coming to TED.
GB: Well, thank you.
(Applause)
How do you observe something you can't see?
This is the basic question of somebody who's interested in finding and studying black holes.
Because black holes are objects whose pull of gravity is so intense that nothing can escape it, not even light, so you can't see it directly.
So, my story today about black holes is about one particular black hole.
I'm interested in finding whether or not there is a really massive, what we like to call "supermassive" black hole at the center of our galaxy.
And the reason this is interesting is that it gives us an opportunity to prove whether or not these exotic objects really exist.
And second, it gives us the opportunity to understand how these supermassive black holes interact with their environment, and to understand how they affect the formation and evolution of the galaxies which they reside in.
So, to begin with, we need to understand what a black hole is so we can understand the proof of a black hole.
So, what is a black hole?
Well, in many ways a black hole is an incredibly simple object, because there are only three characteristics that you can describe: the mass, the spin, and the charge.
And I'm going to only talk about the mass.
So, in that sense, it's a very simple object.
But in another sense, it's an incredibly complicated object that we need relatively exotic physics to describe, and in some sense represents the breakdown of our physical understanding of the universe.
But today, the way I want you to understand a black hole, for the proof of a black hole, is to think of it as an object whose mass is confined to zero volume.
So, despite the fact that I'm going to talk to you about an object that's supermassive, and I'm going to get to what that really means in a moment, it has no finite size.
So, this is a little tricky.
But fortunately there is a finite size that you can see, and that's known as the Schwarzschild radius.
And that's named after the guy who recognized why it was such an important radius.
This is a virtual radius, not reality; the black hole has no size.
So why is it so important?
It's important because it tells us that any object can become a black hole.
That means you, your neighbor, your cellphone, the auditorium can become a black hole if you can figure out how to compress it down to the size of the Schwarzschild radius.
At that point, what's going to happen?
At that point gravity wins.
Gravity wins over all other known forces.
And the object is forced to continue to collapse to an infinitely small object.
And then it's a black hole.
So, if I were to compress the Earth down to the size of a sugar cube, it would become a black hole, because the size of a sugar cube is its Schwarzschild radius.
Now, the key here is to figure out what that Schwarzschild radius is.
And it turns out that it's actually pretty simple to figure out.
It depends only on the mass of the object.
Bigger objects have bigger Schwarzschild radii.
Smaller objects have smaller Schwarzschild radii.
So, if I were to take the sun and compress it down to the scale of the University of Oxford, it would become a black hole.
So, now we know what a Schwarzschild radius is.
And it's actually quite a useful concept, because it tells us not only when a black hole will form, but it also gives us the key elements for the proof of a black hole.
I only need two things.
I need to understand the mass of the object I'm claiming is a black hole, and what its Schwarzschild radius is.
And since the mass determines the Schwarzschild radius, there is actually only one thing I really need to know.
So, my job in convincing you that there is a black hole is to show that there is some object that's confined to within its Schwarzschild radius.
And your job today is to be skeptical.
Okay, so, I'm going to talk about no ordinary black hole; I'm going to talk about supermassive black holes.
So, I wanted to say a few words about what an ordinary black hole is, as if there could be such a thing as an ordinary black hole.
An ordinary black hole is thought to be the end state of a really massive star's life.
So, if a star starts its life off with much more mass than the mass of the Sun, it's going to end its life by exploding and leaving behind these beautiful supernova remnants that we see here.
And inside that supernova remnant is going to be a little black hole that has a mass roughly three times the mass of the Sun.
On an astronomical scale that's a very small black hole.
Now, what I want to talk about are the supermassive black holes.
And the supermassive black holes are thought to reside at the center of galaxies.
And this beautiful picture taken with the Hubble Space Telescope shows you that galaxies come in all shapes and sizes.
There are big ones. There are little ones.
Almost every object in that picture there is a galaxy.
And there is a very nice spiral up in the upper left.
And there are a hundred billion stars in that galaxy, just to give you a sense of scale.
And all the light that we see from a typical galaxy, which is the kind of galaxies that we're seeing here, comes from the light from the stars.
So, we see the galaxy because of the star light.
Now, there are a few relatively exotic galaxies.
I like to call these the prima donna of the galaxy world, because they are kind of show offs.
And we call them active galactic nuclei.
And we call them that because their nucleus, or their center, are very active.
So, at the center there, that's actually where most of the starlight comes out from.
And yet, what we actually see is light that can't be explained by the starlight.
It's way more energetic.
In fact, in a few examples it's like the ones that we're seeing here.
There are also jets emanating out from the center.
Again, a source of energy that's very difficult to explain if you just think that galaxies are composed of stars.
So, what people have thought is that perhaps there are supermassive black holes which matter is falling on to.
So, you can't see the black hole itself, but you can convert the gravitational energy of the black hole into the light we see.
So, there is the thought that maybe supermassive black holes exist at the center of galaxies.
But it's a kind of indirect argument.
Nonetheless, it's given rise to the notion that maybe it's not just these prima donnas that have these supermassive black holes, but rather all galaxies might harbor these supermassive black holes at their centers.
And if that's the case -- and this is an example of a normal galaxy; what we see is the star light.
And if there is a supermassive black hole, what we need to assume is that it's a black hole on a diet.
Because that is the way to suppress the energetic phenomena that we see in active galactic nuclei.
If we're going to look for these stealth black holes at the center of galaxies, the best place to look is in our own galaxy, our Milky Way.
And this is a wide field picture taken of the center of the Milky Way.
And what we see is a line of stars.
And that is because we live in a galaxy which has a flattened, disk-like structure.
And we live in the middle of it, so when we look towards the center, we see this plane which defines the plane of the galaxy, or line that defines the plane of the galaxy.
Now, the advantage of studying our own galaxy is it's simply the closest example of the center of a galaxy that we're ever going to have, because the next closest galaxy is 100 times further away.
So, we can see far more detail in our galaxy than anyplace else.
And as you'll see in a moment, the ability to see detail is key to this experiment.
So, how do astronomers prove that there is a lot of mass inside a small volume?
Which is the job that I have to show you today.
And the tool that we use is to watch the way stars orbit the black hole.
Stars will orbit the black hole in the very same way that planets orbit the sun.
It's the gravitational pull that makes these things orbit.
If there were no massive objects these things would go flying off, or at least go at a much slower rate because all that determines how they go around is how much mass is inside its orbit.
So, this is great, because remember my job is to show there is a lot of mass inside a small volume.
So, if I know how fast it goes around, I know the mass.
And if I know the scale of the orbit I know the radius.
So, I want to see the stars that are as close to the center of the galaxy as possible.
Because I want to show there is a mass inside as small a region as possible.
So, this means that I want to see a lot of detail.
And that's the reason that for this experiment we've used the world's largest telescope.
This is the Keck observatory. It hosts two telescopes with a mirror 10 meters, which is roughly the diameter of a tennis court.
Now, this is wonderful, because the campaign promise of large telescopes is that is that the bigger the telescope, the smaller the detail that we can see.
But it turns out these telescopes, or any telescope on the ground has had a little bit of a challenge living up to this campaign promise.
And that is because of the atmosphere.
Atmosphere is great for us; it allows us to survive here on Earth.
But it's relatively challenging for astronomers who want to look through the atmosphere to astronomical sources.
So, to give you a sense of what this is like, it's actually like looking at a pebble at the bottom of a stream.
Looking at the pebble on the bottom of the stream, the stream is continuously moving and turbulent, and that makes it very difficult to see the pebble on the bottom of the stream.
Very much in the same way, it's very difficult to see astronomical sources, because of the atmosphere that's continuously moving by.
So, I've spent a lot of my career working on ways to correct for the atmosphere, to give us a cleaner view.
And that buys us about a factor of 20.
And I think all of you can agree that if you can figure out how to improve life by a factor of 20, you've probably improved your lifestyle by a lot, say your salary, you'd notice, or your kids, you'd notice.
And this animation here shows you one example of the techniques that we use, called adaptive optics.
You're seeing an animation that goes between an example of what you would see if you don't use this technique -- in other words, just a picture that shows the stars -- and the box is centered on the center of the galaxy, where we think the black hole is.
So, without this technology you can't see the stars.
With this technology all of a sudden you can see it.
This technology works by introducing a mirror into the telescope optics system that's continuously changing to counteract what the atmosphere is doing to you.
So, it's kind of like very fancy eyeglasses for your telescope.
Now, in the next few slides I'm just going to focus on that little square there.
So, we're only going to look at the stars inside that small square, although we've looked at all of them.
So, I want to see how these things have moved.
And over the course of this experiment, these stars have moved a tremendous amount.
So, we've been doing this experiment for 15 years, and we see the stars go all the way around.
Now, most astronomers have a favorite star, and mine today is a star that's labeled up there, SO-2.
Absolutely my favorite star in the world.
And that's because it goes around in only 15 years.
And to give you a sense of how short that is, the sun takes 200 million years to go around the center of the galaxy.
Stars that we knew about before, that were as close to the center of the galaxy as possible, take 500 years.
And this one, this one goes around in a human lifetime.
That's kind of profound, in a way.
But it's the key to this experiment. The orbit tells me how much mass is inside a very small radius.
So, next we see a picture here that shows you before this experiment the size to which we could confine the mass of the center of the galaxy.
What we knew before is that there was four million times the mass of the sun inside that circle.
And as you can see, there was a lot of other stuff inside that circle.
You can see a lot of stars.
So, there was actually lots of alternatives to the idea that there was a supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy, because you could put a lot of stuff in there.
But with this experiment, we've confined that same mass to a much smaller volume that's 10,000 times smaller.
And because of that, we've been able to show that there is a supermassive black hole there.
To give you a sense of how small that size is, that's the size of our solar system.
So, we're cramming four million times the mass of the sun into that small volume.
Now, truth in advertising. Right?
I have told you my job is to get it down to the Schwarzchild radius.
And the truth is, I'm not quite there.
But we actually have no alternative today to explaining this concentration of mass.
And, in fact, it's the best evidence we have to date for not only existence of a supermassive black hole at the center of our own galaxy, but any in our universe.
So, what next? I actually think this is about as good as we're going to do with today's technology, so let's move on with the problem.
So, what I want to tell you, very briefly, is a few examples of the excitement of what we can do today at the center of the galaxy, now that we know that there is, or at least we believe, that there is a supermassive black hole there.
And the fun phase of this experiment is, while we've tested some of our ideas about the consequences of a supermassive black hole being at the center of our galaxy, almost every single one has been inconsistent with what we actually see.
And that's the fun.
So, let me give you the two examples.
You can ask, "What do you expect for the old stars, stars that have been around the center of the galaxy for a long time, they've had plenty of time to interact with the black hole."
What you expect there is that old stars should be very clustered around the black hole.
You should see a lot of old stars next to that black hole.
Likewise, for the young stars, or in contrast, the young stars, they just should not be there.
A black hole does not make a kind neighbor to a stellar nursery.
To get a star to form, you need a big ball of gas and dust to collapse.
And it's a very fragile entity.
And what does the big black hole do?
It strips that gas cloud apart.
It pulls much stronger on one side than the other and the cloud is stripped apart.
In fact, we anticipated that star formation shouldn't proceed in that environment.
So, you shouldn't see young stars.
So, what do we see?
Using observations that are not the ones I've shown you today, we can actually figure out which ones are old and which ones are young.
The old ones are red.
The young ones are blue. And the yellow ones, we don't know yet.
So, you can already see the surprise.
There is a dearth of old stars.
There is an abundance of young stars, so it's the exact opposite of the prediction.
So, this is the fun part.
And in fact, today, this is what we're trying to figure out, this mystery of how do you get -- how do you resolve this contradiction.
So, in fact, my graduate students are, at this very moment, today, at the telescope, in Hawaii, making observations to get us hopefully to the next stage, where we can address this question of why are there so many young stars, and so few old stars.
To make further progress we really need to look at the orbits of stars that are much further away.
To do that we'll probably need much more sophisticated technology than we have today.
Because, in truth, while I said we're correcting for the Earth's atmosphere, we actually only correct for half the errors that are introduced.
We do this by shooting a laser up into the atmosphere, and what we think we can do is if we shine a few more that we can correct the rest.
So this is what we hope to do in the next few years.
And on a much longer time scale, what we hope to do is build even larger telescopes, because, remember, bigger is better in astronomy.
So, we want to build a 30 meter telescope.
And with this telescope we should be able to see stars that are even closer to the center of the galaxy.
And we hope to be able to test some of Einstein's theories of general relativity, some ideas in cosmology about how galaxies form.
So, we think the future of this experiment is quite exciting.
So, in conclusion, I'm going to show you an animation that basically shows you how these orbits have been moving, in three dimensions.
And I hope, if nothing else, I've convinced you that, one, we do in fact have a supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy.
And this means that these things do exist in our universe, and we have to contend with this, we have to explain how you can get these objects in our physical world.
Second, we've been able to look at that interaction of how supermassive black holes interact, and understand, maybe, the role in which they play in shaping what galaxies are, and how they work.
And last but not least, none of this would have happened without the advent of the tremendous progress that's been made on the technology front.
And we think that this is a field that is moving incredibly fast, and holds a lot in store for the future.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
For emotions, we should not move quickly to the desert.
So, first, a small housekeeping announcement: please switch off your proper English check programs installed in your brain.
(Applause) So, welcome to the Golden Desert, Indian desert.
It receives the least rainfall in the country, lowest rainfall.
If you are well-versed with inches, nine inches, centimeters, 16 [centimeters].
The groundwater is 300 feet deep, 100 meters.
And in most parts it is saline, not fit for drinking.
So, you can't install hand pumps or dig wells, though there is no electricity in most of the villages.
But suppose you use the green technology, solar pumps -- they are of no use in this area.
So, welcome to the Golden Desert.
Clouds seldom visit this area.
But we find 40 different names of clouds in this dialect used here.
There are a number of techniques to harvest rain.
This is a new work, it's a new program.
But for the desert society this is no program; this is their life.
And they harvest rain in many ways.
So, this is the first device they use in harvesting rain.
It's called kunds; somewhere it is called [unclear].
And you can notice they have created a kind of false catchment.
The desert is there, sand dunes, some small field.
And this is all big raised platform.
You can notice the small holes the water will fall on this catchment, and there is a slope.
Sometimes our engineers and architects do not care about slopes in bathrooms, but here they will care properly.
And the water will go where it should go.
And then it is 40 feet deep.
The waterproofing is done perfectly, better than our city contractors, because not a single drop should go waste in this.
They collect 100 thousand liters in one season.
And this is pure drinking water.
Below the surface there is hard saline water.
But now you can have this for year round.
It's two houses.
We often use a term called bylaws.
Because we are used to get written things.
But here it is unwritten by law.
And people made their house, and the water storage tanks.
These raised up platforms just like this stage.
In fact they go 15 feet deep, and collect rain water from roof, there is a small pipe, and from their courtyard.
It can also harvest something like 25,000 in a good monsoon.
Another big one, this is of course out of the hardcore desert area.
This is near Jaipur. This is called the Jaigarh Fort.
And it can collect six million gallons of rainwater in one season.
The age is 400 years.
So, since 400 years it has been giving you almost six million gallons of water per season.
You can calculate the price of that water.
It draws water from 15 kilometers of canals.
You can see a modern road, hardly 50 years old.
It can break sometimes.
But this 400 year old canal, which draws water, it is maintained for so many generations.
Of course if you want to go inside, the two doors are locked.
But they can be opened for TED people.
(Laughter) And we request them.
You can see person coming up with two canisters of water.
And the water level -- these are not empty canisters -- water level is right up to this.
It can envy many municipalities, the color, the taste, the purity of this water.
And this is what they call Zero B type of water, because it comes from the clouds, pure distilled water.
We stop for a quick commercial break, and then we come back to the traditional systems.
The government thought that this is a very backward area and we should bring a multi-million dollar project to bring water from the Himalayas.
That's why I said that this is a commercial break.
(Laughter) But we will come back, once again, to the traditional thing.
So, water from 300, 400 kilometers away, soon it become like this.
In many portions, water hyacinth covered these big canals like anything.
Of course there are some areas where water is reaching, I'm not saying that it is not reaching at all.
But the tail end, the Jaisalmer area, you will notice in Bikaner things like this: where the water hyacinth couldn't grow, the sand is flowing in these canals.
The bonus is that you can find wildlife around it.
(Laughter) We had full-page advertisements, some 30 years, 25 years ago when this canal came.
They said that throw away your traditional systems, these new cement tanks will supply you piped water.
It's a dream. And it became a dream also.
Because soon the water was not able to reach these areas.
And people started renovating their own structures.
These are all traditional water structures, which we won't be able to explain in such a short time.
But you can see that no woman is standing on those.
(Laughter) And they are plaiting hair.
(Applause) Jaisalmer. This is heart of desert.
This town was established 800 years ago.
I'm not sure by that time Bombay was there, or Delhi was there, or Chennai was there, or Bangalore was there.
So, this was the terminal point for silk route.
Well connected, 800 years ago, through Europe.
None of us were able to go to Europe, but Jaisalmer was well connected to it.
And this is the 16 centimeter area.
Such a limited rainfall, and highest colorful life flourished in these areas.
You won't find water in this slide.
But it is invisible.
Somewhere a stream or a rivulet is running through here.
Or, if you want to paint, you can paint it blue throughout because every roof which you see in this picture collects rainwater drops and deposit in the rooms.
But apart from this system, they designed 52 beautiful water bodies around this town.
And what we call private public partnership you can add estate also.
So, estate, public and private entrepreneurs work together to build this beautiful water body.
And it's a kind of water body for all seasons.
You will admire it. Just behold the beauty throughout the year.
Whether water level goes up or down, the beauty is there throughout.
Another water body, dried up, of course, during the summer period, but you can see how the traditional society combines engineering with aesthetics, with the heart.
These statues, marvelous statues, gives you an idea of water table.
When this rain comes and the water starts filling this tank, it will submerge these beautiful statues in what we call in English today "mass communication."
This was for mass communication.
Everybody in the town will know that this elephant has drowned, so water will be there for seven months or nine months, or 12 months.
And then they will come and worship this pond, pay respect, their gratitude.
Another small water body, called the [unclear].
It is difficult to translate in English, especially in my English.
But the nearest would be "glory," a reputation.
The reputation in desert of this small water body is that it never dries up.
In severe drought periods nobody has seen this water body getting dried up.
And perhaps they knew the future also.
It was designed some 150 years ago.
But perhaps they knew that on sixth, November, 2009, there will be a TED green and blue session, so they painted it like this.
(Laughter) (Applause) Dry water body. Children are standing on a very difficult device to explain.
This is called kund. We have, in English, surface water and ground water.
But this is not ground water.
You can draw ground water from any well.
But this is no ordinary well.
It squeeze the moisture hidden in the sand.
And they have dubbed this water as the third one called [unclear].
And there is a gypsum belt running below it.
And it was deposited by the great mother Earth, some three million years ago.
And where we have this gypsum strip they can harvest this water.
This is the same dry water body.
Now, you don't find any kund; they are all submerged.
But when the water goes down they will be able to draw water from those structures throughout the year.
This year they have received only six centimeters.
Six centimeter of rainfall, and they can telephone you that if you find any water problem in your city, Delhi, Bombay, Bangalore, Mysore, please come to our area of six centimeters, we can give you water.
(Laughter) How they maintain them?
There are three things: concept, planning, making the actual thing, and also maintaining them.
It is a structure for maintain, for centuries, by generations, without any department, without any funding, So the secret is "[unclear]," respect.
Your own thing, not personal property, my property, every time.
So, these stone pillars will remind you that you are entering into a water body area.
Don't spit, don't do anything wrong, so that the clean water can be collected.
Another pillar, stone pillar on your right side.
If you climb these three, six steps you will find something very nice.
This was done in 11th century.
And you have to go further down.
They say that a picture is worth a thousand words, so we can say a thousand words right now, an another thousand words.
If the water table goes down, you will find new stairs.
If it comes up, some of them will be submerged.
So, throughout the year this beautiful system will give you some pleasure.
Three sides, such steps, on the fourth side there is a four-story building where you can organize such TED conferences anytime.
(Applause) Excuse me, who built these structures?
They are in front of you.
The best civil engineers we had, the best planners, the best architects.
We can say that because of them, because of their forefathers, India could get the first engineering college in 1847.
There were no English medium schools at that time, even no Hindi schools, [unclear] schools.
But such people, compelled to the East India Company, which came here for business, a very dirty kind of business ...
(Laughter) but not to create the engineering colleges.
But because of them, first engineering college was created in a small village, not in the town.
The last point, we all know in our primary schools that that camel is a ship of desert.
So, you can find through your Jeep, a camel, and a cart.
This tire comes from the airplane.
So, look at the beauty from the desert society who can harvest rainwater, and also create something through a tire from a jet plane, and used in a camel cart.
Last picture, it's a tattoo, 2,000-years-old tattoo.
They were using it on their body.
Tattoo was, at one time, a kind of a blacklisted or con thing, but now it is in thing.
(Laughter) (Applause) You can copy this tattoo. I have some posters of this.
(Laughter) The center of life is water.
These are the beautiful waves.
These are the beautiful stairs which we just saw in one of the slides.
These are the trees.
And these are the flowers which add fragrance to our lives.
So, this is the message of desert.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So, first of all, I wish I had your eloquence, truly, in any language.
(Applause) These artifacts and designs are inspiring.
Do you believe that they can be used elsewhere, that the world can learn from this?
Or is this just right for this place?
Anupam Mishra: No, the basic idea is to utilize water that falls on our area.
So, the ponds, the open bodies, are everywhere, right from Sri Lanka to Kashmir, and in other parts also.
And these [unclear], which stored water, there are two type of things.
One recharge, and one stores.
So, it depends on the terrain.
But kund, which uses the gypsum belt, for that you have to go back to your calendar, three million years ago.
If it is there it can be done right now.
Otherwise, it can't be done.
(Laughter) (Applause) CA: Thank you so much.
(Applause)
I'm talking to you about the worst form of human rights violation, the third-largest organized crime, a $10 billion industry.
I'm talking to you about modern-day slavery.
I'd like to tell you the story of these three children, Pranitha, Shaheen and Anjali.
Pranitha's mother was a woman in prostitution, a prostituted person.
She got infected with HIV, and towards the end of her life, when she was in the final stages of AIDS, she could not prostitute, so she sold four-year-old Pranitha to a broker.
By the time we got the information, we reached there, Pranitha was already raped by three men.
Shaheen's background I don't even know.
We found her in a railway track, raped by many, many men, I don't know many.
But the indications of that on her body was that her intestine was outside her body.
And when we took her to the hospital she needed 32 stitches to put back her intestine into her body.
We still don't know who her parents are, who she is.
All that we know that hundreds of men had used her brutally.
Anjali's father, a drunkard, sold his child for pornography.
You're seeing here images of three years, four-year-olds, and five-year-old children who have been trafficked for commercial sexual exploitation.
In this country, and across the globe, hundreds and thousands of children, as young as three, as young as four, are sold into sexual slavery.
But that's not the only purpose that human beings are sold for.
They are sold in the name of adoption.
They are sold in the name of organ trade.
They are sold in the name of forced labor, camel jockeying, anything, everything.
I work on the issue of commercial sexual exploitation.
And I tell you stories from there.
My own journey to work with these children started as a teenager.
I was 15 when I was gang-raped by eight men.
I don't remember the rape part of it so much as much as the anger part of it.
Yes, there were eight men who defiled me, raped me, but that didn't go into my consciousness.
I never felt like a victim, then or now.
But what lingered from then till now -- I am 40 today -- is this huge outrageous anger.
Two years, I was ostracized, I was stigmatized, I was isolated, because I was a victim.
And that's what we do to all traffic survivors.
We, as a society, we have PhDs in victimizing a victim.
Right from the age of 15, when I started looking around me, I started seeing hundreds and thousands of women and children who are left in sexual slavery-like practices, but have absolutely no respite, because we don't allow them to come in.
Where does their journey begin?
Most of them come from very optionless families, not just poor.
You have even the middle class sometimes getting trafficked.
I had this I.S. officer's daughter, who is 14 years old, studying in ninth standard, who was raped chatting with one individual, and ran away from home because she wanted to become a heroine, who was trafficked.
I have hundreds and thousands of stories of very very well-to-do families, and children from well-to-do families, who are getting trafficked.
These people are deceived, forced.
99.9 percent of them resist being inducted into prostitution.
Some pay the price for it.
They're killed; we don't even hear about them.
They are voiceless, [unclear], nameless people.
But the rest, who succumb into it, go through everyday torture.
Because the men who come to them are not men who want to make you your girlfriends, or who want to have a family with you.
These are men who buy you for an hour, for a day, and use you, throw you.
Each of the girls that I have rescued -- I have rescued more than 3,200 girls -- each of them tell me one story in common ...
(Applause) one story about one man, at least, putting chili powder in her vagina, one man taking a cigarette and burning her, one man whipping her.
We are living among those men: they're our brothers, fathers, uncles, cousins, all around us.
And we are silent about them.
We think it is easy money.
We think it is shortcut.
We think the person likes to do what she's doing.
But the extra bonuses that she gets is various infections, sexually transmitted infections, HIV, AIDS, syphilis, gonorrhea, you name it, substance abuse, drugs, everything under the sun.
And one day she gives up on you and me, because we have no options for her.
And therefore she starts normalizing this exploitation.
She believes, "Yes, this is it, this is what my destiny is about."
And this is normal, to get raped by 100 men a day.
And it's abnormal to live in a shelter.
It's abnormal to get rehabilitated.
It's in that context that I work.
It's in that context that I rescue children.
I've rescued children as young as three years, and I've rescued women as old as 40 years.
When I rescued them, one of the biggest challenges I had was where do I begin.
Because I had lots of them who were already HIV infected.
One third of the people I rescue are HIV positive.
And therefore my challenge was to understand how can I get out the power from this pain.
And for me, I was my greatest experience.
Understanding my own self, understanding my own pain, my own isolation, was my greatest teacher.
Because what we did with these girls is to understand their potential.
You see a girl here who is trained as a welder.
She works for a very big company, a workshop in Hyderabad, making furnitures.
She earns around 12,000 rupees.
She is an illiterate girl, trained, skilled as a welder.
Why welding and why not computers?
We felt, one of the things that these girls had is immense amount of courage.
They did not have any pardas inside their body, hijabs inside themselves; they've crossed the barrier of it.
And therefore they could fight in a male-dominated world, very easily, and not feel very shy about it.
We have trained girls as carpenters, as masons, as security guards, as cab drivers.
And each one of them are excelling in their chosen field, gaining confidence, restoring dignity, and building hopes in their own lives.
These girls are also working in big construction companies like Ram-ki construction, as masons, full-time masons.
What has been my challenge?
My challenge has not been the traffickers who beat me up.
I've been beaten up more than 14 times in my life.
I can't hear from my right ear.
I've lost a staff of mine who was murdered while on a rescue.
My biggest challenge is society.
It's you and me.
My biggest challenge is your blocks to accept these victims as our own.
A very supportive friend of mine, a well-wisher of mine, used to give me every month, 2,000 rupees for vegetables.
When her mother fell sick she said, "Sunitha, you have so much of contacts.
Can you get somebody in my house to work, so that she can look after my mother?"
And there is a long pause.
And then she says, "Not one of our girls."
It's very fashionable to talk about human trafficking, in this fantastic A-C hall.
It's very nice for discussion, discourse, making films and everything.
But it is not nice to bring them to our homes.
It's not nice to give them employment in our factories, our companies.
It's not nice for our children to study with their children.
There it ends.
That's my biggest challenge.
If I'm here today, I'm here not only as Sunitha Krishnan.
I'm here as a voice of the victims and survivors of human trafficking.
They need your compassion.
They need your empathy.
They need, much more than anything else, your acceptance.
Many times when I talk to people, I keep telling them one thing: don't tell me hundred ways how you cannot respond to this problem.
Can you ply your mind for that one way that you can respond to the problem?
And that's what I'm here for, asking for your support, demanding for your support, requesting for your support.
Can you break your culture of silence?
Can you speak to at least two persons about this story?
Tell them this story. Convince them to tell the story to another two persons.
I'm not asking you all to become Mahatma Gandhis or Martin Luther Kings, or Medha Patkars, or something like that.
I'm asking you, in your limited world, can you open your minds? Can you open your hearts?
Can you just encompass these people too?
Because they are also a part of us.
They are also part of this world.
I'm asking you, for these children, whose faces you see, they're no more.
They died of AIDS last year.
I'm asking you to help them, accept as human beings -- not as philanthropy, not as charity, but as human beings who deserve all our support.
I'm asking you this because no child, no human being, deserves what these children have gone through.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the last 20 years I've been designing puzzles.
And I'm here today to give you a little tour, starting from the very first puzzle I designed, through what I'm doing now.
I've designed puzzles for books, printed things.
I'm the puzzle columnist for Discover Magazine.
I've been doing that for about 10 years.
I have a monthly puzzle calendar.
I do toys. The bulk of my work is in computer games.
I did puzzles for "Bejeweled."
(Applause) I didn't invent "Bejeweled." I can't take credit for that.
So, very first puzzle, sixth grade, my teacher said, "Oh, let's see, that guy, he likes to make stuff.
I'll have him cut out letters out of construction paper for the board."
I thought this was a great assignment.
And so here is what I came up with. I start fiddling with it.
I came up with this letter. This is a letter of the alphabet that's been folded just once.
The question is, which letter is it if I unfold it?
One hint: It's not "L."
(Laughter) It could be an "L," of course.
So, what else could it be?
Yeah, a lot of you got it.
Oh yeah. So, clever thing.
Now, that was my first puzzle. I got hooked.
I created something new, I was very excited because, you know, I'd made crossword puzzles, but that's sort of like filling in somebody else's matrix.
This was something really original. I got hooked.
I read Martin Gardner's columns in Scientific American.
Went on, and eventually decided to devote myself, full time, to that.
Now, I should pause and say, what do I mean by puzzle?
A puzzle is a problem that is fun to solve and has a right answer.
"Fun to solve," as opposed to everyday problems, which, frankly, are not very well-designed puzzles.
You know, they might have a solution.
It might take a long time. Nobody wrote down the rules clearly.
Who designed this?
It's like, you know, life is not a very well-written story so we have to hire writers to make movies.
Well, I take everyday problems, and I make puzzles out of them.
And "right answer," of course there might be more than one right answer; many puzzles have more than one.
But as opposed to a couple other forms of play, toys and games -- by toy I mean, something you play with that doesn't have a particular goal.
You can create one out of Legos.
You know, you can do anything you want.
Or competitive games like chess where, well, you're not trying to solve ... You can make a chess puzzle, but the goal really is to beat another player.
I consider that puzzles are an art form.
They're very ancient. It goes back as long as there is written history.
It's a very small form, like a joke, a poem, a magic trick or a song, very compact form.
At worst, they're throwaways, they're for amusement.
But at best they can reach for something more and create a memorable impression.
The progression of my career that you'll see is looking for creating puzzles that have a memorable impact.
So, one thing I found early on, when I started doing computer games, is that I could create puzzles that will alter your perception.
I'll show you how. Here is a famous one.
So, it's two profiles in black, or a white vase in the middle.
This is called a figure-ground illusion.
The artist M.C. Escher exploited that in some of his wonderful prints.
Here we have "Day and Night."
Here is what I did with figure and ground.
So, here we have "figure" in black.
Here we have "figure" in white.
And it's all part of the same design.
The background to one is the other.
Originally I tried to do the words "figure" and "ground."
But I couldn't do that, I realized. I changed the problem.
It's all "figure."
(Laughter) A few other things. Here is my name.
And that turns into the title of my first book, "Inversions."
These sorts of designs now go by the word "ambigram."
I'll show you just a couple others. Here we have the numbers one through 10, the digits zero through nine, actually.
Each letter here is one of these digits.
Not strictly an ambigram in the conventional sense.
I like pushing on what an ambigram can mean.
Here's the word "mirror." No, it's not the same upside-down.
It's the same this way.
And a marvelous fellow from the Media Lab who just got appointed head of RISD, is John Maeda.
And so I did this for him. It's sort of a visual canon.
(Laughter) And recently in Magic magazine I've done a number of ambigrams on magician's names.
So here we have Penn and Teller, same upside-down.
This appears in my puzzle calendar.
Okay, let's go back to the slides.
Thank you very much.
Now, those are fun to look at.
Now how would you do it interactively?
For a while I was an interface designer.
And so I think a lot about interaction.
Well, let's first of all simplify the vases illusion, make the thing on the right.
Now, if you could pick up the black vase, it would look like the figure on top.
If you could pick up the white area, it would look like the figure on the bottom.
Well, you can't do that physically, but on a computer you can do it. Let's switch over to the P.C.
And here it is, figure-ground.
The goal here is to take the pieces on the left and make them so they look like the shape on the right.
And this follows the rules I just said: any black area that is surrounded by white can be picked up.
But that is also true of any white area.
So, here we got the white area in the middle, and you can pick it up.
I'll just go one step further.
So, here is -- here is a couple pieces. Move them together, and now this is an active piece.
You can really get inside somebody's perception and have them experience something.
It's like the old maxim of "you can tell somebody something and show them, but if they do it they really learn it."
Here is another thing you can do.
There is a game called Rush Hour.
This is one of the true masterpieces in puzzle design besides Rubik's cube.
So, here we have a crowded parking lot with cars all over the place.
The goal is to get the red car out. It's a sliding block puzzle.
It's made by the company Think Fun.
It's done very well. I love this puzzle.
Well, let's play one. Here. So, here is a very simple puzzle.
Well, that's too simple, let's add another piece.
Okay, so how would you solve this one?
Well, move the blue one out of the way.
Here, let's make it a little harder. Still pretty easy.
Now we'll make it harder, a little harder.
Now, this one is a little bit trickier.
You know? What do you do here?
The first move is going to be what?
You're going to move the blue one up in order to get the lavender one to the right.
And you can make puzzles like this one that aren't solvable at all.
Those four are locked in a pinwheel; you can't get them apart.
I wanted to make a sequel.
I didn't come up with the original idea. But this is another way I work as an inventor is to create a sequel.
I came up with this. This is Railroad Rush Hour.
It's the same basic game except I introduced a new piece, a square piece that can move both horizontally and vertically.
In the other game the cars can only move forward and back.
Created a whole bunch of levels for it.
Now I'm making it available to schools.
And it includes exercises that show you not just how to solve these puzzles, but how to extract the principles that will let you solve mathematical puzzles or problems in science, other areas.
So, I'm really interested in you learning how to make your own puzzles as well as just me creating them.
Garry Trudeau calls himself an investigative cartoonist.
You know, he does a lot of research before he writes a cartoon.
In Discover Magazine, I'm an investigative puzzle maker.
I got interested in gene sequencing.
And I said, "Well, how on Earth can you come up with a sequence of the base pairs in DNA?"
Cut up the DNA, you sequence individual pieces, and then you look for overlaps, and you basically match them at the edges. And I said, "This is kind of like a jigsaw puzzle, except the pieces overlap."
So, here is what I created for Discover Magazine.
And it has to be solvable in a magazine.
You know, you can't cut out the pieces and move them around.
So, here is the nine pieces. And you're supposed to put them into this grid.
And you have to choose pieces that overlap on the edge.
There is only one solution. It's not that hard.
But it takes some persistence.
And when you're done, it makes this design, which, if you squint, is the word "helix."
So, that's the form of the puzzle coming out of the content, rather than the other way around.
Here is a couple more. Here is a physics-based puzzle.
Which way will these fall?
One of these weighs 50 pounds, 30 pounds and 10 pounds.
And depending on which one weighs which amount, they'll fall different directions.
And here is a puzzle based on color mixing.
I separated this image into cyan, magenta, yellow, black, the basic printing colors, and then mixed up the separations, and you get these peculiar pictures.
Which separations were mixed up to make those pictures?
Gets you thinking about color.
Finally, what I'm doing now. So, ShuffleBrain.com, website you can go visit, I joined up with my wife, Amy-Jo Kim.
She could easily be up here giving a talk about her work.
So, we're making smart games for social media.
I'll explain what that means. We're looking at three trends.
This is what's going on in the games industry right now.
First of all, you know, for a long time computer games meant things like "Doom," where you're going around shooting things, very violent games, very fast, aimed at teenage boys. Right? That's who plays computer games.
Well, guess what? That's changing.
"Bejeweled" is a big hit. It was the game that really broke open what's called casual games.
And the main players are over 35, and are female.
Then recently "Rock Band" has been a big hit.
And it's a game you play with other people.
It's very physical. It looks nothing like a traditional game.
This is what's becoming the dominant form of electronic gaming.
Now, within that there is some interesting things happening.
There is also a trend towards games that are good for you.
Why? Well, we aging Boomers, Baby Boomers, we're eating our healthy food, we're exercising. What about our minds?
Oh no, our parents are getting Alzheimer's. We better do something.
Turns out doing crossword puzzles can stave off some of the effects of Alzheimer's.
So, we got games like "Brain Age" coming out for the Nintendo DS, huge hit.
A lot of people do Sudoku. In fact some doctors prescribe it.
And then there is social media, and what's happening on the Internet.
Everybody now considers themselves a creator, and not just a viewer.
And what does this add up to?
Here is what we see coming.
It's games that fit into a healthy lifestyle.
They're part of your life. They're not necessarily a separate thing.
And they are both, something that is good for you, and they're fun.
I'm a puzzle guy. My wife is an expert in social media.
And we decided to combine our skills.
Our first game is called "Photo Grab." The game takes about a minute and 20 seconds.
This is your first time playing my game. Okay.
Let's see how well we can do. There are three images.
And we have 24 seconds each.
Where is that?
I'll play as fast as I can.
But if you can see it, shout out the answer.
You get more -- Down, okay, yeah where is that?
Oh, yeah. There, okay. J-O and -- I guess that's that part. We got the bow. That bow helps.
That's his hair. You get a lot of figure-ground problems.
Yeah, that one is easy. Okay. So, ahhh! Okay on to the next one.
Okay, so that's the lens.
Anybody?
Looks like a black shape. So, where is that?
That's the corner of the whole thing.
Yeah, I've played this image before, but even when I make up my own puzzles -- and you can put your own images in here.
And we have people all over the world doing that now.
There we are. Visit ShuffleBrain.com if you want to try it yourself. Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris has been so nice.
I don't know how you keep it up, Chris, I really don't.
So nice, all week. He's the kind of man you could say to, "Chris, I'm really sorry, I've crashed your car.
And it gets worse, I crashed it into your house.
Your house has caught fire.
And what's more, your wife has just run off with your best friend."
And you know that Chris would say, "Thank you."
(Laughter) "Thank you for sharing, that's really interesting."
(Laughter) "Thank you for taking me to a place that I didn't know existed. Thank you."
(Laughter) One of the -- (Applause) Thank you for inviting us.
One of the things about appearing later on in the TED week is that, gradually, as the days go by, all the other speakers cover most of what you were going to say.
(Laughter) Nuclear fusion, I had about 10 minutes on that.
Spectroscopy, that was another one.
Parallel universes.
And so this morning I thought, "Oh well, I'll just do a card trick."
(Laughter) That one's gone as well.
And today is Emmanuel's day, I think we've agreed that, already, haven't we?
Emmanuel? Absolutely. (Applause) I was planning on finishing on a dance ...
(Laughter) So, that's going to look pretty shabby now.
So, what I thought I'd do is -- in honor of Emmanuel -- is, what I can do is to launch today the first TED Global auction.
If I could start, this is the Enigma decoding machine.
(Laughter) Who will start me with $1,000? Anyone?
Thank you. Bruno's face, just then, he said, "No, don't go through this. Don't, please don't.
Don't go through this. Don't do it."
(Laughter) I'm worried. When I first got the invitation, they said somewhere in the thing, they said, "15 minutes to change the world, your moment onstage." 15 minutes to change the world.
I don't know about you, it takes me 15 minutes to change a plug.
(Laughter) So, the idea of changing the world is really quite an extraordinary one.
Well, of course now we know we don't have to change a plug, now we've seen that wonderful demonstration of the wireless electric -- fantastic. You know, it inspires us.
300 years ago he'd have been burnt at the stake for that.
(Laughter) And now it's an idea.
(Laughter) It's great. It's fantastic.
But you do meet some fantastic people, people who look at the world in a totally different way.
Yesterday, David Deutsch, another one who covered most of what I was going to say.
(Laughter) But when you think of the world in that way, it does make going to Starbucks a whole new experience, don't you think?
I mean, he must walk in and they will say, "Would you like a macchiato, or a latte, or an Americano, or a cappuccino?"
And he'll say, "You're offering me things that are infinitely variable."
(Laughter) "How can your coffee be true?"
(Laughter) And they will say, "Would you mind if I serve the next customer?"
(Laughter) And Elaine Morgan yesterday, wasn't she wonderful?
Fantastic. Really good.
Her talk about the aquatic ape, and the link, of course, the link between Darwinism and the fact that we are all naked beneath this -- we're not hirsute and we can swim rather well.
And she said, you know, she's 90. She's running out of time, she said.
And she's desperate to find more evidence for the link.
And I think, "I'm sitting next to Lewis Pugh."
(Laughter) This man has swum around the North Pole, what more evidence do you want?
(Laughter) And there he is.
(Applause) That's how TED brings these connections together.
I wasn't here on Tuesday. I didn't actually see Gordon Brown's job application -- um, sorry.
(Laughter) I'm so sorry. (Applause) I'm so sorry. No, no. (Applause) No, no, ahh ... (Applause) (As Brown): "Global problems require Scottish solutions."
(Laughter) The problem I have is because Gordon Brown, he comes onstage and he looks for all the world like a man who's just taken the head off a bear suit.
(As Brown): "Hello, can I tell you what happened in the woods back there?
Uh, no." (Laughter) "I'm sorry. I've only got 18 minutes, 18 minutes to talk about saving the world, saving the planet, global institutions.
Our work on climate change, I've only got 18 minutes, unfortunately I'm not able to tell you about all the wonderful things we're doing to promote the climate change agenda in Great Britain, like the third runway we're planning at Heathrow Airport ..."
(Laughter) "The large coal-fired power station we're building at King's North, and of course the exciting news that only today, only this week, Britain's only manufacturer of wind turbines has been forced to close.
No time, unfortunately, to mention those."
(Applause) "British jobs for Scottish people ...
No." (Laughter) "Christian principles, Christian values.
Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife."
(Laughter) "Although to be honest, when I was at Number 11 that was never going to be a problem."
(Laughter) (As Tony Blair): "Yeah, alright, come on, eh.
Alright Gordon, come on, eh.
I just, can I just say a few things about, first about Cherie, because she's a wonderful lady, my wife, with a wonderful smile.
That reminds me, I must post that letter."
(Laughter) "I just think, you know, what people forget, Gordon and I, we always got on perfectly well.
Alright, it was never exactly 'Brokeback Mountain.'" (Laughter) "You know, I wrote to him, just before I left office. I said, 'Can I rely on your support for the next month?' And he wrote back. He said, 'No, you can't.' Which kind of surprised me, because I'd never seen 'can't' spelled that way before."
(Laughter) Another thing Gordon could have mentioned in his speech to the Mansion House in 2002 -- that was to the building; the people weren't listening.
But the people, when talking about the finance industry, he said, "What you as the city of London have done for financial services, we, as a government, hope to do for the economy as a whole."
(Laughter) When you think what's happened to financial services, and you see what's happened to the economy, you think, "Well, there is a man who delivers on his promises."
(Laughter) But we're in a new world now. We're in a completely new world.
This is the first time that I can remember, where if you get a letter from the bank manager about a loan, you don't know if you're borrowing money from him, or if he's borrowing money from you.
Am I right?
These extraordinary things, Icelandic Internet accounts.
Did anyone here have an Icelandic Internet account?
Why would you do that? Why would -- It's like one step up from replying to one of those emails from Nigeria, isn't it?
(Laughter) Asking for your bank details.
And, you know, Iceland, it was never going to cut it.
It didn't have that kind of collateral.
What does it have? It has fish, that's all.
That's why the Prime Minister went on television. He said, "This has left us all with a very big haddock."
(Laughter) A lot of what I do -- I have to try and make sense of things before I can make nonsense of them.
And making sense of the financial crisis is very, very difficult.
Luckily, somebody like George Bush was really helpful.
He summed it up, really, at a dinner.
He was speaking at a dinner, he said, "Wall Street got drunk."
(Laughter) "And now it's got a hangover."
And that's, you know, that's something -- (Applause) And that's something we can relate to.
It's certainly something he can relate to.
(Laughter) And the other one, of course, is Donald Rumsfeld, who said, "There are the known knowns, the things we know we know.
And then you got the known unknowns, the things we know we don't know.
And then you got the unknown unknowns, those are the things we don't know we don't know."
And being English, when I first heard that I thought, "What a load of cock."
And then, you're now, well, actually, that's what this is about.
This whole, what Ben Bernanke has said, the chaotic unwinding of the world's financial system, it's about -- they don't know, they didn't know what they were doing.
In 2006, the head of the American Mortgage Bankers Association said, quote, "As we can clearly see, no seismic occurrence is about to overwhelm the U.S. economy."
Now, there is a man on top of his job.
(Laughter) And when the crisis was happening, the head of quantitative equities at Lehman Brothers said, "Events which models predicted would happen once every 10,000 years happened every day for three days."
So, it's extraordinary. It's a new world that's very, very difficult to make sense of.
But we have a new hope. We have a new man.
America has now elected its first openly black President.
(Laughter) Wonderful news.
Not only that, he's left-handed. Have you noticed this?
How many people here are left-handed?
You see, a lot of the people that I most admire, they're great artists, great designers, great thinkers, they're left-handed.
And somebody said to me last night, you know, being left-handed, you have to learn to write without smudging the ink.
And somebody was talking about metaphors on Monday.
And I thought, what a wonderful metaphor, isn't it? An American President who has to write without smudging the ink.
You like that one? As opposed to you could see George Bush, well, what's the metaphor there?
I think it would be something out of the aquatic ape thing, wouldn't it?
"Well, you know I'm sorry about that.
I'm right-handed but I seem to have smudged that ink as well."
(Laughter) But, you know, he's gone. Now he's gone.
That's eight years of American History, eight minutes of my act, just gone like that.
"You know, it's the end of an error [sic].
I happen to believe it was a great error.
I know folks said to me they believe it was one of the greatest errors in the history of the United States.
But we proved them wrong in Iraq.
They said there was no link between Iraq and Al Qaeda.
There is now."
(Laughter) "But I have a message for the suicide bombers, for those people who've blown themselves up."
(Laughter) "We're going to find you."
(Laughter) "We're going to make sure you don't do it again."
(Laughter) But now he's gone, and it's great to see one of the -- arguably one of the worst speech makers in American history, now given way to one of the greatest, in Obama.
You were there, maybe, on the night of his victory.
And he spoke to the crowd in Chicago, he said, "If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are possible ..."
I can't do the whole thing because it would take too long, it really would.
(Laughter) But you get the picture. And then it goes to the inauguration.
And he and the Chief Justice, they trip over each other, they get their words wrong and they screw the thing up.
And there is George Bush sitting there going, "Heh heh heh heh ..."
(Laughter) "Not so easy is it? Heh heh heh."
(Laughter) But the interesting thing is, Gordon Brown was talking about Cicero, who said, people would listen to a speech, they said, "Great speech."
And then they'd listen to Demosthenes, and they'd say, "Let's march."
And we all want to believe in President Obama.
It's rather like that line in the film "As Good As it Gets."
Do you remember that film with Helen Hunt and Jack Nicholson, and Helen Hunt says to Jack Nicholson, "What do you see in me?"
And Jack Nicholson just says, "You make me want to be a better man."
And you want a leader who inspires and challenges and makes you want to be a better citizen. Right?
But at the moment, it's a Cicero thing.
We like what Barack Obama says, but we don't do anything about it.
So he comes over to this country, and he says, "We need a big fiscal stimulus."
And everyone goes, "Great!" He leaves the country and the French and the Germans go, "No, no, forget about that, absolutely not." Nothing happens. He goes to Strasburg.
He says, "We need more boots on the ground in Afghanistan."
And everyone goes, "Great idea."
He leaves, people go, "No no no, we're not going to do that.
5,000 maximum, and no rockets. No, no, not going to do it."
He goes to Prague, he says, "We believe in a nuclear-free world."
And it's great to have an American president who can say the word "nuclear," let's just point that out first.
Do you remember that? George Bush, "A nu-ca-ler."
Sorry, what? "A nu-ca-ler."
(Laughter) Could you say "avuncular"? "Avunclear."
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
But he says, "We want a nuclear-free world."
And that day, North Korea, that very day, North Korea is just seeing if it can just get one over Japan -- (Laughter) -- and land it before ...
So, where do we look for inspiration? We've still got Bill Clinton.
"Travels the world." (Laughs) "I believe, I believe it was President Dwight D. Eisenhower who said ..."
(Laughter) "Tell a lie; it was Diana Ross ..."
(Laughter) "... who said, reach out and touch ..."
(Laughter) "... somebody's gla -- hand."
(Laughter) "Make this world a better place, if you can.
I just think that's important. I really do.
And I was hoping Hillary would get to the White House, because she'd have been out of our home for four years.
And I, you know." (Laughter) "So, when that didn't work out I had to make a few arrangements, let me tell you."
(Laughter) So, there's him. In Britain we have Prince Charles: "And the environment is so important, all we can do.
My wife gets fed up with me constantly trying to push emissions up her agenda."
(Laughter) Or, any South Africans, we have Mandela to inspire.
Mandela, the great man Mandela.
He's been honored with a statue now.
The previous highest honor he had in Britain was a visit from the team from Ground Force, a gardening program.
"So, Nelson, how would you like a nice water feature?"
"Ahh, listen to me Mr. Titchmarsh."
(Laughter) "I was held in prison for nearly 30 years on an island in the middle of the ocean.
Why would I need a bloody water feature?"
(Laughter) Very quickly: I wasn't quite sure how to end this talk and then yesterday that man came up with a wonderful quote from the "Japanese Essays on Idleness" which said it's nice to have something which is unfinished because it implies there is still room for growth.
Thank you very much indeed.
(Applause)
The National Portrait Gallery is the place dedicated to presenting great American lives, amazing people.
And that's what it's about.
We use portraiture as a way to deliver those lives, but that's it.
And so I'm not going to talk about the painted portrait today.
I'm going to talk about a program I started there, which, from my point of view, is the proudest thing I did.
I started to worry about the fact that a lot of people don't get their portraits painted anymore, and they're amazing people, and we want to deliver them to future generations.
So, how do we do that?
And so I came up with the idea of the living self-portrait series.
And the living self-portrait series was the idea of basically my being a brush in the hand of amazing people who would come and I would interview.
And so what I'm going to do is, not so much give you the great hits of that program, as to give you this whole notion of how you encounter people in that kind of situation, what you try to find out about them, and when people deliver and when they don't and why.
Now, I had two preconditions.
One was that they be American.
That's just because, in the nature of the National Portrait Gallery, it's created to look at American lives.
That was easy, but then I made the decision, maybe arbitrary, that they needed to be people of a certain age, which at that point, when I created this program, seemed really old.
Sixties, seventies, eighties and nineties.
For obvious reasons, it doesn't seem that old anymore to me.
And why did I do that?
Well, for one thing, we're a youth-obsessed culture.
And I thought really what we need is an elders program to just sit at the feet of amazing people and hear them talk.
But the second part of it -- and the older I get, the more convinced I am that that's true.
It's amazing what people will say when they know how the story turned out.
That's the one advantage that older people have.
Well, they have other, little bit of advantage, but they also have some disadvantages, but the one thing they or we have is that we've reached the point in life where we know how the story turned out.
So, we can then go back in our lives, if we've got an interviewer who gets that, and begin to reflect on how we got there.
All of those accidents that wound up creating the life narrative that we inherited.
So, I thought okay, now, what is it going to take to make this work?
There are many kinds of interviews. We know them.
There are the journalist interviews, which are the interrogation that is expected.
This is somewhat against resistance and caginess on the part of the interviewee.
Then there's the celebrity interview, where it's more important who's asking the question than who answers.
That's Barbara Walters and others like that, and we like that.
That's Frost-Nixon, where Frost seems to be as important as Nixon in that process.
Fair enough.
But I wanted interviews that were different.
I wanted to be, as I later thought of it, empathic, which is to say, to feel what they wanted to say and to be an agent of their self-revelation.
By the way, this was always done in public.
This was not an oral history program.
This was all about 300 people sitting at the feet of this individual, and having me be the brush in their self-portrait.
Now, it turns out that I was pretty good at that.
I didn't know it coming into it.
And the only reason I really know that is because of one interview I did with Senator William Fulbright, and that was six months after he'd had a stroke.
And he had never appeared in public since that point.
This was not a devastating stroke, but it did affect his speaking and so forth.
And I thought it was worth a chance, he thought it was worth a chance, and so we got up on the stage, and we had an hour conversation about his life, and after that a woman rushed up to me, essentially did, and she said, "Where did you train as a doctor?"
And I said, "I have no training as a doctor. I never claimed that."
And she said, "Well, something very weird was happening.
When he started a sentence, particularly in the early parts of the interview, and paused, you gave him the word, the bridge to get to the end of the sentence, and by the end of it, he was speaking complete sentences on his own."
I didn't know what was going on, but I was so part of the process of getting that out.
So I thought, okay, fine, I've got empathy, or empathy, at any rate, is what's critical to this kind of interview.
But then I began to think of other things.
Who makes a great interview in this context?
It had nothing to do with their intellect, the quality of their intellect.
Some of them were very brilliant, some of them were, you know, ordinary people who would never claim to be intellectuals, but it was never about that.
It was about their energy.
It's energy that creates extraordinary interviews and extraordinary lives.
I'm convinced of it.
And it had nothing to do with the energy of being young.
These were people through their 90s.
In fact, the first person I interviewed was George Abbott, who was 97, and Abbott was filled with the life force -- I guess that's the way I think about it -- filled with it.
And so he filled the room, and we had an extraordinary conversation.
He was supposed to be the toughest interview that anybody would ever do because he was famous for being silent, for never ever saying anything except maybe a word or two.
And, in fact, he did wind up opening up -- by the way, his energy is evidenced in other ways.
He subsequently got married again at 102, so he, you know, he had a lot of the life force in him.
But after the interview, I got a call, very gruff voice, from a woman.
I didn't know who she was, and she said, "Did you get George Abbott to talk?"
And I said, "Yeah. Apparently I did."
And she said, "I'm his old girlfriend, Maureen Stapleton, and I could never do it."
And then she made me go up with the tape of it and prove that George Abbott actually could talk.
So, you know, you want energy, you want the life force, but you really want them also to think that they have a story worth sharing.
The worst interviews that you can ever have are with people who are modest.
Never ever get up on a stage with somebody who's modest, because all of these people have been assembled to listen to them, and they sit there and they say, "Aw, shucks, it was an accident."
There's nothing that ever happens that justifies people taking good hours of the day to be with them.
The worst interview I ever did: William L. Shirer.
The journalist who did "The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich."
This guy had met Hitler and Gandhi within six months, and every time I'd ask him about it, he'd say, "Oh, I just happened to be there.
Didn't matter." Whatever.
Awful.
I never would ever agree to interview a modest person.
They have to think that they did something and that they want to share it with you.
But it comes down, in the end, to how do you get through all the barriers we have.
All of us are public and private beings, and if all you're going to get from the interviewee is their public self, there's no point in it.
It's pre-programmed. It's infomercial, and we all have infomercials about our lives.
We know the great lines, we know the great moments, we know what we're not going to share, and the point of this was not to embarrass anybody.
This wasn't -- and some of you will remember Mike Wallace's old interviews -- tough, aggressive and so forth. They have their place.
I was trying to get them to say what they probably wanted to say, to break out of their own cocoon of the public self, and the more public they had been, the more entrenched that person, that outer person was.
And let me tell you at once the worse moment and the best moment that happened in this interview series.
It all has to do with that shell that most of us have, and particularly certain people.
There's an extraordinary woman named Clare Boothe Luce.
It'll be your generational determinant as to whether her name means much to you.
She did so much. She was a playwright.
She did an extraordinary play called "The Women."
She was a congresswoman when there weren't very many congresswomen.
She was editor of Vanity Fair, one of the great phenomenal women of her day.
And, incidentally, I call her the Eleanor Roosevelt of the Right.
She was sort of adored on the Right the way Eleanor Roosevelt was on the Left.
And, in fact, when we did the interview -- I did the living self-portrait with her -- there were three former directors of the CIA basically sitting at her feet, just enjoying her presence.
And I thought, this is going to be a piece of cake, because I always have preliminary talks with these people for just maybe 10 or 15 minutes.
We never talk before that because if you talk before, you don't get it on the stage.
So she and I had a delightful conversation.
We were on the stage and then -- by the way, spectacular.
It was all part of Clare Boothe Luce's look.
She was in a great evening gown.
She was 80, almost that day of the interview, and there she was and there I was, and I just proceeded into the questions.
And she stonewalled me. It was unbelievable.
Anything that I would ask, she would turn around, dismiss, and I was basically up there -- any of you in the moderate-to-full entertainment world know what it is to die onstage.
And I was dying. She was absolutely not giving me a thing.
And I began to wonder what was going on, and you think while you talk, and basically, I thought, I got it.
When we were alone, I was her audience.
Now I'm her competitor for the audience.
That's the problem here, and she's fighting me for that, and so then I asked her a question -- I didn't know how I was going to get out of it -- I asked her a question about her days as a playwright, and again, characteristically, instead of saying, "Oh yes, I was a playwright, and this is what blah blah blah," she said, "Oh, playwright. Everybody knows I was a playwright.
Most people think that I was an actress. I was never an actress."
But I hadn't asked that, and then she went off on a tear, and she said, "Oh, well, there was that one time that I was an actress.
It was for a charity in Connecticut when I was a congresswoman, and I got up there," and she went on and on, "And then I got on the stage."
And then she turned to me and said, "And you know what those young actors did?
They upstaged me." And she said, "Do you know what that is?"
Just withering in her contempt.
And I said, "I'm learning."
(Laughter) And she looked at me, and it was like the successful arm-wrestle, and then, after that, she delivered an extraordinary account of what her life really was like.
I have to end that one. This is my tribute to Clare Boothe Luce.
Again, a remarkable person.
I'm not politically attracted to her, but through her life force, I'm attracted to her.
And the way she died -- she had, toward the end, a brain tumor.
That's probably as terrible a way to die as you can imagine, and very few of us were invited to a dinner party.
And she was in horrible pain.
We all knew that.
She stayed in her room.
Everybody came. The butler passed around canapes.
The usual sort of thing.
Then at a certain moment, the door opened and she walked out perfectly dressed, completely composed.
The public self, the beauty, the intellect, and she walked around and talked to every person there and then went back into the room and was never seen again.
She wanted the control of her final moment, and she did it amazingly.
Now, there are other ways that you get somebody to open up, and this is just a brief reference.
It wasn't this arm-wrestle, but it was a little surprising for the person involved.
I interviewed Steve Martin. It wasn't all that long ago.
And we were sitting there, and almost toward the beginning of the interview, I turned to him and I said, "Steve," or "Mr. Martin, it is said that all comedians have unhappy childhoods.
Was yours unhappy?"
And he looked at me, you know, as if to say, "This is how you're going to start this thing, right off?"
And then he turned to me, not stupidly, and he said, "What was your childhood like?"
And I said -- these are all arm wrestles, but they're affectionate -- and I said, "My father was loving and supportive, which is why I'm not funny."
(Laughter) And he looked at me, and then we heard the big sad story.
His father was an SOB, and, in fact, he was another comedian with an unhappy childhood, but then we were off and running.
So the question is: What is the key that's going to allow this to proceed?
Now, these are arm wrestle questions, but I want to tell you about questions that are more related to empathy and that really, very often, are the questions that people have been waiting their whole lives to be asked.
And I'll just give you two examples of this because of the time constraints.
One was an interview I did with one of the great American biographers.
Again, some of you will know him, most of you won't, Dumas Malone.
He did a five-volume biography of Thomas Jefferson, spent virtually his whole life with Thomas Jefferson, and by the way, at one point I asked him, "Would you like to have met him?"
And he said, "Well, of course, but actually, I know him better than anyone who ever met him, because I got to read all of his letters."
So, he was very satisfied with the kind of relationship they had over 50 years.
And I asked him one question.
I said, "Did Jefferson ever disappoint you?"
And here is this man who had given his whole life to uncovering Jefferson and connecting with him, and he said, "Well ..." -- I'm going to do a bad southern accent.
Dumas Malone was from Mississippi originally.
But he said, "Well," he said, "I'm afraid so."
He said, "You know, I've read everything, and sometimes Mr. Jefferson would smooth the truth a bit."
And he basically was saying that this was a man who lied more than he wished he had, because he saw the letters.
He said, "But I understand that." He said, "I understand that."
He said, "We southerners do like a smooth surface, so that there were times when he just didn't want the confrontation."
And he said, "Now, John Adams was too honest."
And he started to talk about that, and later on he invited me to his house, and I met his wife who was from Massachusetts, and he and she had exactly the relationship of Thomas Jefferson and John Adams.
She was the New Englander and abrasive, and he was this courtly fellow.
But really the most important question I ever asked, and most of the times when I talk about it, people kind of suck in their breath at my audacity, or cruelty, but I promise you it was the right question.
This was to Agnes de Mille.
Agnes de Mille is one of the great choreographers in our history.
She basically created the dances in "Oklahoma," transforming the American theater.
An amazing woman.
At the time that I proposed to her that -- by the way, I would have proposed to her; she was extraordinary -- but proposed to her that she come on.
She said, "Come to my apartment."
She lived in New York.
"Come to my apartment and we'll talk for those 15 minutes, and then we'll decide whether we proceed."
And so I showed up in this dark, rambling New York apartment, and she called out to me, and she was in bed.
I had known that she had had a stroke, and that was some 10 years before.
And so she spent almost all of her life in bed, but -- I speak of the life force -- her hair was askew.
She wasn't about to make up for this occasion.
And she was sitting there surrounded by books, and her most interesting possession she felt at that moment was her will, which she had by her side.
She wasn't unhappy about this. She was resigned.
She said, "I keep this will by my bed, memento mori, and I change it all the time just because I want to."
And she was loving the prospect of death as much as she had loved life.
I thought, this is somebody I've got to get in this series.
She agreed.
She came on. Of course she was wheelchaired on.
Half of her body was stricken, the other half not.
She was, of course, done up for the occasion, but this was a woman in great physical distress.
And we had a conversation, and then I asked her this unthinkable question.
I said, "Was it a problem for you in your life that you were not beautiful?"
And the audience just -- you know, they're always on the side of the interviewee, and they felt that this was a kind of assault, but this was the question she had wanted somebody to ask her whole life.
And she began to talk about her childhood, when she was beautiful, and she literally turned -- here she was, in this broken body -- and she turned to the audience and described herself as the fair demoiselle with her red hair and her light steps and so forth, and then she said, "And then puberty hit."
And she began to talk about things that had happened to her body and her face, and how she could no longer count on her beauty, and her family then treated her like the ugly sister of the beautiful one for whom all the ballet lessons were given.
And she had to go along just to be with her sister for company, and in that process, she made a number of decisions.
First of all, was that dance, even though it hadn't been offered to her, was her life.
And secondly, she had better be, although she did dance for a while, a choreographer because then her looks didn't matter.
But she was thrilled to get that out as a real, real fact in her life.
It was an amazing privilege to do this series.
There were other moments like that, very few moments of silence.
The key point was empathy because everybody in their lives is really waiting for people to ask them questions, so that they can be truthful about who they are and how they became what they are, and I commend that to you, even if you're not doing interviews.
Just be that way with your friends and particularly the older members of your family.
Thank you very much.
Good morning.
I've come here to share with you an experiment of how to get rid of one form of human suffering.
It really is a story of Dr. Venkataswamy.
His mission and his message is about the Aravind Eye Care System.
I think first it's important for us to recognize what it is to be blind.
(Music) Woman: Everywhere I went looking for work, they said no, what use do we have for a blind woman?
I couldn't thread a needle or see the lice in my hair.
If an ant fell into my rice, I couldn't see that either.
Thulasiraj Ravilla: Becoming blind is a big part of it, but I think it also deprives the person of their livelihood, their dignity, their independence, and their status in the family.
So she is just one amongst the millions who are blind.
And the irony is that they don't need to be.
A simple, well-proven surgery can restore sight to millions, and something even simpler, a pair of glasses, can make millions more see.
If we add to that the many of us here now who are more productive because they have a pair of glasses, then almost one in five Indians will require eye care, a staggering 200 million people.
Today, we're reaching not even 10 percent of them.
So this is the context in which Aravind came into existence about 30 years back as a post-retirement project of Dr. V.
He started this with no money.
He had to mortgage all his life savings to make a bank loan.
And over time, we have grown into a network of five hospitals, predominately in the state of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry, and then we added several, what we call Vision Centers as a hub-and-spoke model.
And then more recently we started managing hospitals in other parts of the country and also setting up hospitals in other parts of the world as well.
The last three decades, we have done about three-and-a-half million surgeries, a vast majority of them for the poor people.
Now, each year we perform about 300,000 surgeries.
A typical day at Aravind, we would do about a thousand surgeries, maybe see about 6,000 patients, send out teams into the villages to examine, bring back patients, lots of telemedicine consultations, and, on top of that, do a lot of training, both for doctors and technicians who will become the future staff of Aravind.
And then doing this day-in and day-out, and doing it well, requires a lot of inspiration and a lot of hard work.
And I think this was possible thanks to the building blocks put in place by Dr. V., a value system, an efficient delivery process, and fostering the culture of innovation.
(Music) Dr. V: I used to sit with the ordinary village man because I am from a village, and suddenly you turn around and seem to be in contact with his inner being, you seem to be one with him.
Here is a soul which has got all the simplicity of confidence.
Doctor, whatever you say, I accept it.
An implicit faith in you and then you respond to it.
Here is an old lady who has got so much faith in me, I must do my best for her.
When we grow in spiritual consciousness, we identify ourselves with all that is in the world, so there is no exploitation.
It is ourselves we are helping.
It is ourselves we are healing.
(Applause) This helped us build a very ethical and very highly patient-centric organization and systems that support it.
But on a practical level, you also have to deliver services efficiently, and, odd as it may seem, the inspiration came from McDonald's.
Dr. V: See, McDonald's' concept is simple.
They feel they can train people all over the world, irrespective of different religions, cultures, all those things, to produce a product in the same way and deliver it in the same manner in hundreds of places.
Larry Brilliant: He kept talking about McDonalds and hamburgers, and none of it made any sense to us.
He wanted to create a franchise, a mechanism of delivery of eye care with the efficiency of McDonald's.
Dr. V: Supposing I'm able to produce eye care, techniques, methods, all in the same way, and make it available in every corner of the world.
The problem of blindness is gone.
TR: If you think about it, I think the eyeball is the same, as American or African, the problem is the same, the treatment is the same.
And yet, why should there be so much variation in quality and in service, and that was the fundamental principle that we followed when we designed the delivery systems.
And, of course, the challenge was that it's a huge problem, we are talking of millions of people, very little resource to deal with it, and then lots of logistics and affordability issues.
And then so, one had to constantly innovate.
And one of the early innovations, which still continues, is to create ownership in the community to the problem, and then engage with them as a partner, and here is one such event.
Here a community camp just organized by the community themselves, where they find a place, organize volunteers, and then we'll do our part. You know, check their vision, and then you have doctors who you find out what the problem is and then determine what further testing should be done, and then those tests are done by technicians who check for glasses, or check for glaucoma.
And then, with all these results, the doctor makes a final diagnosis, and then prescribes a line of treatment, and if they need a pair of glasses, they are available right there at the camp site, usually under a tree.
But they get glasses in the frames of their choice, and that's very important because I think glasses, in addition to helping people see, is also a fashion statement, and they're willing to pay for it.
So they get it in about 20 minutes and those who require surgery, are counseled, and then there are buses waiting, which will transport them to the base hospital.
And if it was not for this kind of logistics and support, many people like this would probably never get services, and certainly not when they most need it.
They receive surgery the following day, and then they will stay for a day or two, and then they are put back on the buses to be taken back to where they came from, and where their families will be waiting to take them back home.
(Applause) And this happens several thousand times each year.
It may sound impressive that we're seeing lots of patients, very efficient process, but we looked at, are we solving the problem?
We did a study, a scientifically designed process, and then, to our dismay, we found this was only reaching seven percent of those in need, and we're not adequately addressing more, bigger problems.
So we had to do something different, so we set up what we call primary eye care centers, vision centers.
These are truly paperless offices with completely electronic medical records and so on.
They receive comprehensive eye exams.
We kind of changed the simple digital camera into a retinal camera, and then every patient gets their teleconsultation with a doctor.
The effect of this has been that, within the first year, we really had a 40 percent penetration in the market that it served, which is over 50,000 people.
And the second year went up to 75 percent.
So I think we have a process by which we can really penetrate into the market and reach everyone who needs it, and in this process of using technology, make sure that most don't need to come to the base hospital.
And how much will they pay for this?
We fixed the pricing, taking into account what they would save in bus fare in coming to a city, so they pay about 20 rupees, and that's good for three consultations.
(Applause) The other challenge was, how do you give high-tech or more advanced treatment and care?
We designed a van with a VSAT, which sends out images of patients to the base hospital where it is diagnosed, and then as the patient is waiting, the report goes back to the patient, it gets printed out, the patient gets it, and then gets a consultation about what they should be doing -- I mean, go see a doctor or come back after six months, and then this happens as a way of bridging the technology competence.
So the impact of all this has been essentially one of growing the market, because it focused on the non-customer, and then by reaching the unreached, we're able to significantly grow the market.
The other aspect is how do you deal with this efficiently when you have very few ophthalmologists?
So what is in this video is a surgeon operating, and then you see on the other side, another patient is getting ready.
So, as they finish the surgery, they just swing the microscope over, the tables are placed so that their distance is just right, and then we need to do this, because, by doing this kind of process, we're able to more than quadruple the productivity of the surgeon.
And then to support the surgeon, we require a certain workforce.
And then we focused on village girls that we recruited, and then they really are the backbone of the organization.
They do almost all of the skill-based routine tasks.
They do one thing at a time. They do it extremely well.
With the result we have very high productivity, very high quality at very, very low cost.
So, putting all this together, what really happened was the productivity of our staff was significantly higher than anyone else.
(Applause) This is a very busy table, but what this really is conveying is that, when it comes to quality, we have put in very good quality-assurance systems.
As a result, our complications are significantly lower than what has been reported in the United Kingdom, and you don't see those kind of numbers very often.
(Applause) So the final part of the puzzle is, how do you make all this work financially, especially when the people can't pay for it?
So what we did was, we gave away a lot of it for free, and then those who pay, I mean, they paid local market rates, nothing more, and often much less.
And we were helped by the market inefficiency.
I think that has been a big savior, even now.
And, of course, one needs the mindset to be wanting to give away what you have as a surplus.
The result has been, over the years, the expenditure has increased with volumes.
The revenues increase at a higher level, giving us a healthy margin while you're treating a large number of people for free.
I think in absolute terms, last year we earned about 20-odd million dollars, spent about 13 million, with over a 40 percent EBITA.
(Applause) But this really requires going beyond what we do, or what we have done, if you really want to achieve solving this problem of blindness.
And what we did was a couple of very counter-intuitive things.
We created competition for ourselves, and then we made eye care affordable by making low-cost consumables.
We proactively and systematically promoted these practices to many hospitals in India, many in our own backyards and then in other parts of the world as well.
The impact of this has been that these hospitals, in the second year after our consultation, are double their output and then achieve financial recovery as well.
The other part was how do you address this increase in cost of technology?
There was a time when we failed to negotiate the [intra-ocular lens] prices to be at affordable levels, so we set up a manufacturing unit.
And then, over time, we were able to bring down the cost significantly to about two percent of what it used to be when we started out.
Today, we believe we have about seven percent of the global market, and they're used in about 120-odd countries.
To conclude, I mean, what we do, does it have a broader relevance, or is it just India or developing countries?
So to address this, we studied UK versus Aravind.
What it shows is that we do roughly about 60 percent of the volume of what the UK does, near a half-million surgeries as a whole country.
And we do about 300,000.
And then we train about 50 ophthalmologists against the 70 trained by them, comparable quality, both in training and in patient care.
So we're really comparing apples to apples.
We looked at cost.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, I think it is simple to say just because the U.K. isn't India the difference is happening.
I think there is more to it.
I mean, I think one has to look at other aspects as well.
Maybe there is -- the solution to the cost could be in productivity, maybe in efficiency, in the clinical process, or in how much they pay for the lenses or consumables, or regulations, their defensive practice.
So, I think decoding this can probably bring answers to most developed countries including the U.S., and maybe Obama's ratings can go up again.
(Laughter) Another insight, which, again, I want to leave with you, in conditions where the problem is very large, which cuts across all economic strata, where we have a good solution, I think the process I described, you know, productivity, quality, patient-centered care, can give an answer, and there are many which fit this paradigm.
You take dentistry, hearing aid, maternity and so on.
There are many where this paradigm can now play, but I think probably one of the most challenging things is on the softer side.
Now, how do you create compassion?
Now, how do you make people own the problem, want to do something about it?
There are a bit harder issues.
And I'm sure people in this crowd can probably find the solutions to these.
So I want to end my talk leaving this thought and challenge to you.
Dr. V: When you grow in spiritual consciousness, we identify with all that is in the world so there is no exploitation.
It is ourselves we are helping.
It is ourselves we are healing.
TR: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm often asked, "What surprised you about the book?"
And I say, "That I got to write it."
I would have never imagined that.
Not in my wildest dreams did I think -- I don't even consider myself to be an author.
And I'm often asked, "Why do you think so many people have read this?
This thing's selling still about a million copies a month."
And I think it's because spiritual emptiness is a universal disease.
I think inside at some point, we put our heads down on the pillow and we go, "There's got to be more to life than this."
Get up in the morning, go to work, come home and watch TV, go to bed, get up in the morning, go to work, come home, watch TV, go to bed, go to parties on weekends.
A lot of people say, "I'm living." No, you're not living -- that's just existing.
I really think that there's this inner desire.
I do believe what Chris said; I believe that you're not an accident.
Your parents may not have planned you, but I believe God did.
I think there are accidental parents; there's no doubt about that.
I don't think there are accidental kids.
And I think you matter.
I think you matter to God; I think you matter to history; I think you matter to this universe.
And I think that the difference between what I call the survival level of living, the success level of living, and the significance level of living is: Do you figure out, "What on Earth am I here for?"
I meet a lot of people who are very smart, and say, "But why can't I figure out my problems?"
And I meet a lot of people who are very successful, who say, "Why don't I feel more fulfilled?
Why do I feel like a fake?
Why do I feel like I've got to pretend that I'm more than I really am?"
I think that comes down to this issue of meaning, of significance, of purpose.
I think it comes down to this issue of: "Why am I here? What am I here for? Where am I going?"
These are not religious issues.
They're human issues.
I wanted to tell Michael before he spoke that I really appreciate what he does, because it makes my life work a whole lot easier.
As a pastor, I do see a lot of kooks.
And I have learned that there are kooks in every area of life.
Religion doesn't have a monopoly on that, but there are plenty of religious kooks.
There are secular kooks; there are smart kooks, dumb kooks.
There are people -- a lady came up to me the other day, and she had a white piece of paper -- Michael, you'll like this one -- and she said, "What do you see in it?"
And she goes, "Well, I see Jesus," and started crying and left.
I'm going, "OK," you know? "Fine."
(Laughter) Good for you.
When the book became the best-selling book in the world for the last three years, I kind of had my little crisis.
And that was: What is the purpose of this?
Because it brought in enormous amounts of money.
When you write the best-selling book in the world, it's tons and tons of money.
And it brought in a lot of attention, neither of which I wanted.
When I started Saddleback Church, I was 25 years old.
I started it with one other family in 1980.
And I decided that I was never going to go on TV, because I didn't want to be a celebrity.
I didn't want to be a, quote, "evangelist, televangelist" -- that's not my thing.
And all of the sudden, it brought a lot of money and a lot of attention.
I don't think -- now, this is a worldview, and I will tell you, everybody's got a worldview.
Everybody's betting their life on something.
You're betting your life on something, you just better know why you're betting what you're betting on.
So, everybody's betting their life on something.
And when I, you know, made a bet, I happened to believe that Jesus was who he said he was.
And I believe in a pluralistic society, everybody's betting on something.
And when I started the church, you know, I had no plans to do what it's doing now.
And then when I wrote this book, and all of a sudden, it just took off, and I started saying, now, what's the purpose of this?
Because as I started to say, I don't think you're given money or fame for your own ego, ever.
I just don't believe that.
And when you write a book that the first sentence of the book is, "It's not about you," then, when all of a sudden it becomes the best-selling book in history, you've got to figure, well, I guess it's not about me.
That's kind of a no-brainer.
So, what is it for?
And I began to think about what I call the "stewardship of affluence" and the "stewardship of influence."
So I believe, essentially, leadership is stewardship.
That if you are a leader in any area -- in business, in politics, in sports, in art, in academics, in any area -- you don't own it.
You are a steward of it.
For instance, that's why I believe in protecting the environment.
This is not my planet.
It wasn't mine before I was born, it's not going to be mine after I die, I'm just here for 80 years and then that's it.
I was debating the other day on a talk show, and the guy was challenging me and he'd go, "What's a pastor doing on protecting the environment?"
And I asked this guy, I said, "Well, do you believe that human beings are responsible to make the world a little bit better place for the next generation?
Do you think we have a stewardship here, to take the environment seriously?"
And he said, "No."
I said, "Oh, you don't?"
I said, "Let me make this clear again: Do you believe that as human beings -- I'm not talking about religion -- do you believe that as human beings, it is our responsibility to take care of this planet, and make it just a little bit better for the next generation?"
And he said, "No. Not any more than any other species."
When he said the word "species," he was revealing his worldview.
And he was saying, "I'm no more responsible to take care of this environment than a duck is."
Well now, I know a lot of times we act like ducks, but you're not a duck.
You're not a duck.
And you are responsible -- that's my worldview.
And so, you need to understand what your worldview is.
The problem is most people never really think it through.
They never really ...
codify it or qualify it or quantify it, and say, "This is what I believe in. This is why I believe what I believe."
I don't personally have enough faith to be an atheist.
But you may, you may.
Your worldview, though, does determine everything else in your life, because it determines your decisions; it determines your relationships; it determines your level of confidence.
It determines, really, everything in your life.
What we believe, obviously -- and you know this -- determines our behavior, and our behavior determines what we become in life.
So all of this money started pouring in, and all of this fame started pouring in.
And I'm going, what do I do with this?
My wife and I first made five decisions on what to do with the money.
We said, "First, we're not going to use it on ourselves."
I didn't go out and buy a bigger house.
I don't own a guesthouse.
I still drive the same four year-old Ford that I've driven.
We just said, we're not going to use it on us.
The second thing was, I stopped taking a salary from the church that I pastor.
Third thing is, I added up all that the church had paid me over the last 25 years, and I gave it back.
And I gave it back because I didn't want anybody thinking that I do what I do for money -- I don't.
In fact, personally, I've never met a priest or a pastor or a minister who does it for money.
I know that's the stereotype; I've never met one of them.
Believe me, there's a whole lot easier ways to make money.
Pastors are like on 24 hours-a-day call, they're like doctors.
I left late today -- I'd hoped to be here yesterday -- because my father-in-law is in his last, probably, 48 hours before he dies of cancer.
And I'm watching a guy who's lived his life -- he's now in his mid-80s -- and he's dying with peace.
You know, the test of your worldview is not how you act in the good times.
The test of your worldview is how you act at the funeral.
And having been through literally hundreds if not thousands of funerals, it makes a difference.
It makes a difference what you believe.
So, we gave it all back, and then we set up three foundations, working on some of the major problems of the world: illiteracy, poverty, pandemic diseases -- particularly HIV/AIDS -- and set up these three foundations, and put the money into that.
The last thing we did is we became what I call "reverse tithers."
And that is, when my wife and I got married 30 years ago, we started tithing.
Now, that's a principle in the Bible that says give 10 percent of what you get back to charity, give it away to help other people.
So, we started doing that, and each year we would raise our tithe one percent.
So, our first year of marriage we went to 11 percent, second year we went to 12 percent, and the third year we went to 13 percent, and on and on and on.
Why did I do that?
Because every time I give, it breaks the grip of materialism in my life.
Materialism is all about getting -- get, get, get, get all you can, can all you get, sit on the can and spoil the rest.
It's all about more, having more.
And we think that the good life is actually looking good -- that's most important of all -- looking good, feeling good and having the goods.
But that's not the good life.
I meet people all the time who have those, and they're not necessarily happy.
If money actually made you happy, then the wealthiest people in the world would be the happiest.
And that I know, personally, I know, is not true.
It's just not true.
So, the good life is not about looking good, feeling good or having the goods, it's about being good and doing good.
Giving your life away.
Significance in life doesn't come from status, because you can always find somebody who's got more than you.
It doesn't come from sex.
It doesn't come from salary.
It comes from serving.
It is in giving our lives away that we find meaning, we find significance.
That's the way we were wired, I believe, by God.
And so we began to give away, and now after 30 years, my wife and I are reverse tithers -- we give away 90 percent and live on 10.
That, actually, was the easy part.
The hard part is, what do I do with all this attention?
Because I started getting all kinds of invitations.
I just came off a nearly month-long speaking tour on three different continents, and I won't go into that, but it was an amazing thing.
And I'm going, what do I do with this notoriety that the book has brought?
And, being a pastor, I started reading the Bible.
There's a chapter in the Bible called Psalm 72, and it's Solomon's prayer for more influence.
When you read this prayer, it sounds incredibly selfish, self-centered.
He says, "God, I want you to make me famous."
That's what he prays.
He said, "I want you to make me famous.
I want you to spread the fame of my name through every land, I want you to give me power.
I want you to make me famous, I want you to give me influence."
And it just sounds like the most egotistical request you could make, if you were going to pray.
Until you read the whole psalm, the whole chapter.
And then he says, "So that the king ..." -- he was the king of Israel at that time, at its apex in power -- "... so that the king may care for the widow and orphan, support the oppressed, defend the defenseless, care for the sick, assist the poor, speak up for the foreigner, those in prison."
Basically, he's talking about all the marginalized in society.
And as I read that, I looked at it, and I thought, you know, what this is saying is that the purpose of influence is to speak up for those who have no influence.
The purpose of influence is not to build your ego.
Or your net worth.
And, by the way, your net worth is not the same thing as your self-worth.
Your value is not based on your valuables.
It's based on a whole different set of things.
And so the purpose of influence is to speak up for those who have no influence.
And I had to admit: I can't think of the last time I thought of widows and orphans.
They're not on my radar.
I pastor a church in one of the most affluent areas of America -- a bunch of gated communities.
I have a church full of CEOs and scientists.
And I could go five years and never, ever see a homeless person.
They're just not in my pathway.
Now, they're 13 miles up the road in Santa Ana.
So I had to say, ok, I would use whatever affluence and whatever influence I've got to help those who don't have either of those.
You know, there's a story in the Bible about Moses, whether you believe it's true or not, it really doesn't matter to me.
But Moses, if you saw the movie, "The Ten Commandments," Moses goes out, and there's this burning bush, and God talks to him, and God says, "Moses, what's in your hand?"
I think that's one of the most important questions you'll ever be asked: What's in your hand?
Moses says, "It's a staff. It's a shepherd's staff."
And God says, "Throw it down."
And if you saw the movie, you know, he throws it down and it becomes a snake.
And then God says, "Pick it up."
And he picks it back up again, and it becomes a staff again.
Now, I'm reading this thing, and I'm going, what is that all about?
OK. What's that all about? Well, I do know a couple of things.
Number one, God never does a miracle to show off.
It's not just, "Wow, isn't that cool?"
And, by the way, my God doesn't have to show up on cheese bread.
You know, if God's going to show up, he's not going to show up on cheese bread.
(Laughter) Ok? I just, this is why I love what Michael does, because it's like, if he's debunking it, then I don't have to.
But God -- my God -- doesn't show up on sprinkler images.
He's got a few more powerful ways than that to do whatever he wants to do.
But he doesn't do miracles just to show off.
Second thing is, if God ever asks you a question, he already knows the answer.
Obviously, if he's God, then that would mean that when he asks the question, it's for your benefit, not his.
So he's going, "What's in your hand?"
Now, what was in Moses' hand?
Well, it was a shepherd's staff. Now, follow me on this.
This staff represented three things about Moses' life.
First, it represented his identity; he was a shepherd.
It's the symbol of his own occupation: I am a shepherd.
It's a symbol of his identity, his career, his job.
Second, it's a symbol of not only his identity, it's a symbol of his income, because all of his assets are tied up in sheep.
In those days, nobody had bank accounts, or American Express cards, or hedge funds.
Your assets are tied up in your flocks.
So it's a symbol of his identity, and it's a symbol of his income.
And the third thing: it's a symbol of his influence.
What do you do with a shepherd's staff?
Well, you know, you move sheep from point A to point B with it, by hook or by crook.
You pull them or you poke them. One or the other.
So, he's saying, "You're going to lay down your identity.
What's in your hand?
You've got identity, you've got income, you've got influence.
What's in your hand?"
And he's saying, "If you lay it down, I'll make it come alive.
I'll do some things you could never imagine possible."
And if you've watched that movie, "Ten Commandments," all of those big miracles that happen in Egypt are done through this staff.
Last year, I was invited to speak at the NBA All-Stars game.
And so, I'm talking to the players, because most of the NBA teams, NFL teams and all the other teams have done this 40 Days of Purpose, based on the book.
And I asked them, I said, "What's in your hand?
So, what's in your hand?" I said, "It's a basketball.
And that basketball represents your identity, who you are: you're an NBA player.
It represents your income: you're making a lot of money off that little ball.
And it represents your influence.
And even though you're only going to be in the NBA for a few years, you're going to be an NBA player for the rest of your life.
And that gives you enormous influence.
So, what are you going to do with what you've been given?"
And I guess that's the main reason I came up here today, to all of you very bright people at TED -- it is to say, "What's in your hand?"
What do you have that you've been given?
Talent, background, education, freedom, networks, opportunities, wealth, ideas, creativity.
What are you doing with what you've been given?
That, to me, is the primary question about life.
That, to me, is what being purpose-driven is all about.
In the book, I talk about how you're wired to do certain things, you're "SHAPED" with -- a little acrostic: Spiritual gifts, Heart, Ability, Personality and Experiences.
These things shape you.
And if you want to know what you ought to be doing with your life, you need to look at your shape -- "What am I wired to do?"
Why would God wire you to do something and then not have you do it?
If you're wired to be an anthropologist, you'll be an anthropologist.
If you're wired to be an undersea explorer, you'll be an undersea explorer.
If you're wired to make deals, you make deals.
If you're wired to paint, you paint.
Did you know that God smiles when you be you?
When my little kids -- when my kids were little -- they're all grown now, I have grandkids -- I used to go in and sit on the side of their bed, and I used to watch my kids sleep.
And I just watched their little bodies rise and lower, rise and lower.
And I would look at them: "This is not an accident."
Rise and lower.
And I got joy out of just watching them sleep.
Some people have the misguided idea that God only gets excited when you're doing, quote, "spiritual things," like going to church or helping the poor, or, you know, confessing or doing something like that.
The bottom line is, God gets pleasure watching you be you.
Why? He made you.
And when you do what you were made to do, he goes, "That's my boy! That's my girl!
You're using the talent and ability that I gave you."
So my advice to you is: look at what's in your hand -- your identity, your influence, your income -- and say, "It's not about me.
It's about making the world a better place."
Thank you.
Hello, everyone. Because this is my first time at TED, I've decided to bring along an old friend to help break the ice a bit.
Yes. That's right. This is Barbie.
She's 50 years old. And she's looking as young as ever.
(Laughter) But I'd also like to introduce you to what may be an unfamiliar face.
This is Fulla. Fulla is the Arab world's answer to Barbie.
Now, according to proponents of the clash of civilizations, Barbie and Fulla occupy these completely separate spheres.
They have different interests. They have divergent values.
And should they ever come in contact ...
well, I've got to tell you, it's just not going to be pretty.
My experience, however, in the Islamic world is very different.
Where I work, in the Arab region, people are busy taking up Western innovations and changing them into things which are neither conventionally Western, nor are they traditionally Islamic.
I want to show you two examples.
The first is 4Shbab.
It means "for youth" and it's a new Arab TV channel.
(Video): Video clips from across the globe.
The USA.
♫ I am not afraid to stand alone ♫ ♫ I am not afraid to stand alone, if Allah is by my side ♫ ♫ I am not afraid to stand alone ♫ ♫ Everything will be all right ♫ ♫ I am not afraid to stand alone ♫ The Arab world.
(Music) ♫ She was preserved by modesty of the religion ♫ ♫ She was adorned by the light of the Quran ♫ Shereen El Feki: 4Shbab has been dubbed Islamic MTV.
Its creator, who is an Egyptian TV producer called Ahmed Abu Haïba, wants young people to be inspired by Islam to lead better lives.
He reckons the best way to get that message across is to use the enormously popular medium of music videos.
4Shbab was set up as an alternative to existing Arab music channels.
And they look something like this.
(Music) That, by the way is Haifa Wehbe. She's a Lebanese pop star and pan-Arab pin-up girl.
In the world of 4Shbab, it's not about bump and grind.
But it's not about fire and brimstone either.
Its videos are intended to show a kinder, gentler face of Islam, for young people to deal with life's challenges.
Now, my second example is for a slightly younger crowd.
And it's called "The 99."
Now, these are the world's first Islamic superheroes.
They were created by a Kuwaiti psychologist called Naif Al Mutawa.
And his desire is to rescue Islam from images of intolerance, all in a child-friendly format.
"The 99." The characters are meant to embody the 99 attributes of Allah: justice, wisdom, mercy, among others.
So, for example, there is the character of Noora.
She is meant to have the power to look inside people and see the good and bad in everyone.
Another character called Jami has the ability to create fantastic inventions.
Now, "The 99" is not just a comic book.
It's now a theme park.
There is an animated series in the works.
And by this time next year, the likes of Superman and Wonder Woman will have joined forces with "The 99" to beat injustice wherever they find it.
"The 99" and 4Shbab are just two of many examples of this sort of Islamic cross-cultural hybridization.
We're not talking here about a clash of civilizations.
Nor is it some sort of indistinguishable mash.
I like to think of it as a mesh of civilizations, in which the strands of different cultures are intertwined.
Now, while 4Shbab and "The 99" may look new and shiny, there is actually a very long tradition of this.
Throughout its history, Islam has borrowed and adapted from other civilizations both ancient and modern.
After all, it's the Quran which encourages us to do this: "We made you into nations and tribes so that you could learn from one another."
And to my mind, those are pretty wise words, no matter what your creed. Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to show you how terrorism actually interacts with our daily life.
15 years ago I received a phone call from a friend.
At the time he was looking after the rights of political prisoners in Italian jails.
He asked me if I wanted to interview the Red Brigades.
Now, as many of you may remember, the Red Brigades was a terrorist, Marxist organization which was very active in Italy from the 1960s until the mid-1980s.
As part of their strategy the Red Brigades never spoke with anybody, not even with their lawyers.
They sat in silence through their trails, waving occasionally at family and friends.
In 1993 they declared the end of the armed struggle.
And they drew a list of people with whom they would talk, and tell their story.
And I was one of those people.
When I asked my friend why the Red Brigades want to talk to me, he said that the female members of the organization had actually supported my name.
In particular, one person had put it forward.
She was my childhood friend.
She had joined the Red Brigades and became a leader of the organization.
Naturally, I didn't know that until the day she was arrested.
In fact, I read it in the newspaper.
At the time of the phone call I just had a baby, I successfully completed a management buyout to the company I was working with, and the last thing I wanted to do was to go back home and touring the high-security prisons.
But this is exactly what I did because I wanted to know what had turned my best friend into a terrorist, and why she'd never tried to recruit me.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, this is exactly what I did.
Now, I found the answer very quickly.
I actually had failed the psychological profiling of a terrorist.
The center committee of the Red Brigades had judged me too single-minded and too opinionated to become a good terrorist.
My friend, on the other hand, she was a good terrorist because she was very good at following orders.
She also embraced violence.
Because she believed that the only way to unblock what, at the time, was known as a blocked democracy, Italy, a country run by the same party for 35 years was the arms struggle.
At the same time, while I was interviewing the Red Brigades, I also discovered that their life was not ruled by politics or ideology, but actually was ruled by economics.
They were constantly short of cash.
They were constantly searching for cash.
Now, contrary to what many people believe, terrorism is actually a very expensive business.
I'll give you an idea.
In the 1970s, the turnover of the Red Brigades on a yearly basis was seven million dollars.
This is roughly between 100 and 150 million, today.
Now, you know, if you live underground it's really hard to produce this amount of money.
But this also explains why, when I was interviewing the Red Brigades, and then, later on, other arms organizations, including members of al-Zarqawi group in the Middle East, everybody was extremely reluctant to talk about ideology, or politics.
Because they had no idea.
The political vision of a terrorist organization is decided by the leadership, which, generally, is never more than five to seven people.
All the others do, day in and day out, is search for money.
Once, for example, I was interviewing this part-timer from the Red Brigades.
It was a psychiatrist. He loved sailing.
He was a really keen sailor. And he had this beautiful boat.
And he told me that the best time of his life was when he was a member of the Red Brigades and he went sailing, every summer, back and forth from Lebanon, where he would pick up Soviet weapons from the PLO, and then carry them all the way to Sardinia where the other arms organization from Europe would go and take their share of the arms.
For that service the Red Brigades were actually paid a fee, which went to fund their organization.
So, because I am a trained economist and I think in economic terms, all of the sudden I thought, maybe there is something here.
Maybe there is a link, a commercial link, between one organization and another one.
But it was only when I interviewed Mario Moretti, the head of the Red Brigades, the man who kidnapped and killed Aldo Moro, Italian former prime minister, that I finally realized that terrorism is actually business.
I was having lunch with him in a high-security prison in Italy.
And as we were eating, I had the distinct feeling that I was back in the city of London, having lunch with a fellow banker or an economist.
This guy thought in the same way I did.
So, I decided that I wanted to investigate the economics of terrorism.
Naturally, nobody wanted to fund my research.
In fact, I think many people thought that I was a bit crazy.
You know, that woman that goes around to foundations asking for money, thinking about the economics of terrorism.
So, in the end, I took a decision that, in retrospect, did change my life.
I sold my company, and funded the research myself.
And what I discovered is this parallel reality, another international economic system, which runs parallel to our own, which has been created by arms organizations since the end of World War II.
And what is even more shocking is that this system has followed, step by step, the evolution of our own system, of our Western capitalism.
And there are three main stages.
The first one is the state sponsor of terrorism.
The second one is the privatization of terrorism.
And the third, of course, is the globalization of terrorism.
So, state sponsor of terrorism, feature of the Cold War.
This is when the two superpowers were fighting a war by proxy, along the periphery of the sphere of influence, fully funding arms organizations.
A mix of legal and illegal activities is used.
So, the link between crime and terror is established very early on.
And here is the best example, the Contras in Nicaragua, created by the CIA, legally funded by the U.S. Congress, illegally funded by the Reagan administration via covert operation, for example, the Iran-Contra Affair.
Then comes the late 1970s, early '80s, and some groups successfully carry out the privatization of terrorism.
So, they gain independence from the sponsor, and start funding themselves.
Now, again we see a mix of legal and illegal activities.
So, Arafat used to get a percentage of the smuggling of hashish from Bekáa Valley, which is the valley between Lebanon and Syria.
And the IRA, which control the private transportation system in Northern Ireland, did exactly the same thing.
So, every single time that somebody got into a taxi in Belfast without knowing, actually, was funding the IRA.
But the great change came, of course, with globalization and deregulation.
This is when arms organization were able to link up, also financially, with each other.
But above all, they started to do serious business with the world of crime.
And together they money-laundered their dirty business through the same channel.
This is when we see the birth of the transnational arms organization Al Qaeda.
This is an organization that can raise money across border.
But also that is able to carry out attacks in more than one country.
Now, deregulation also brought back rogue economics.
So what is rogue economics?
Rogue economics is a force which is constantly lurking in the background of history.
It comes back at times of great transformation, globalization being one of those transformations.
It is at this times in which politics actually loses control of the economy, and the economy becomes a rogue force working against us.
It has happened before in history.
It has happened with the fall of the Roman Empire.
It has happened with Industrial Revolution.
And it actually happened again, with the fall of the Berlin wall.
Now, I calculated how big was this international economic system composed by crime, terror, and illegal economy, before 9-11.
And it is a staggering 1.5 trillion dollars.
It is trillions, it's not billions.
This is about twice the GDP of the United Kingdom, soon will be more, considering where this country is going.
(Laughter) Now, until 9-11, the bulk of all this money flew into the U.S. economy because the bulk of the money was denominated in U.S. dollars and the money laundering was taking place inside the United States.
The entry point, of course, of most of this money were the off-shore facilities.
So, this was a vital injection of cash into the U.S. economy.
Now, when I went to look at the figures of the U.S. money supply, the U.S. money supply is the amount of dollars that the Federal Reserve prints every year in order to satisfy the increase in the demand for dollars, which, of course, reflects the growth of the economy.
So, when I went to look at those figures, I noted that since the late 1960s a growing number of these dollars was actually leaving the United States, never to come back.
These were money taken out in suitcases or in containers, in cash of course.
These were money taken out by criminals and money launderers.
These were money taken out to fund the growth of the terror, illegal and criminal economy.
So, you see, what is the relationship?
The United States actually is a country that is the reserve currency of the world.
What does it mean? That means that it has a privilege that other countries do not have.
It can borrow against the total amount of dollars in circulation in the world.
This privilege is called seigniorage.
No other country can do that.
All the other countries, for example the United Kingdom, can borrow only against the amount of money in circulation inside its own borders.
So, here is the implication of the relationship between the worlds of crime, terror, and illegal economy, and our economy.
The U.S. in the 1990s was borrowing against the growth of the terror, illegal and criminal economy.
This is how close we are with this world.
Now, this situation changed, of course, after 9-11, because George Bush launched the War on Terror.
Part of the War on Terror was the introduction of the Patriot Act.
Now, many of you know that the Patriot Act is a legislation that greatly reduces the liberties of Americans in order to protect them against terrorism.
But there is a section of the Patriot Act which refers specifically to finance.
And it is, in fact, an anti-money-laundering legislation.
What the Patriot Act did was to prohibit U.S. bank, and U.S.-registered foreign banks from doing any businesses with off-shore facilities.
It closed that door between the money laundering in dollars, and the U.S. economy.
It also gave the U.S. monetary authorities the right to monitor any dollar transaction taking place anywhere in the world.
Now, you can imagine what was the reaction of the international finance and banking.
All the bankers said to their clients, "Get out of the dollars and go and invest somewhere else."
Now, the Euro was a newly born currency of great opportunity for business, and, of course, for investment.
And this is what people did.
Nobody wants the U.S. monetary authority to check their relationship, to monitor their relationship with their clientele.
The same thing happened, of course, in the world of crime and terror.
People simply moved their money-laundering activities away from the United States into Europe.
Why did this happen? This happened because the Patriot Act was a unilateral legislation.
It was introduced only in the United States.
And it was introduced only for the U.S. dollars.
In Europe, a similar legislation was not introduced.
So, within six months Europe became the epicenter of the money-laundering activities of the world.
So, this is how incredible are the relationship between the world of crime and the world of terror, and our own life.
So, why did I tell you this story?
I told you this story because you must understand that there is a world that goes well beyond the headlines of the newspapers, including the personal relationship that you have with friends and family.
You got to question everything that is told to you, including what I just told you today.
(Laughter) This is the only way for you to step into the dark side, and have a look at it.
And believe me, it's going to be scary.
It's going to be frightful, but it's going to enlighten you.
And, above all, it's not going to be boring.
(Laughter) (Applause)
My name is Ryan Lobo, and I've been involved in the documentary filmmaking business all over the world for the last 10 years.
During the process of making these films I found myself taking photographs, often much to the annoyance of the video cameramen.
I found this photography of mine almost compulsive.
And at the end of a shoot, I would sometimes feel that I had photographs that told a better story than a sometimes-sensational documentary.
I felt, when I had my photographs, that I was holding on to something true, regardless of agendas or politics.
In 2007, I traveled to three war zones.
I traveled to Iraq, Afghanistan and Liberia.
And over there I experienced other people's suffering, up close and personal, immersed myself in some rather intense and emotional stories, and at times I experienced great fear for my own life.
As always, I would return to Bangalore, and often to animated discussions at friend's homes, where we would discuss various issues while they complained bitterly about the new pub timings, where a drink often cost more than what they'd paid their 14-year-old maid.
I would feel very isolated during these discussions.
But at the same time, I questioned myself and my own integrity and purpose in storytelling.
And I decided that I had compromised, just like my friends in those discussions, where we told stories in contexts we made excuses for, rather than taking responsibility for.
I won't go into details about what led to a decision I made, but let's just say it involved alcohol, cigarettes, other substances and a woman.
(Laughter) I basically decided that it was I, not the camera or the network, or anything that lay outside myself, that was the only instrument in storytelling truly worth tuning.
In my life, when I tried to achieve things like success or recognition, they eluded me.
Paradoxically, when I let go of these objectives, and worked from a place of compassion and purpose, looking for excellence, rather than the results of it, everything arrived on its own, including fulfillment.
Photography transcended culture, including my own.
And it is, for me, a language which expressed the intangible, and gives voice to people and stories without.
I invite you into three recent stories of mine, which are about this way of looking, if you will, which I believe exemplify the tenets of what I like to call compassion in storytelling.
In 2007 I went to Liberia, where a group of my friends and I did an independent, self-funded film, still in progress, on a very legendary and brutal war-lord named General Butt Naked.
His real name is Joshua, and he's pictured here in a cell where he once used to torture and murder people, including children.
Joshua claims to have personally killed more than 10,000 people during Liberia's civil war.
He got his name from fighting stark naked.
And he is probably the most prolific mass murderer alive on Earth today.
This woman witnessed the General murdering her brother.
Joshua commanded his child-soldiers to commit unspeakable crimes, and enforced his command with great brutality.
Today many of these children are addicted to drugs like heroin, and they are destitute, like these young men in the image.
How do you live with yourself if you know you've committed horrific crimes?
Today the General is a baptized Christian evangelist.
And he's on a mission.
We accompanied Joshua, as he walked the Earth, visiting villages where he had once killed and raped.
He seeked forgiveness, and he claims to endeavor to improve the lives of his child-soldiers.
During this expedition I expected him to be killed outright, and us as well.
But what I saw opened my eyes to an idea of forgiveness which I never thought possible.
In the midst of incredible poverty and loss, people who had nothing absolved a man who had taken everything from them.
He begs for forgiveness, and receives it from the same woman whose brother he murdered.
Senegalese, the young man seated on the wheelchair here, was once a child soldier, under the General's command, until he disobeyed orders, and the General shot off both his legs.
He forgives the General in this image.
He risked his life as he walked up to people whose families he'd murdered.
In this photograph a hostile crowd in a slum surrounds him.
And Joshua remains silent as they vented their rage against him.
This image, to me, is almost like from a Shakespearean play, with a man, surrounded by various influences, desperate to hold on to something true within himself, in a context of great suffering that he has created himself.
I was intensely moved during all this.
But the question is, does forgiveness and redemption replace justice?
Joshua, in his own words, says that he does not mind standing trial for his crimes, and speaks about them from soapboxes across Monrovia, to an audience that often includes his victims.
A very unlikely spokesperson for the idea of separation of church and state.
The second story I'm going to tell you about is about a group of very special fighting women with rather unique peace-keeping skills.
Liberia has been devastated by one of Africa's bloodiest civil wars, which has left more than 200,000 people dead, thousands of women scarred by rape and crime on a spectacular scale.
Liberia is now home to an all-woman United Nations contingent of Indian peacekeepers.
These women, many from small towns in India, help keep the peace, far away from home and family.
They use negotiation and tolerance more often than an armed response.
The commander told me that a woman could gauge a potentially violent situation much better than men.
And that they were definitely capable of diffusing it non-aggressively.
This man was very drunk, and he was very interested in my camera, until he noticed the women, who handled him with smiles, and AK-47s at the ready, of course.
(Laughter) This contingent seems to be quite lucky, and it has not sustained any casualties, even though dozens of peacekeepers have been killed in Liberia.
And yes, all of those people killed were male.
Many of the women are married with children, and they say the hardest part of their deployment was being kept away from their children.
I accompanied these women on their patrols, and watched as they walked past men, many who passed very lewd comments incessantly.
And when I asked one of the women about the shock and awe response, she said, "Don't worry, same thing back home.
We know how to deal with these fellows," and ignored them.
In a country ravaged by violence against women, Indian peacekeepers have inspired many local women to join the police force.
Sometimes, when the war is over and all the film crews have left, the most inspiring stories are the ones that float just beneath the radar.
I came back to India and nobody was interested in buying the story.
And one editor told me that she wasn't interested in doing what she called "manual labor stories."
In 2007 and 2009 I did stories on the Delhi Fire Service, the DFS, which, during the summer, is probably the world's most active fire department.
They answer more than 5,000 calls in just two months.
And all this against incredible logistical odds, like heat and traffic jams.
Something amazing happened during this shoot.
Due to a traffic jam, we were late in getting to a slum, a large slum, which had caught fire.
As we neared, angry crowds attacked our trucks and stoned them, by hundreds of people all over the place.
These men were terrified, as the mob attacked our vehicle.
But nonetheless, despite the hostility, firefighters left the vehicle and successfully fought the fire.
Running the gauntlet through hostile crowds, and some wearing motorbike helmets to prevent injury.
Some of the local people forcibly took away the hoses from the firemen to put out the fire in their homes.
Now, hundreds of homes were destroyed.
But the question that lingered in my mind was, what causes people to destroy fire trucks headed to their own homes?
Where does such rage come from?
And how are we responsible for this?
45 percent of the 14 million people who live in Delhi live in unauthorized slums, which are chronically overcrowded.
They lack even the most basic amenities.
And this is something that is common to all our big cities.
Back to the DFS. A huge chemical depot caught fire, thousands of drums filled with petrochemicals were blazing away and exploding all around us.
The heat was so intense, that hoses were used to cool down firefighters fighting extremely close to the fire, and with no protective clothing.
In India we often love to complain about our government bodies.
But over here, the heads of the DFS, Mr. R.C. Sharman, Mr. A.K. Sharman, led the firefight with their men.
Something wonderful in a country where manual labor is often looked down upon.
(Applause) Over the years, my faith in the power of storytelling has been tested.
And I've had very serious doubt about its efficacy, and my own faith in humanity.
However, a film we shot still airs on the National Geographic channel.
And when it airs I get calls from all the guys I was with and they tell me that they receive hundreds of calls congratulating them.
Some of the firemen told me that they were also inspired to do better because they were so pleased to get thank-yous rather than brick bats.
It seems that this story helped change perceptions about the DFS, at least in the minds of an audience in part on televisions, read magazines and whose huts aren't on fire.
Sometimes, focusing on what's heroic, beautiful and dignified, regardless of the context, can help magnify these intangibles three ways, in the protagonist of the story, in the audience, and also in the storyteller.
And that's the power of storytelling.
Focus on what's dignified, courageous and beautiful, and it grows. Thank you.
(Applause)
There are a lot of web 2.0 consultants who make a lot of money.
In fact, they make their living on this stuff.
I'm going to try to save you all the time and money and go through it in the next three minutes, so bear with me.
Started a website in 2005 with a few friends, called Reddit.com.
It's what you'd call a social news website; basically, the democratic front page of the best stuff on the web.
You find some interesting content -- say, a TED Talk -- submit it to Reddit, and a community of your peers votes up if they like it, down if they don't.
That creates the front page.
It's always rising, falling; a half million people visit every day.
But this isn't about Reddit.
In the last four years, we've seen all kinds of memes, all kinds of trends get born right on our front page.
This isn't about Reddit itself, it's actually about humpback whales.
Well, technically, it's about Greenpeace, an environmental organization that wanted to stop the Japanese government's whaling campaign.
The whales were getting killed; they wanted to put an end to it.
One of the ways they wanted to do it was to put a tracking chip inside one of the whales.
So in true web fashion, they put together a poll, where they had a bunch of very erudite, very thoughtful, cultured names.
I believe this is the Farsi word for "immortal."
I think this means "divine power of the ocean" in a Polynesian language.
And then there was this: "Mister Splashy Pants."
(Laughter) And this was a special name.
Mister Pants, or "Splashy" to his friends, was very popular on the Internet.
In fact, someone on Reddit thought, "What a great thing, we should all vote this up."
And Redditors responded and all agreed.
So the voting started.
We got behind it ourselves; we changed our logo for the day, from the alien to Splashy, to help the cause.
And it wasn't long before other sites like Fark and Boing Boing and the rest of the Internet started saying, "We love Splashy Pants!"
So it went from about five percent, which was when this meme started, to 70 percent at the end of voting.
Pretty impressive, right? We won! Mister Splashy Pants was chosen.
Just kidding -- Greenpeace actually wasn't that crazy about it, because they wanted one of the more thoughtful names to win.
They said, "No, just kidding. We'll give it another week of voting."
Well, that got us a little angry, so we changed it to Fightin' Splashy.
(Laughter) And the Reddit community -- really, the rest of the Internet, really got behind this.
Facebook groups were created.
The idea was, "Vote your conscience, vote for Mister Splashy Pants."
People were putting up signs in the real world about this whale.
(Laughter) This was the final vote: 78 percent of the votes.
To give you an idea of the landslide, the next highest name pulled in three.
There was a clear lesson: the Internet loves Mister Splashy Pants.
Which is obvious. It's a great name.
Everyone wants to hear their news anchor say, "Mister Splashy Pants."
(Laughter) I think that's what helped drive this.
What was cool were the repercussions.
Greenpeace created an entire marketing campaign around it -- Mister Splashy Pants shirts and pins, an e-card so you could send your friend a dancing Splashy.
But even more important was that they accomplished their mission.
The Japanese government called off their whaling expedition.
Mission accomplished: Greenpeace was thrilled, the whales were happy -- that's a quote.
(Laughter) And actually, Redditors in the Internet community were happy to participate, but they weren't whale lovers.
A few, certainly, but we're talking about a lot of people, really interested and caught up in this meme.
Greenpeace came back to the site and thanked Reddit for its participation.
But this wasn't really altruism; just interest in doing something cool.
This is how the Internet works. This is that great big secret.
The Internet provides a level playing field.
Your link is as good as your link, which is as good as my link.
With a browser, anyone can get to any website no matter your budget.
Another important thing is it costs nothing to get content online.
There are so many publishing tools available, it only takes a few minutes to produce something.
and the cost of iteration is so cheap, you might as well.
If you do, be genuine. Be honest, up-front.
One of the great lessons Greenpeace learned is that it's OK to lose control, OK to take yourself a little less seriously, given that, even though it's a very serious cause, you could ultimately achieve your goal.
That's the final message I want to share: you can do well online.
But no longer is the message coming from just the top down.
If you want to succeed you've got to be OK to lose control.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Actually, I come from Britain, but I've been living in Maldives for 26 years now.
So, that's home really.
The Maldives, as I'm sure you're aware, are a chain of islands off the southwest coast of India here.
Capital, Malé, where I live.
Actually, sitting here today in Mysore, we're closer to Malé than we are to Delhi, for example.
If you're in IT, India, obviously, is the place to be at the moment.
But if you're a marine biologist, Maldives is not such a bad place to be.
And it has been my home these years.
For those of you who've been there, fantastic coral reefs, fantastic diving, fantastic snorkeling.
I spend as much of my time as possible investigating the marine life.
I study fish, also the bigger things, whales and dolphins.
This is a blue whale. We have blue whales in the waters around here, off Maldives, around the waters of India. You can see them off Kerala.
And, in fact, we're very lucky in this region.
One of the best places in the world to see blue whales is here in this region.
In Sri Lanka, if you go down to the south coast of Sri Lanka, during the northeast monsoon season, you can see blue whales very, very easily.
It's probably the best place in the world to see them.
Now, when I talk about the northeast monsoon season, I'm sure many of you here know exactly what I mean, but perhaps some of you are not quite so sure.
I need to explain a little bit about monsoons.
Now, monsoon, the root of the word "monsoon" comes from the word "season."
So, it's just a season. And there are two seasons in most of South Asia.
And in the summer India heats up, gets very hot.
Hot air rises, and air is drawn in off the sea to replace it.
And the way it works is, it comes from the southwest.
It comes off the ocean here and is drawn up towards India.
So it comes from the southwest. It's a southwest monsoon.
Picks up moisture as it crosses the ocean.
That's what brings the monsoon rain.
And then in the winter things cool down.
High pressure builds over India.
And the whole system goes into reverse.
So, the wind is now coming from the northeast out of India, across the Indian Ocean, this way towards Africa.
Keep that in mind.
Now, I'm a marine biologist, but I'm actually a bit of an old fashioned naturalist, I suppose.
I'm interested in all sorts of things, almost everything that moves, including dragonflies. And I'm actually going to talk, this afternoon, about dragonflies.
This is a very beautiful species, it's called the Oriental Scarlet.
And one thing you need to know about dragonflies, one important thing, is that they lay their eggs in fresh water.
They need fresh water to breed.
They lay the eggs into fresh water.
Little larvae hatch out in fresh water.
They feed on other little things. They feed on mosquito larvae.
So, they're very important.
They control mosquito larvae, among other things.
And they grow and grow by stages. And they climb out of the water, burst out, as the adult which we see.
And typically, there is a lot of variation, but if you have a dragonfly with, say, a one year life cycle, which is quite typical, the larva, living in the fresh water, lives for 10 or 11 months.
And then the adult, which comes after, lives for one or two months.
So it's essentially a freshwater animal.
It really does need fresh water.
Now, the particular species of dragonfly I want to talk about is this one, because most dragonflies, like the one we've just seen, when the adult is there for its brief one or two months of life, it doesn't go very far. It can't travel very far.
A few kilometers, maybe, is quite typical.
They are very good fliers, but they don't go too far.
But this guy is an exception.
And this is called the Globe Skimmer, or Wandering Glider.
And, as the name might suggest, it is found pretty much around the world.
It lives throughout the tropics, the Americas, Africa, Asia, Australia, into the Pacific.
And it wanders far and wide. We know that much about it.
But it really hasn't been studied very much.
It's a rather mediocre looking dragonfly.
If you're going to study dragonflies, you want to study those really bright beautiful ones, like that red one. Or the really rare ones, the endemic endangered ones.
This is, it seems a bit dull you know.
It's sort of dull-colored. And it's fairly common.
And it occurs everywhere -- you know, why bother?
But if you take that attitude, you're actually missing something rather special.
Because this dragonfly has a rather amazing story to tell.
And I feel very privileged to have stumbled across it living in the Maldives.
When I first went to the Maldives, dead keen on diving, spent as much of my time as I could in and under the water.
Didn't notice any dragonflies; maybe they were there, maybe they weren't.
Didn't notice them.
But after some time, after some months, one day as I was going out and about, suddenly I noticed hundreds of dragonflies, hundreds of dragonflies.
Something like this, these are all this species Globe Skimmer.
I didn't know at the time, but I know now, they're Globe Skimmers, hundreds of them.
And they were there for some time. And then they were gone.
And I didn't think anything more of it until the following year, when it happened again, and then the year after that, and then the year after that.
And I was a bit slow, I didn't really take too much notice.
But I asked some Maldivian friends and colleagues, and yes they come every year.
And I asked people about them and yes, they knew, but they didn't know anything, where they came from, or anything.
And again I didn't think too much of it.
But slowly it began to dawn on me that something rather special was happening.
Because dragonflies need fresh water to breed.
And the Maldives, and I'm sure some of you have been there -- so here is home.
So, Maldives, beautiful place.
(Laughter) It's built entirely of coral reefs.
And on top of the coral reefs are sand banks.
Average height, about that much above sea level.
So, global warming, sea level rise, it's a real serious issue.
But I'm not going to talk about that.
Another important point of these sand banks is that when it rains, the rainwater soaks down into the soil. So, it's gone.
So, it stays under the soil.
The trees can put their roots into it.
Humans can dig holes and make a well.
But dragonflies -- a bit tricky.
There is no surface fresh water.
There are no ponds, streams, rivers, lakes, nothing like that.
So, why is it that every year millions of dragonflies, millions, millions of dragonflies turn up?
I got a little bit curious. In fact I'll stop here, because I want to ask, and there is a lot of people who, from India of course, people who grew up spending your childhood here.
Those of you who are Indian or spent your childhood here, let me have a show of hands, who of you -- not yet, not yet!
You're too keen. You're too keen. No. Hang on. Hang on.
Wait for the go. I'll say go.
Those of you who grew up in India, do you remember in your childhood, dragonflies, swarms of dragonflies? Maybe at school, maybe tying little bits of string onto them?
Maybe pulling bits off? I'm not asking about that.
You've only got to say, do you remember seeing lots of dragonflies.
Any hands? Any hands? Yes. Thank you. Thank you.
It's a widespread phenomenon throughout South Asia, including the Maldives.
And I got a bit curious about it.
In the Maldives -- now, in India there is plenty of water, so, dragonflies, yeah, of course. Why not?
But in Maldives, no fresh water. So, what on Earth is going on?
And the first thing I did was started recording when they turned up in the Maldives.
And there is the answer, 21st of October.
Not every year, that's the average date.
So, I've been writing it down for 15 years now.
You'd think they're coming from India. It's the closest place.
But in October, remember, we're still in southwest monsoon, Maldives is still in the southwest monsoon.
But wind is, invariably, every time, is from the west.
It's going towards India, not from India.
So, are these things, how are these things getting here?
Are they coming from India against the wind?
Seemed a bit unlikely.
So, next thing I did is I got on the phone.
Maldives is a long archipelago.
It stretches about 500 miles, of course it's India here.
I got on the phone and emailed to friends and colleagues.
When do you see the dragonflies appear?
And pretty soon, a picture started emerging.
In Bangalore, a colleague there sent me information for three years, average, 24th of September, so late September.
Down in Trivandrum, a bit later.
Far north of Maldives, a bit later.
Then Malé, then further south.
And then the southernmost Maldives.
It's pretty obvious, they're coming from India.
But they are coming 400 miles across the ocean, against the wind.
How on Earth are they doing that?
I didn't know.
The next thing I did was I started counting dragonflies.
I wanted to know about their seasonality, what time of year, this is when they first arrive, but how long are they around for? Does that give any clues?
So, I started a very rigorous scientific process.
I had a rigorous scientific transect.
I got on my bicycle, and I cycled around the island of Malé.
It's about five kilometers around, counting the dragonflies as I go, trying not to bump into people as I'm looking in the trees.
And they're here for a very short time, October, November, December. That's it.
And then they tail off, there's a few, but that's it.
October, November, December. That is not the northeast monsoon season.
That's not the southwest season.
That's the inter-monsoon, the time when the monsoon changes.
Now, what I said was, you get the southwest monsoon going one way, and then it changes and you get the northeast monsoon going the other way.
And that sort of gives the impression you've got one air mass going up and down, up and down. It doesn't work like that.
What happens, actually, is there is two air masses.
And there is a front between them, and the front moves.
So, if you've got India here, when the front is up above India you're into the southwest monsoon.
Then the front moves into the northeast monsoon.
And that front in the middle is not vertical, it's at an angle.
So, as it comes over towards Malé I'm standing in Malé underneath the front.
I can be in the southwest monsoon.
But the wind above is from the northeast monsoon.
So, the dragonflies are actually coming from India on the northeast monsoon, but at an altitude at 1,000 to 2,000 meters up in the air. Incredible.
These little insects, it's the same ones we see out here [in India], two inches long, five centimeters long, flying in their millions, 400 miles across the ocean, at 2,000 meters up. Quite incredible.
So, I was quite pleased with myself. I thought wow, I've tracked this one, I know how they come here. Then I scratched my head a bit, and that's okay, I know how they come here, but why do they come here?
What are millions of dragonflies doing, flying out over the ocean every year to their apparent doom?
It doesn't make sense. There is nothing for them in Maldives.
What on Earth are they doing?
Well, to cut a long story short, they're actually flying right across the ocean.
They're making it all the way across to East Africa.
I know that because I have friends who work on fisheries' research vessels who have sent to me reports from boats out in the ocean.
I know because we have reports from Seychelles, which fit in as well, down here.
And I know because when you look at the rainfall, these particular insects, these Globe Skimmers breed in temporary rain water pools.
Okay, they lay their eggs where the seasonal rains are, the monsoon rains.
The larvae have to develop very quickly.
They only take six weeks. Instead of 11 months, they're six weeks.
They're up, and they're off.
Now, here we have, in case you can't read at the back, the top is rainfall for India.
And we're starting in June. So this is the monsoon rain.
By September, October, it's drying out.
Nothing for these dragonflies. There is no more seasonal rain.
They've got to go hunting for seasonal rain.
And they fly south. As the monsoon withdraws to the south they come down through Karnataka, into Kerala.
And then they run out of land.
But they are incredibly good fliers. This particular species, it can fly for thousands of kilometers.
And it just keeps going. And the wind, the northeast wind swooshes it around and carries it off across the ocean to Africa, where it's raining.
And they are breeding in the rains of Africa.
Now, this is southeast Africa. It makes it look like there are sort of two breeding periods here. It's slightly more complicated than that.
What's happening is they are breeding in the monsoon rains here.
And the dragonflies you can see today outside here, on the campus, are the young of this generation.
They hatched out in India.
They're looking for somewhere to breed. If it rains here they'll breed.
But most of them are going to carry on. And next stop, perhaps only four or five days away is going to be East Africa.
The wind will swoosh them out across here.
If they pass the Maldives they might go and have a look, nothing there, they'll carry on.
Here, here, Kenya, East Africa, they've actually just come out of a long drought.
Just last week the rains broke. The short rains broke and it's raining there now.
And the dragonflies are there. I have reports from my various contacts.
The dragonflies are here now. They're breeding there.
When those guys, they'll lay their eggs now.
They'll hatch out in six weeks. By that time the seasonal rains have moved on. It's not there, it's down here.
They'll fly down here. And the clever thing is the wind is always converging to where the rain is.
The rain occurs, these are summer rains.
This is a summer monsoon.
The sun is overhead there. Summer rains in southern Africa.
The sun is overhead, maximum heating, maximum evaporation, maximum clouds, maximum rainfall, maximum opportunities for reproduction.
Not only that, because you have this convection, you have this rising of the air where it's hot, air is drawn in.
There's a convergence. So, wherever the rain is falling, the air is drawn towards it to replace the air that's rising.
So, the little fellow that hatches out here, he gets up into the air, he is automatically carried to where the rain is falling.
Lay their eggs, next generation, they come up, automatically carried to where the rain is falling.
It's now back there. They come out, it's time to come back.
So, in four generations, one, two, three, four and then back.
A complete circuit of the Indian Ocean.
This is a circuit of about 16,000 kilometers.
16,000 kilometers, four generations, mind you, for a two inch long insect. It's quite incredible.
Those of you from North America will be familiar with the Monarch butterfly.
Which, up until now has had the longest known insect migration.
It's only half the length of this one.
And this crossing here, of the ocean, is the only truly regular transoceanic crossing of any insect.
A quite incredible feat.
And I only stumbled on this because I was living in Malé, in Maldives for long enough for it to percolate into my brain that something rather special was going on.
But dragonflies are not the only creatures that make the crossing.
There is more to the story.
I'm also interested in birds. And I'm familiar with this fellow. This is a rather special bird.
It's a falcon. It's called the eastern red-footed falcon, obviously.
But it's also called the Amur Falcon.
And it's called the Amur Falcon because it breeds in Amurland.
Which is an area along the Amur River, which is up here.
It's the border, much of it is the border between China and Russia, up here in the far east.
So, Siberia, Manchuria.
And that's where it breeds.
And if you're a falcon it's quite a nice place to be in the summer.
But it's a pretty miserable place to be in the winter.
It's, well, you can imagine.
So, as any sensible bird would do, he moves south. They move south. The whole population moves south.
But then the being sensible stopped.
So, now they don't stop here, or even down here.
No, they turn across here.
They have a little refueling stop in northeastern India.
They come to the latitude of about Mumbai or Goa.
And then they strike out across the ocean, down to Kenya.
And down here, and they winter down here [in southern Africa].
Incredible. This is the most extraordinary migration of any bird of prey. A quite incredible migration.
And they are not the only one that makes the crossing.
They have the most incredible journey, but several make the crossing from India to Africa. Includes this one, the hobby.
This fellow is a very nice bird, this is the Pied cuckoo.
Those of you from northern India will be familiar with this.
It comes with the monsoons.
This time of year they cross back to Africa.
And this guy, the roller, a rather beautiful bird.
It's known as the Eurasian Roller. In India it occurs in the northwest, so it's known as the Kashmir Roller.
And these birds, what I've done is I've complied all the records, all the available records of these birds, put them together, and found out they migrate at exactly the same time as the dragonflies.
They make use of exactly the same winds.
They travel at exactly the same time with the same winds to make the crossing. I know they travel at the same altitude.
It's known about the Amur Falcon. This guy, unfortunately, one of these met an unfortunate end.
He was flying off the coast of Goa, 21 years ago, 1988. October, 1988.
An Indian Navy jet was flying off Goa, bang! In the middle of the night. Fortunately, a two engine jet got back to base, and they pulled the remains of one of these [Eurasian Rollers] out.
Flying at night over the Indian Ocean 2,424 meters.
Same height as the dragonflies go.
So, they are using the same winds.
And the other thing, the other important factor for all these birds, all medium sized fellows, and this includes the next slide as well, which is a bee-eater.
Bee-eaters eat bees. This one has a nice blue cheek.
It's a Blue-cheeked Bee-eater.
And every one of these birds that makes the crossing from India to East Africa eats insects, large insects, the size of dragonflies. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Metaphor lives a secret life all around us.
We utter about six metaphors a minute.
Metaphorical thinking is essential to how we understand ourselves and others, how we communicate, learn, discover and invent.
But metaphor is a way of thought before it is a way with words.
Now, to assist me in explaining this, I've enlisted the help of one of our greatest philosophers, the reigning king of the metaphorians, a man whose contributions to the field are so great that he himself has become a metaphor.
I am, of course, referring to none other than Elvis Presley.
(Laughter) Now, "All Shook Up" is a great love song.
It's also a great example of how whenever we deal with anything abstract -- ideas, emotions, feelings, concepts, thoughts -- we inevitably resort to metaphor.
In "All Shook Up," a touch is not a touch, but a chill.
Lips are not lips, but volcanoes.
She is not she, but a buttercup.
And love is not love, but being all shook up.
In this, Elvis is following Aristotle's classic definition of metaphor as the process of giving the thing a name that belongs to something else.
This is the mathematics of metaphor.
And fortunately it's very simple.
X equals Y.
(Laughter) This formula works wherever metaphor is present.
Elvis uses it, but so does Shakespeare in this famous line from "Romeo and Juliet:" Juliet is the sun.
Now, here, Shakespeare gives the thing, Juliet, a name that belongs to something else, the sun.
But whenever we give a thing a name that belongs to something else, we give it a whole network of analogies too.
We mix and match what we know about the metaphor's source, in this case the sun, with what we know about its target, Juliet.
And metaphor gives us a much more vivid understanding of Juliet than if Shakespeare had literally described what she looks like.
So, how do we make and understand metaphors?
This might look familiar.
The first step is pattern recognition.
Look at this image. What do you see?
Three wayward Pac-Men, and three pointy brackets are actually present.
What we see, however, are two overlapping triangles.
Metaphor is not just the detection of patterns; it is the creation of patterns.
Second step, conceptual synesthesia.
Now, synesthesia is the experience of a stimulus in once sense organ in another sense organ as well, such as colored hearing.
People with colored hearing actually see colors when they hear the sounds of words or letters.
We all have synesthetic abilities.
This is the Bouba/Kiki test.
What you have to do is identify which of these shapes is called Bouba, and which is called Kiki.
(Laughter) If you are like 98 percent of other people, you will identify the round, amoeboid shape as Bouba, and the sharp, spiky one as Kiki.
Can we do a quick show of hands?
Does that correspond?
Okay, I think 99.9 would about cover it.
Why do we do that?
Because we instinctively find, or create, a pattern between the round shape and the round sound of Bouba, and the spiky shape and the spiky sound of Kiki.
And many of the metaphors we use everyday are synesthetic.
Silence is sweet.
Neckties are loud.
Sexually attractive people are hot.
Sexually unattractive people leave us cold.
Metaphor creates a kind of conceptual synesthesia, in which we understand one concept in the context of another.
Third step is cognitive dissonance.
This is the Stroop test.
What you need to do here is identify as quickly as possible the color of the ink in which these words are printed.
You can take the test now.
If you're like most people, you will experience a moment of cognitive dissonance when the name of the color is printed in a differently colored ink.
The test shows that we cannot ignore the literal meaning of words even when the literal meaning gives the wrong answer.
Stroop tests have been done with metaphor as well.
The participants had to identify, as quickly as possible, the literally false sentences.
They took longer to reject metaphors as false than they did to reject literally false sentences.
Why? Because we cannot ignore the metaphorical meaning of words either.
One of the sentences was, "Some jobs are jails."
Now, unless you're a prison guard, the sentence "Some jobs are jails" is literally false.
Sadly, it's metaphorically true.
And the metaphorical truth interferes with our ability to identify it as literally false.
Metaphor matters because it's around us every day, all the time.
Metaphor matters because it creates expectations.
Pay careful attention the next time you read the financial news.
Agent metaphors describe price movements as the deliberate action of a living thing, as in, "The NASDAQ climbed higher."
Object metaphors describe price movements as non-living things, as in, "The Dow fell like a brick."
Researchers asked a group of people to read a clutch of market commentaries, and then predict the next day's price trend.
Those exposed to agent metaphors had higher expectations that price trends would continue.
And they had those expectations because agent metaphors imply the deliberate action of a living thing pursuing a goal.
If, for example, house prices are routinely described as climbing and climbing, higher and higher, people might naturally assume that that rise is unstoppable.
They may feel confident, say, in taking out mortgages they really can't afford.
That's a hypothetical example of course.
But this is how metaphor misleads.
Metaphor also matters because it influences decisions by activating analogies.
A group of students was told that a small democratic country had been invaded and had asked the U.S. for help.
And they had to make a decision.
What should they do?
Intervene, appeal to the U.N., or do nothing?
They were each then given one of three descriptions of this hypothetical crisis.
Each of which was designed to trigger a different historical analogy: World War II, Vietnam, and the third was historically neutral.
Those exposed to the World War II scenario made more interventionist recommendations than the others.
Just as we cannot ignore the literal meaning of words, we cannot ignore the analogies that are triggered by metaphor.
Metaphor matters because it opens the door to discovery.
Whenever we solve a problem, or make a discovery, we compare what we know with what we don't know.
And the only way to find out about the latter is to investigate the ways it might be like the former.
Einstein described his scientific method as combinatory play.
He famously used thought experiments, which are essentially elaborate analogies, to come up with some of his greatest discoveries.
By bringing together what we know and what we don't know through analogy, metaphorical thinking strikes the spark that ignites discovery.
Now metaphor is ubiquitous, yet it's hidden.
But you just have to look at the words around you and you'll find it.
Ralph Waldo Emerson described language as "fossil poetry."
But before it was fossil poetry language was fossil metaphor.
And these fossils still breathe.
Take the three most famous words in all of Western philosophy: "Cogito ergo sum."
That's routinely translated as, "I think, therefore I am."
But there is a better translation.
The Latin word "cogito" is derived from the prefix "co," meaning "together," and the verb "agitare," meaning "to shake."
So, the original meaning of "cogito" is to shake together.
And the proper translation of "cogito ergo sum" is "I shake things up, therefore I am."
(Laughter) Metaphor shakes things up, giving us everything from Shakespeare to scientific discovery in the process.
The mind is a plastic snow dome, the most beautiful, most interesting, and most itself, when, as Elvis put it, it's all shook up.
And metaphor keeps the mind shaking, rattling and rolling, long after Elvis has left the building.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The anger in me against corruption made me to make a big career change last year, becoming a full-time practicing lawyer.
My experiences over the last 18 months, as a lawyer, has seeded in me a new entrepreneurial idea, which I believe is indeed worth spreading.
So, I share it with all of you here today, though the idea itself is getting crystallized and I'm still writing up the business plan.
Of course it helps that fear of public failure diminishes as the number of ideas which have failed increases.
I've been a huge fan of enterprise and entrepreneurship since 1993.
I've explored, experienced, and experimented enterprise and capitalism to my heart's content.
I built, along with my two brothers, the leading real estate company in my home state, Kerala, and then worked professionally with two of India's biggest businessmen, but in their startup enterprises.
In 2003, when I stepped out of the pure play capitalistic sector to work on so-called social sector issues, I definitely did not have any grand strategy or plan to pursue and find for-profit solutions to addressing pressing public issues.
When life brought about a series of death and near-death experiences within my close circle, which highlighted the need for an emergency medical response service in India, similar to 911 in USA.
To address this, I, along with four friends, founded Ambulance Access for All, to promote life-support ambulance services in India.
For those from the developing world, there is nothing, absolutely nothing new in this idea.
But as we envisioned it, we had three key goals: Providing world-class life support ambulance service which is fully self-sustainable from its own revenue streams, and universally accessible to anyone in a medical emergency, irrespective of the capability to pay.
The service which grew out of this, Dial 1298 for Ambulance, with one ambulance in 2004, now has a hundred-plus ambulances in three states, and has transported over 100,000 patients and victims since inception.
The service is -- (Applause) fully self-sustainable from its own revenues, without accessing any public funds, and the cross-subsidy model actually works, where the rich pays higher, poor pays lower, and the accident victim is getting the service free of charge.
The service responded effectively and efficiently, during the unfortunate 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks.
And as you can see from the visuals, the service was responding and rescuing victims from the incident locations even before the police could cordon off the incident locations and formally confirm it as a terror strike.
We ended up being the first medical response team in every incident location and transported 125 victims, saving life.
(Applause) In tribute and remembrance of 26/11 attacks over the last one year, we have actually helped a Pakistani NGO, Aman Foundation, to set up a self-sustainable life support ambulance service in Karachi, facilitated by Acumen Fund.
(Applause) It's a small message from us, in our own small way to the enemies of humanity, of Islam, of South Asia, of India, and of Pakistan, that humanity will continue to bloom, irrespective of such dastardly attacks.
Since then I've also co-founded two other social enterprises.
One is Education Access for All, setting up schools in small-town India.
And the other is Moksha-Yug Access, which is integrating rural supply chain on the foundations of self-help group-based microfinance.
I guess we seem to be doing at least a few things right.
Because diligent investors and venture funds have committed over 7.5 million dollars in funding.
With the significance being these funds have come in as a QT capital, not as grant or as philanthropy.
Now I come back to the idea of the new social enterprise that I'm exploring.
Corruption, bribes, and lack of transparency.
You may be surprised to know that eight speakers yesterday actually mentioned these terms in their talks.
Bribes and corruption have both a demand and a supply side, with the supply side being mostly of greedy corporate unethical businesses and hapless common man.
And the demand side being mostly politicians, bureaucrats and those who have discretionary power vested with them.
According to World Bank estimate, one trillion dollars is paid in bribes every year, worsening the condition of the already worse off.
Yet, if you analyze the common man, he or she does not wake up every day and say, "Hmm, let me see who I can pay a bribe to today."
or, "Let me see who I can corrupt today."
Often it is the constraining or the back-to-the-wall situation that the hapless common man finds himself or herself in that leads him to pay a bribe.
In the modern day world, where time is premium and battle for subsistence is unimaginably tough, the hapless common man simply gives in and pays the bribe just to get on with life.
Now, let me ask you another question.
Imagine you are being asked to pay a bribe in your day-to-day life to get something done.
What do you do? Of course you can call the police.
But what is the use if the police department is in itself steeped in corruption?
Most definitely you don't want to pay the bribe.
But you also don't have the time, resources, expertise or wherewithal to fight this.
Unfortunately, many of us in this room are supporters of capitalist policies and market forces.
Yet the market forces around the world have not yet thrown up a service where you can call in, pay a fee, and fight the demand for a bribe.
Like a bribe buster service, or 1-800-Fight-Bribes, or www.stopbribes.org or www.preventcorruption.org.
Such a service simply do not exist.
One image that has haunted me from my early business days is of a grandmother, 70 plus years, being harassed by the bureaucrats in the town planning office.
All she needed was permission to build three steps to her house, from ground level, making it easier for her to enter and exit her house.
Yet the officer in charge would not simply give her the permit for want of a bribe.
Even though it pricked my conscience then, I could not, or rather I did not tend to her or assist her, because I was busy building my real estate company.
I don't want to be haunted by such images any more.
A group of us have been working on a pilot basis to address individual instances of demands for bribes for common services or entitlement.
And in all 42 cases where we have pushed back such demands using existing and legitimate tools like the Right to Information Act, video, audio, or peer pressure, we have successfully obtained whatever our clients set out to achieve without actually paying a bribe.
And with the cost of these tools being substantially lower than the bribe demanded.
I believe that these tools that worked in these 42 pilot cases can be consolidated in standard processes in a BPO kind of environment, and made available on web, call-center and franchise physical offices, for a fee, to serve anyone confronted with a demand for a bribe.
The target market is as tempting as it can get.
It can be worth up to one trillion dollars, being paid in bribes every year, or equal to India's GDP.
And it is an absolutely virgin market.
I propose to explore this idea further, to examine the potential of creating a for-profit, fee-based BPO kind of service to stop bribes and prevent corruption.
I do realize that the fight for justice against corruption is never easy.
It never has been and it never will be.
In my last 18 months as a lawyer, battling small- and large-scale corruption, including the one perpetrated by India's biggest corporate scamster.
Through his charities I have had three police cases filed against me alleging trespass, impersonation and intimidation.
The battle against corruption exacts a toll on ourselves, our families, our friends, and even our kids.
Yet I believe the price we pay is well worth holding on to our dignity and making the world a fairer place.
What gives us the courage?
As my close friend replied, when told during the seeding days of the ambulance project that it is an impossible task and the founders are insane to chalk up their blue-chip jobs, I quote: "Of course we cannot fail in this, at least in our own minds.
For we are insane people, trying to do an impossible task.
And an insane person does not know what an impossible task is." Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Shaffi, that is a really exciting business idea.
Shaffi Mather: I just have to get through the initial days where I don't get eliminated.
(Laughter) CA: What's on your mind?
I mean, give us a sense of the numbers here -- a typical bribe and a typical fee. I mean, what's in your head?
SM: So let me ... Let me give you an example.
Somebody who had applied for the passport.
The officer was just sitting on it and was demanding around 3,000 rupees in bribes.
And he did not want to pay.
So we actually used the Right to Information Act, which is equal to the Freedom of Information Act in the United States, and pushed back the officers in this particular case.
And in all these 42 cases, when we kept pushing them back, there was three kinds of reaction.
A set of people actually say, "Oh, let me just grant it to them, and run away from it."
Some people actually come back and say, "Oh, you want to screw me. Let me show you what I can do."
And he will push us back.
So you take the next step, or use the next tool available in what we are putting together, and then he relents.
By the third time, in all 42 cases, we have achieved success.
CA: But if it's a 3,000-rupee, 70-dollar bribe, what fee would you have to charge, and can you actually make the business work?
SM: Well, actually the cost that we incurred was less than 200 rupees.
So, it actually works.
CA: That's a high gross margin business. I like it.
(Laughter) SM: I actually did not want to answer this on the TED stage.
CA: OK, so these are provisional numbers, no pricing guarantee.
If you can pull this off, you will be a global hero.
I mean, this could be huge.
Thank you so much for sharing this idea at TED.
(Applause)
The key question is, "When are we going to get fusion?"
It's really been a long time since we've known about fusion.
We've known about fusion since 1920, when Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington and the British Association for the Advancement of Science conjectured that that's why the sun shines.
I've always been very worried about resource.
I don't know about you, but when my mother gave me food, I always sorted the ones I disliked from the ones I liked.
And I ate the disliked ones first, because the ones you like, you want to save.
And as a child you're always worried about resource.
And once it was sort of explained to me how fast we were using up the world's resources, I got very upset, about as upset as I did when I realized that the Earth will only last about five billion years before it's swallowed by the sun.
Big events in my life, a strange child.
(Laughter) Energy, at the moment, is dominated by resource.
The countries that make a lot of money out of energy have something underneath them.
Coal-powered industrial revolution in this country -- oil, gas, sorry.
(Laughter) Gas, I'm probably the only person who really enjoys it when Mister Putin turns off the gas tap, because my budget goes up.
We're really dominated now by those things that we're using up faster and faster and faster.
And as we try to lift billions of people out of poverty in the Third World, in the developing world, we're using energy faster and faster.
And those resources are going away.
And the way we'll make energy in the future is not from resource, it's really from knowledge.
If you look 50 years into the future, the way we probably will be making energy is probably one of these three, with some wind, with some other things, but these are going to be the base load energy drivers.
Solar can do it, and we certainly have to develop solar.
But we have a lot of knowledge to gain before we can make solar the base load energy supply for the world.
Fission.
Our government is going to put in six new nuclear power stations.
They're going to put in six new nuclear power stations, and probably more after that.
China is building nuclear power stations. Everybody is.
Because they know that that is one sure way to do carbon-free energy.
But if you wanted to know what the perfect energy source is, the perfect energy source is one that doesn't take up much space, has a virtually inexhaustible supply, is safe, doesn't put any carbon into the atmosphere, doesn't leave any long-lived radioactive waste: it's fusion.
But there is a catch. Of course there is always a catch in these cases.
Fusion is very hard to do.
We've been trying for 50 years.
Okay. What is fusion? Here comes the nuclear physics.
And sorry about that, but this is what turns me on.
(Laughter) I was a strange child.
Nuclear energy comes for a simple reason.
The most stable nucleus is iron, right in the middle of the periodic table.
It's a medium-sized nucleus.
And you want to go towards iron if you want to get energy.
So, uranium, which is very big, wants to split.
But small atoms want to join together, small nuclei want to join together to make bigger ones to go towards iron.
And you can get energy out this way.
And indeed that's exactly what stars do.
In the middle of stars, you're joining hydrogen together to make helium and then helium together to make carbon, to make oxygen, all the things that you're made of are made in the middle of stars.
But it's a hard process to do because, as you know, the middle of a star is quite hot, almost by definition.
And there is one reaction that's probably the easiest fusion reaction to do.
It's between two isotopes of hydrogen, two kinds of hydrogen: deuterium, which is heavy hydrogen, which you can get from seawater, and tritium which is super-heavy hydrogen.
These two nuclei, when they're far apart, are charged.
And you push them together and they repel.
But when you get them close enough, something called the strong force starts to act and pulls them together.
So, most of the time they repel.
You get them closer and closer and closer and then at some point the strong force grips them together.
For a moment they become helium 5, because they've got five particles inside them.
So, that's that process there. Deuterium and tritium goes together makes helium 5.
Helium splits out, and a neutron comes out and lots of energy comes out.
If you can get something to about 150 million degrees, things will be rattling around so fast that every time they collide in just the right configuration, this will happen, and it will release energy.
And that energy is what powers fusion.
And it's this reaction that we want to do.
There is one trickiness about this reaction.
Well, there is a trickiness that you have to make it 150 million degrees, but there is a trickiness about the reaction yet.
It's pretty hot.
The trickiness about the reaction is that tritium doesn't exist in nature.
You have to make it from something else.
And you make if from lithium. That reaction at the bottom, that's lithium 6, plus a neutron, will give you more helium, plus tritium.
And that's the way you make your tritium.
But fortunately, if you can do this fusion reaction, you've got a neutron, so you can make that happen.
Now, why the hell would we bother to do this?
This is basically why we would bother to do it.
If you just plot how much fuel we've got left, in units of present world consumption.
And as you go across there you see a few tens of years of oil -- the blue line, by the way, is the lowest estimate of existing resources.
And the yellow line is the most optimistic estimate.
And as you go across there you will see that we've got a few tens of years, and perhaps 100 years of fossil fuels left.
And god knows we don't really want to burn all of it, because it will make an awful lot of carbon in the air.
And then we get to uranium.
And with current reactor technology we really don't have very much uranium.
And we will have to extract uranium from sea water, which is the yellow line, to make conventional nuclear power stations actually do very much for us.
This is a bit shocking, because in fact our government is relying on that for us to meet Kyoto, and do all those kind of things.
To go any further you would have to have breeder technology.
And breeder technology is fast breeders. And that's pretty dangerous.
The big thing, on the right, is the lithium we have in the world.
And lithium is in sea water. That's the yellow line.
And we have 30 million years worth of fusion fuel in sea water.
Everybody can get it. That's why we want to do fusion.
Is it cost-competitive?
We make estimates of what we think it would cost to actually make a fusion power plant.
And we get within about the same price as current electricity.
So, how would we make it?
We have to hold something at 150 million degrees.
And, in fact, we've done this.
We hold it with a magnetic field.
And inside it, right in the middle of this toroidal shape, doughnut shape, right in the middle is 150 million degrees.
It boils away in the middle at 150 million degrees.
And in fact we can make fusion happen.
And just down the road, this is JET.
It's the only machine in the world that's actually done fusion.
When people say fusion is 30 years away, and always will be, I say, "Yeah, but we've actually done it." Right?
We can do fusion. In the center of this device we made 16 megawatts of fusion power in 1997.
And in 2013 we're going to fire it up again and break all those records.
But that's not really fusion power. That's just making some fusion happen.
We've got to take that, we've got to make that into a fusion reactor.
Because we want 30 million years worth of fusion power for the Earth.
This is the device we're building now.
It gets very expensive to do this research.
It turns out you can't do fusion on a table top despite all that cold fusion nonsense. Right?
You can't. You have to do it in a very big device.
More than half the world's population is involved in building this device in southern France, which is a nice place to put an experiment.
Seven nations are involved in building this.
It's going to cost us 10 billion. And we'll produce half a gigawatt of fusion power.
But that's not electricity yet.
We have to get to this.
We have to get to a power plant.
We have to start putting electricity on the grid in this very complex technology.
And I'd really like it to happen a lot faster than it is.
But at the moment, all we can imagine is sometime in the 2030s.
I wish this were different. We really need it now.
We're going to have a problem with power in the next five years in this country.
So 2030 looks like an infinity away.
But we can't abandon it now; we have to push forward, get fusion to happen.
I wish we had more money, I wish we had more resources.
But this is what we're aiming at, sometime in the 2030s -- real electric power from fusion. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Namaste. Salaam.
Shalom. Sat Sri Akal.
Greetings to all of you from Pakistan.
It is often said that we fear that which we do not know.
And Pakistan, in this particular vein, is very similar.
Because it has provoked, and does provoke, a visceral anxiety in the bellies of many a Western soul, especially when viewed through the monochromatic lens of turbulence and turmoil.
But there are many other dimensions to Pakistan.
And what follows is a stream of images, a series of images captured by some of Pakistan's most dynamic and young photographers, that aims to give you an alternative glimpse, a look inside the hearts and minds of some ordinary Pakistani citizens.
Here are some of the stories they wanted us to share with you.
My name is Abdul Khan. I come from Peshawar.
I hope that you will be able to see not just my Taliban-like beard, but also the richness and color of my perceptions, aspirations and dreams, as rich and colorful as the satchels that I sell.
My name is Meher and this is my friend Irim.
I hope to become a vet when I grow up so that I can take care of stray cats and dogs who wander around the streets of the village that I live near Gilgit, northern Pakistan.
My name is Kailash. And I like to enrich lives through technicolored glass.
Madame, would you like some of those orange bangles with the pink polka dots?
My name is Zamin.
And I'm an IDP, an internally displaced person, from Swat.
Do you see me on the other side of this fence?
Do I matter, or really exist for you?
My name is Iman. I am a fashion model, an up-and-coming model from Lahore.
Do you see me simply smothered in cloth?
Or can you move beyond my veil and see me for who I truly am inside?
My name is Ahmed. I am an Afghan refugee from the Khyber agency.
I have come from a place of intense darkness.
And that is why I want to illuminate the world.
My name is Papusay.
My heart and drum beat as one.
If religion is the opium of the masses, then for me, music is my one and only ganja.
A rising tide lifts all boats.
And the rising tide of India's spectacular economic growth has lifted over 400 million Indians into a buoyant middle class.
But there are still over 650 million Indians, Pakistanis, Sri Lankans, Bangladeshis, Nepalese, who remain washed up on the shores of poverty.
Therefore as India and Pakistan, as you and I, it behooves us to transcend our differences, to celebrate our diversity, to leverage our common humanity.
Our collective vision at Naya Jeevan, which for many of you, as you all recognize, means "new life" in Urdu and Hindi, is to rejuvenate the lives of millions of low income families by providing them with affordable access to catastrophic health care.
Indeed it is the emerging world's first HMO for the urban working poor.
Why should we do this as Indians and Pakistanis?
We are but two threads cut from the same cloth.
And if our fates are intertwined, then we believe that it is good karma, it is good fortune.
And for many of us, our fortunes do indeed lie at the bottom of the pyramid. Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Fantastic. Just stay up here.
That was fantastic.
I found that really moving.
You know, we fought hard to get at least a small Pakistani contingent to come.
It felt like it was really important.
They went through a lot to get here.
Would the Pakistanis please just stand up please?
I just really wanted to acknowledge you.
(Applause) Thank you so much.
I'd like to speak about technology trends, which is something that many of you follow -- but we also follow, for related reasons.
Obviously, being a technology magazine, technology trends are something that we write about and need to know about.
But also it's part of being any monthly magazine -- you live in the future. And we have a long lead-time.
We have to plan issues many months in advance; we have to guess at what public appetites are going to be six months, nine months down the road. So we're in the forecasting business.
We also, like a lot of companies, create a product that's based on technology trends.
In this case, ours is about ideas and information, and, if we're lucky, some entertainment. But the concept's quite the same.
And so we have to understand not only why tech's important, where it's going, but also, very importantly, when -- the timing is everything.
And it's interesting, when you look at the predictions made during the peak of the boom in the 1990s, about e-commerce, or Internet traffic, or broadband adoption, or Internet advertising, they were all right -- they were just wrong in time.
Almost every one of those has come true just a few years later.
But the difference of a few years on stock-market valuations is obviously extreme. And that's why timing is everything.
You've probably seen something like this before.
This is the classic Gartner Hype Curve, which talks about kind of the trajectory of a technology's lifespan.
And just for fun, we put a bunch of technologies on it, to show whether they were kind of rising for the first high peak, or whether they were about to crash into the trough of disillusionment, or rise back in the slope of enlightenment, etc.
And this is one way to do technology forecasting: get a sense of where technology is and then anticipate the next upturn.
We tend to do any technology that we think is sufficiently important; we'll typically do it twice. Once, we want to do it first.
We want to be the first to do it, for the geeks who appreciate that, we'll catch it right there at the technology-trigger.
You can see in 1997, we put Linux on the cover.
But then it comes back. And sufficiently big technologies are going to hit the mainstream, and they're going to burst out.
And then it's time to do it again. Last year.
And that's one way that we try to time technology trends.
I'd like to talk about a way of thinking about technology trends that I call my "grand unified theory of predicting the future," but it's closer to a petite unified theory of predicting the future.
It's based on the presumption, the observation even, that all important technologies go through four stages in their life -- at least one of the four stages, sometimes all four of the stages.
And at each one of these stages, can be seen as a collision -- a collision with something else -- for example, a critical price-line that changes both the technology and also changes its effect on the world. It's an inflection point.
And these are the inflection points that tell you what the next chapter in that technology's life is going to be, and maybe how you can do something about it.
The first is the critical price.
The first stage in a technology's advance is that it'll fall below a critical price.
After it falls below a critical price, it will tend, if it's successful, to rise above a critical mass, a penetration.
Many technologies, at that point, displace another technology, and that's another important point.
And then finally, a lot of technologies commoditize.
Towards the end of their life, they become nearly free.
Each one of those is an opportunity to do something about it; it's an opportunity for the technology to change.
And even if you missed, you know, the first boom of Wi-Fi -- you know, Wi-Fi did the critical price, it did the critical mass, but hasn't done displacement yet, and hasn't done free yet -- there's still more opportunity in that.
I'd like to demonstrate what I mean by this by telling the story of the DVD, which is a technology which has done all of these.
The DVD, as you know, was introduced in the mid-1990s and it was quite expensive. But you can see that by 1998, it had fallen below 400 dollars, and 400 dollars was a psychological threshold.
And it started to take off. And you can see that the units started to trend up, the hidden inflection point -- it was taking off.
The next thing it hit, a year later, was critical mass. In this case, 20 percent is often a good proxy for critical mass in a household.
And what's interesting here is that something else took off along with it: home-theater units.
Suddenly you have a DVD in the house; you've got high-quality digital video; you have a reason to have a big-screen television; you have a reason for Dolby 5.1 surround-sound.
And maybe you have reasons for starting to connect them, and bring the rest of your entertainment in.
What's interesting also is -- note that Netflix was founded in 1999.
Reed Hastings is here. He clearly saw that that was a moment, that was an inflection point that he could do something with.
The next phase it hit was displacement.
You can see around 2001 it finally out-sold the VCR.
And here too, you can see the implications in the world at large.
Netflix was right -- the Netflix model could capitalize on the DVD in a way that the video-rental stores couldn't.
Among the DVD's many assets is that it's very small; you can stick it in the mailer and post it cheaply.
That gave an advantage; that was an implication of the technology's rise that wasn't obvious to everybody.
And then finally, DVDs are approaching free.
There's a company called Apex, a no-name Chinese firm, who has, several times in the past year, been the number-one DVD seller in America. Their average price, for last year, was 48 dollars.
You're aware of the perhaps apocryphal Wal-Mart stampede over the 30-dollar DVD.
But they're getting very, very cheap, and look at the interesting implication of it. As they get cheaper, the premium brands, the Sonys and such, are losing market share, and the no-names, the Apexes, are gaining them.
They're being commodified, and that's what happens when things go to zero. It's a tough market out there.
(Laughter) Now they've introduced these four ways of looking at technology, these four stages of technology's life.
I'd like to talk about some other technologies out there, just technologies on our radar -- and I'll use this lens, these four, as a way to kind of tell you where each one of those technologies is in its development.
They're not necessarily the top-10 technologies out there -- they're just examples of technologies that are in each one of these periods.
But I think that the implications of them approaching these crossovers, these intersections, are interesting to think about.
Start with gene sequencing.
As you probably know, gene sequencing -- in a large part, because it's built on computers -- is falling in price at a kind of a Moore's Law-like level.
It is now possible -- will be possible, and if Craig Venter indeed comes today, he may tell you something about this -- to sequence the human genome for 40 million dollars by the end of this year.
That's as opposed to billions just a few years ago.
You know, our ability to capture the tools of creation is getting closer and closer.
What's interesting is that at the same time, the number of genes that we're discovering is rising very quickly.
Each one of these genes has potential diagnostic test.
There will come a day when you can have hundreds of thousands of tests done, very cheaply, if you want to know. You can learn about your own mosaic.
Here's another technology that's approaching a critical price.
This is a fascinating research from WHO that shows the effect of generic drugs on anti-retroviral drug compounds and cocktails.
In January 2000, the price was 10,000 dollars, or 27 dollars a day.
The generics came in, first in Brazil and elsewhere, and the effect was just dramatic on pricing.
Today it's less than 50 cents a day.
And what's interesting is if you look at the price elasticity, if you look at the correlation between these two, as the anti-retrovirals come down, the number of people you can treat goes radically up. And the Clinton Foundation and WHO believe that they can treat three million people worldwide by 2005 -- two million in sub-Saharan Africa.
And the falling price of drugs has a lot to do with that.
Linux is another good example.
Now we've switched to critical mass.
These are now technologies that are hitting critical mass.
If you look here, here's Linux in red, and it's hit 20 percent.
Interestingly, it's done a crossover before, but not the crossovers that matter.
The crossover that's going to matter is the one with the blue.
But you can look and see the direction those lines are going, you can see that at the 20 percent, it's now taken seriously.
It's not just for the geeks any more.
That is, I imagine, what people in Redmond wake up in the middle of the night thinking about.
(Laughter) Another technology that we see all around us out here is hybrid cars.
I don't know whether anybody has a Prius 2004, but they're fantastic.
And if you look at the trends here, by about 2008 -- and I don't think this is a crazy forecast -- they'll be two percent of auto sales.
Two percent isn't 20 percent, but in the car business, which is slow moving, that's huge; that's arrival.
At two percent, you start seeing them on the roads everywhere.
And what's interesting about the hybrids taking off is you've now introduced electric motors to the automobile industry.
It's the first radical change in automobile technology in 100 years.
And once you have electric motors, you can do anything: you can change the structure of the car in any way you want.
You can have regenerative braking; you can have drive-by-wire; you can have replaceable body shapes -- it's a little thing that starts with a hybrid, but it can lead to a whole new era of the car.
Voice Over IP is something you may have heard something about.
Again, it's kind of coming out of nowhere; it's a little hard to use right now.
There's a company created by the Kazaa founders called Skype.
Look at these numbers. They launched it in August of last year; they already have nearly four million registered users -- that's critical mass.
And the same thing's happening on the carrier side.
You're looking at IP taking over from some of the traditional telecom standards. This is a tipping point -- if Malcolm's here, forgive me -- and it's going to change the economics, and the speed, and the players in the industry.
It's going to look a little bit like that.
And finally, free. Free is really, really interesting.
Free is something that comes with digital, because the reproduction costs are essentially free. It comes with IP, because it's such an efficient protocol. It comes with fiber optics, because there's so much bandwidth.
Free is really, you know, the gift of Silicon Valley to the world.
It's an economic force; it's a technical force.
It's a deflationary force, if not handled right.
It is abundance, as opposed to scarcity.
Free is probably the most interesting thing.
And here you have just the number of songs that can be stored on a hard drive.
You know, there could be a film's [unclear] there, but it's basically, every song ever made could be stored on 400 dollars worth of storage by 2008. It takes that entire element, the physical element, of songs off the table.
And you've seen the numbers.
I mean, you know, the music industry is imploding in front of our very eyes, and Hollywood's worried as well.
They're facing a force that they haven't faced before.
And their response is draconian, and not necessarily the one that's going to get them out of this.
And finally, I'll give you one last example of free -- perhaps the most powerful of all. I mentioned fiber optics -- their abundance tends to make things free.
This is the price of a phone call to India per minute.
And what's interesting is that it was just 1990 when it was more than two dollars a minute.
India had, still has, a regulated phone system and so did we.
It was surprisingly non-innovative, moved very slowly, but then there was just so much fiber out there, you couldn't hold back, and look how quickly the price fell.
It's seven cents a minute, in many cases.
And the consequence of cheap phone calling, free phone calling, to India, is the pissed-off programmer, is the outsourcing.
It is probably one of the most dramatic shifts in globalization and one of the most powerful economic tools that we're seeing in our world today.
The force of India, and then China, and any other country that can contact our markets and will work with our companies -- because the communications are free -- is just beginning to be felt.
And I think that's probably one of the most important technology trends that we're looking at today.
Thank you.
Well, I learned a lot of things about ballooning, especially at the end of these balloon flights around the world I did with Brian Jones.
When I took this picture, the window was frozen because of the moisture of the night.
And on the other side there was a rising sun.
So, you see that on the other side of ice you have the unknown, you have the non-obvious, you have the non-seen, for the people who don't dare to go through the ice.
There are so many people who prefer to suffer in the ice they know instead of taking the risk of going through the ice to see what there is on the other side.
And I think that's one of the main problems of our society.
We learn, maybe not the famous TED audience, but so many other people learn, that the unknown, the doubts, the question marks are dangerous.
And we have to resist to the changes.
We have to keep everything under control.
Well, the unknown is part of life.
And in that sense, ballooning is a beautiful metaphor.
Because in the balloon, like in life, we go very well in unforeseen directions.
We want to go in a direction, but the winds push us in another direction, like in life.
And as long as we fight horizontally, against life, against the winds, against what's happening to us, life is a nightmare.
How do we steer a balloon?
By understanding that the atmosphere is made out of several different layers of wind which all have different direction.
So, then, we understand that if we want to change our trajectory, in life, or in the balloon, we have to change altitude.
Changing altitude, in life, that means raising to another psychological, philosophical, spiritual level.
But how do we do that?
In ballooning, or in life, how do we change altitude?
How do we go from the metaphor to something more practical that we can really use every day?
Well, in a balloon it's easy, we have ballast.
And when we drop the ballast overboard we climb.
Sand, water, all the equipment we don't need anymore.
And I think in life it should be exactly like this.
You know, when people speak about pioneering spirit, very often they believe that pioneers are the ones who have new ideas.
It's not true.
The pioneers are not the ones who have new ideas, because new ideas are so easy to have.
We just close our eyes for a minute we all come back with a lot of new ideas.
No, the pioneer is the one who allows himself to throw overboard a lot of ballast.
Habits, certainties, convictions, exclamation marks, paradigms, dogmas.
And when we are able to do that, what happens?
Life is not anymore just one line going in one direction in one dimension. No.
Life is going to be made out of all the possible lines that go in all the possible directions in three dimensions.
And pioneering spirit will be each time we allow ourselves to explore this vertical axis.
Of course not just like the atmosphere in the balloon, but in life itself.
Explore this vertical axis, that means explore all the different ways to do, all the different ways to behave, all the different ways to think, before we find the one that goes in the direction we wish.
This is very practical.
This can be in politics.
This can be in spirituality.
This can be in environment, in finance, in education of children.
I deeply believe that life is a much greater adventure if we manage to do politics without the trench between the left and the right wing.
Because we will throw away these political dogmas.
I deeply believe that we can make much more protection of the environment if we get rid -- if we throw overboard this fundamentalism that some of the greens have showed in the past.
And that we can aim for much higher spirituality if we get rid of the religious dogmas.
Throwing overboard, as ballast, to change our direction.
Well, these basically are things I believed in such a long time.
But actually I had to go around the world in a balloon to be invited to talk about it.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's clear that it's not easy to know which ballast to drop and which altitude to take. Sometime we need friends, family members or a psychiatrist.
Well, in balloons we need weather men, the one who calculate the direction of each layer of wind, at which altitude, in order to help the balloonist.
But sometimes it's very paradoxical.
When Brian Jones and I were flying around the world, the weather man asked us, one day, to fly quite low, and very slow.
And when we calculated we thought we're never going to make it around the world at that speed.
So, we disobeyed. We flew much higher, and double the speed.
And I was so proud to have found that jetstream that I called the weather man, and I told him, "Hey, guy, don't you think we're good pilots up there?
We fly twice the speed you predicted."
And he told me, "Don't do that. Go down immediately in order to slow down."
And I started to argue. I said, "I'm not going to do that.
We don't have enough gas to fly so slow."
And he told me, "Yes, but with the low pressure you have on your left if you fly too fast, in a couple of hours you will turn left and end up at the North Pole.
(Laughter) And then he asked me -- and this is something I will never forget in my life -- he just asked me, "You're the good pilot up there.
What do you really want? You want to go very fast in the wrong direction, or slowly in the good direction?
(Laughter) (Applause) And this is why you need weathermen.
This is why you need people with long-term vision.
And this is precisely what fails in the political visions we have now, in the political governments.
We are burning, as you heard, so much energy, not understanding that such an unsustainable way of life cannot last for long.
So, we went down actually.
We slowed down. And we went through moments of fears because we had no idea how the little amount of gas we had in the balloon could allow us to travel 45,000 kilometers.
But we were expected to have doubts; we're expected to have fears.
And actually this is where the adventure really started.
When we were flying over the Sahara and India it was nice holidays.
We could land anytime and fly back home with an airplane.
In the middle of the Pacific, when you don't have the good winds, you cannot land, you cannot go back.
That's a crisis.
That's the moment when you have to wake up from the automatic way of thinking.
That's the moment when you have to motivate your inner potential, your creativity.
That's when you throw out all the ballast, all the certainties, in order to adapt to the new situation.
And actually, we changed completely our flight plan.
We changed completely our strategy.
And after 20 days we landed successfully in Egypt.
But if I show you this picture it's not to tell you how happy we were.
It's to show you how much gas was left in the last bottles.
We took off with 3.7 tons of liquid propane.
We landed with 40 kilos.
When I saw that, I made a promise to myself.
I made a promise that the next time I would fly around the world, it would be with no fuel, independent from fossil energies, in order to be safe, not to be threatened by the fuel gauge.
I had no idea how it was possible.
I just thought it's a dream and I want to do it.
And when the capsule of my balloon was introduced officially in the Air and Space Museum in Washington, together with the airplane of Charles Lindbergh, with Apollo 11, with the Wright Brothers' Flyer, with Chuck Yeager's 61, I had really a thought then.
I thought, well, the 20th century, that was brilliant.
It allowed to do all those things there.
But it will not be possible in the future any more.
It takes too much energy. It will cost too much.
It will be prohibited because we'll have to save our natural resources in a few decades from now.
So how can we perpetuate this pioneering spirit with something that will be independent from fossil energy?
And this is when the project Solar Impulse really started to turn in my head.
And I think it's a nice metaphor also for the 21st century.
Pioneering spirit should continue, but on another level.
Not to conquer the planet or space, not anymore, it has been done, but rather to improve the quality of life.
How can we go through the ice of certainty in order to make the most incredible a possible thing?
What is today completely impossible -- get rid of our dependency on fossil energy.
If you tell to people, we want to be independent from fossil energy in our world, people will laugh at you, except here, where crazy people are invited to speak.
(Laughter) So, the idea is that if we fly around the world in a solar powered airplane, using absolutely no fuel, nobody ever could say in the future that it's impossible to do it for cars, for heating systems, for computers, and so on and so on.
Well, solar power airplanes are not new.
They have flown in the past, but without saving capabilities, without batteries.
Which means that they have more proven the limits of renewable energies than the potential of it.
If we want to show the potential, we have to fly day and night.
That means to load the batteries during the flight, in order to spend the night on the batteries, and fly the next day again.
It has been made, already, on remote controlled little airplane models, without pilots.
But it stays an anecdote because the public couldn't identify to it.
I think you need a pilot in the plane that can talk to the universities, that can talk to students, talk to politicians during the flight, and really make it a human adventure.
For that, unfortunately, four meters wingspan is not enough.
You need 64 meter wingspan.
64 meter wingspan to carry one pilot, the batteries, flies slowly enough with the aerodynamic efficiency.
Why that? Because fuel is not easy to replace.
That's for sure.
And with 200 square meters of solar power on our plane, we can produce the same energy than 200 little lightbulbs.
That means a Christmas tree, a big Christmas tree.
So the question is, how can you carry a pilot around the world with an airplane that uses the same amount of energy as a big Christmas tree?
People will tell you it's impossible, and that's exactly why we try to do it.
We launched the project with my colleague Andre Borschberg six years ago.
We have now 70 people in the team working on it.
We have gone through the stages of simulation, design, computing, preparing the construction of the first prototype.
That has been achieved after two years of work.
Cockpit, propeller, engine.
Just the fuselage here, it's so light.
It's not designed by an artist, but it could be.
50 kilos for the entire fuselage.
Couple of kilos more for the wing spars.
This is the complete structure of the airplane.
And one month ago we have unveiled it.
You cannot imagine how it is for a team who has been working six years on it to show that it's not only a dream and a vision, it's a real airplane.
A real airplane that we could finally present.
And what's the goal now?
The goal is to take off, end of this year for the first test, but mainly next year, spring or summer, take off, on our own power, without additional help, without being towed, climb to 9,000 meters altitude.
The same time we load the batteries, we run the engines, and when we get at the maximum height, we arrive at the beginning of the night.
And there, there will be just one goal, just one: reach the next sunrise before the batteries are empty.
(Laughter) And this is exactly the symbol of our world.
If our airplane is too heavy, if the pilot wastes energy, we'll never make it through the night.
And in our world, if we keep on spoiling, wasting our energy resources, if we keep on building things that consume so much energy that most of the companies now go bankrupt, it's clear that we'll never give the planet to the next generation without a major problem.
So, you see that this airplane is more a symbol.
I don't think it will transport 200 people in the next years.
But when Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic, the payload was also just sufficient for one person and some fuel.
And 20 years later there were 200 people in every airplane crossing the Atlantic.
So, we have to start, and show the example.
A little bit like on this picture here.
This is a painting from Magritte, in the museum in Holland that I love so much.
It's a pipe, and it's written, "This is not a pipe."
This is not an airplane.
This is a symbol of what we can achieve when we believe in the impossible, when we have a team, when we have pioneering spirit, and especially when we understand that all the certainties we have should be thrown overboard.
What pleases me very much is that in the beginning I thought that we would have to fly around the world with no fuel in order to have our message been understood.
And more and more, we're invited around the world with Andre to talk about that project, to talk about the symbol of it, invited by politicians, invited in energy forums, in order to show that it's not anymore completely stupid to think about getting rid of the dependency on fossil energies.
So, through speeches like this one today, through interviews, through meetings, our goal is to get as many people possible on the team.
The success will not come if we "just," quote, unquote, fly around the world in a solar-powered airplane.
No, the success will come if enough people are motivated to do exactly the same in their daily life, save energy, go to renewables.
And this is possible. You know, with the technologies we have today, we can save between 30 and 50 percent of the energy of a country in Europe, and we can solve half of the rest with renewables.
It leaves 25 or 30 percent for oil, gas, coal, nuclear, or whatever.
This is acceptable.
This is why all the people who believe in this type of spirit are welcome to be on that team.
You can just go on SolarImpulse.com, subscribe to just be informed of what we're doing.
But much more, to get advices, to give your comments, to spread the word that if it's possible in the air, of course it's possible in the ground.
And each time we have some ice in the future, we have to know that life will be great, and the success will be brilliant if we dare to overcome our fear of the ice, to go through the obstacle, to go through the problem, in order to see what there is on the other side.
So, you see, this is what we're doing on our side.
Everyone has his goal, has his dreams, has his visions.
The question I leave you with now is which is the ballast you would like to throw overboard?
Which will be the altitude at which you would like to fly in your life, to get to the success that you wish to have, to get to the point that really belongs to you, with the potential you have, and the one you can really fulfill?
Because the most renewable energy we have is our own potential, and our own passion.
So, let's go for it, and I wish you an excellent adventure in the wings of the future. Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to talk to you today about the human brain, which is what we do research on at the University of California.
Just think about this problem for a second.
Here is a lump of flesh, about three pounds, which you can hold in the palm of your hand.
But it can contemplate the vastness of interstellar space.
It can contemplate the meaning of infinity, ask questions about the meaning of its own existence, about the nature of God.
And this is truly the most amazing thing in the world.
It's the greatest mystery confronting human beings: How does this all come about?
Well, the brain, as you know, is made up of neurons.
We're looking at neurons here.
There are 100 billion neurons in the adult human brain.
And each neuron makes something like 1,000 to 10,000 contacts with other neurons in the brain.
And based on this, people have calculated that the number of permutations and combinations of brain activity exceeds the number of elementary particles in the universe.
So, how do you go about studying the brain?
One approach is to look at patients who had lesions in different part of the brain, and study changes in their behavior.
This is what I spoke about in the last TED.
Today I'll talk about a different approach, which is to put electrodes in different parts of the brain, and actually record the activity of individual nerve cells in the brain.
Sort of eavesdrop on the activity of nerve cells in the brain.
Now, one recent discovery that has been made by researchers in Italy, in Parma, by Giacomo Rizzolatti and his colleagues, is a group of neurons called mirror neurons, which are on the front of the brain in the frontal lobes.
Now, it turns out there are neurons which are called ordinary motor command neurons in the front of the brain, which have been known for over 50 years.
These neurons will fire when a person performs a specific action.
For example, if I do that, and reach and grab an apple, a motor command neuron in the front of my brain will fire.
If I reach out and pull an object, another neuron will fire, commanding me to pull that object.
These are called motor command neurons that have been known for a long time.
But what Rizzolatti found was a subset of these neurons, maybe about 20 percent of them, will also fire when I'm looking at somebody else performing the same action.
So, here is a neuron that fires when I reach and grab something, but it also fires when I watch Joe reaching and grabbing something.
And this is truly astonishing.
Because it's as though this neuron is adopting the other person's point of view.
It's almost as though it's performing a virtual reality simulation of the other person's action.
Now, what is the significance of these mirror neurons?
For one thing they must be involved in things like imitation and emulation.
Because to imitate a complex act requires my brain to adopt the other person's point of view.
So, this is important for imitation and emulation.
Well, why is that important?
Well, let's take a look at the next slide.
So, how do you do imitation? Why is imitation important?
Mirror neurons and imitation, emulation.
Now, let's look at culture, the phenomenon of human culture.
If you go back in time about [75,000] to 100,000 years ago, let's look at human evolution, it turns out that something very important happened around 75,000 years ago.
And that is, there is a sudden emergence and rapid spread of a number of skills that are unique to human beings like tool use, the use of fire, the use of shelters, and, of course, language, and the ability to read somebody else's mind and interpret that person's behavior.
All of that happened relatively quickly.
Even though the human brain had achieved its present size almost three or four hundred thousand years ago, 100,000 years ago all of this happened very, very quickly.
And I claim that what happened was the sudden emergence of a sophisticated mirror neuron system, which allowed you to emulate and imitate other people's actions.
So that when there was a sudden accidental discovery by one member of the group, say the use of fire, or a particular type of tool, instead of dying out, this spread rapidly, horizontally across the population, or was transmitted vertically, down the generations.
So, this made evolution suddenly Lamarckian, instead of Darwinian.
Darwinian evolution is slow; it takes hundreds of thousands of years.
A polar bear, to evolve a coat, will take thousands of generations, maybe 100,000 years.
A human being, a child, can just watch its parent kill another polar bear, and skin it and put the skin on its body, fur on the body, and learn it in one step. What the polar bear took 100,000 years to learn, it can learn in five minutes, maybe 10 minutes.
And then once it's learned this it spreads in geometric proportion across a population.
This is the basis. The imitation of complex skills is what we call culture and is the basis of civilization.
Now there is another kind of mirror neuron, which is involved in something quite different.
And that is, there are mirror neurons, just as there are mirror neurons for action, there are mirror neurons for touch.
In other words, if somebody touches me, my hand, neuron in the somatosensory cortex in the sensory region of the brain fires.
But the same neuron, in some cases, will fire when I simply watch another person being touched.
So, it's empathizing the other person being touched.
So, most of them will fire when I'm touched in different locations. Different neurons for different locations.
But a subset of them will fire even when I watch somebody else being touched in the same location.
So, here again you have neurons which are enrolled in empathy.
Now, the question then arises: If I simply watch another person being touched, why do I not get confused and literally feel that touch sensation merely by watching somebody being touched?
I mean, I empathize with that person but I don't literally feel the touch.
Well, that's because you've got receptors in your skin, touch and pain receptors, going back into your brain and saying "Don't worry, you're not being touched.
So, empathize, by all means, with the other person, but do not actually experience the touch, otherwise you'll get confused and muddled."
Okay, so there is a feedback signal that vetoes the signal of the mirror neuron preventing you from consciously experiencing that touch.
But if you remove the arm, you simply anesthetize my arm, so you put an injection into my arm, anesthetize the brachial plexus, so the arm is numb, and there is no sensations coming in, if I now watch you being touched, I literally feel it in my hand.
In other words, you have dissolved the barrier between you and other human beings.
So, I call them Gandhi neurons, or empathy neurons.
(Laughter) And this is not in some abstract metaphorical sense.
All that's separating you from him, from the other person, is your skin.
Remove the skin, you experience that person's touch in your mind.
You've dissolved the barrier between you and other human beings.
And this, of course, is the basis of much of Eastern philosophy, and that is there is no real independent self, aloof from other human beings, inspecting the world, inspecting other people.
You are, in fact, connected not just via Facebook and Internet, you're actually quite literally connected by your neurons.
And there is whole chains of neurons around this room, talking to each other.
And there is no real distinctiveness of your consciousness from somebody else's consciousness.
And this is not mumbo-jumbo philosophy.
It emerges from our understanding of basic neuroscience.
So, you have a patient with a phantom limb. If the arm has been removed and you have a phantom, and you watch somebody else being touched, you feel it in your phantom.
Now the astonishing thing is, if you have pain in your phantom limb, you squeeze the other person's hand, massage the other person's hand, that relieves the pain in your phantom hand, almost as though the neuron were obtaining relief from merely watching somebody else being massaged.
So, here you have my last slide.
For the longest time people have regarded science and humanities as being distinct.
C.P. Snow spoke of the two cultures: science on the one hand, humanities on the other; never the twain shall meet.
So, I'm saying the mirror neuron system underlies the interface allowing you to rethink about issues like consciousness, representation of self, what separates you from other human beings, what allows you to empathize with other human beings, and also even things like the emergence of culture and civilization, which is unique to human beings. Thank you.
(Applause)
So, 120 years ago, Dr. Röntgen X-rayed his wife's hand.
Quite why he had to pin her fingers to the floor with her brooch, I'm not sure. It seems a bit extreme to me.
That image was the start of the X-ray technology.
And I'm still fundamentally using the same principles today.
I'm interpreting it in a more contemporary manner.
The first shot I ever did was of a soda can, which was to promote a brand that we all know, so I'm not going to do them any favors by showing you it.
But the second shot I did was my shoes I was wearing on the day.
And I do really like this shot, because it shows all the detritus that's sort of embedded in the sole of the sneakers.
It was just one of those pot-luck things where you get it right first time.
Moving on to something a bit larger, this is an X-ray of a bus.
And the bus is full of people.
It's actually the same person. It's just one skeleton.
And back in the '60s, they used to teach student radiographers to take X-rays, thankfully not on you and I, but on dead people.
So, I've still got access to one of these dead people called Frieda; she's falling apart, I'm afraid, because she's very old and fragile.
But everyone on that bus is Frieda.
And the bus is taken with a cargo-scanning X-ray, which is the sort of machine you have on borders, which checks for contraband and drugs and bombs and things.
Fairly obvious what that is.
So, using large-scale objects does sort of create drama because you just don't see X-rays of big things that often.
Technology is moving ahead, and these large cargo scanner X-rays that work with the digital system are getting better and better and better.
Again though, to make it come alive you need, somehow, to add the human element.
And I think the reason this image works, again, is because Frieda is driving the bulldozer.
(Laughter) Quite a difficult brief, make a pair of men's pants look beautiful.
But I think the process, in itself, shows how exquisite they are.
Fashion -- now, I'm sort of anti-fashion because I don't show the surface, I show what's within.
So, the fashionistas don't really like me because it doesn't matter if Kate Moss is wearing it or if I'm wearing it, it looks the same.
(Laughter) We all look the same inside, believe me.
The creases in the material and the sort of nuances.
And I show things for really what they are, what they're made of.
I peel back the layers and expose it.
And if it's well made I show it, if it's badly made I show it.
And I'm sure Ross can associate that with design.
The design comes from within.
It's not just Topshop, I get some strange looks when I go out getting my props.
Here I was fumbling around in the ladies' underwear department of a department store, almost got escorted from the premises.
I live opposite a farm. And this was the runt of the litter, a piglet that died.
And what's really interesting is, if you look at the legs, you'll notice that the bones haven't fused.
And should that pig have grown, unfortunately it was dead, it would have certainly been dead after I X-rayed it, with the amount of radiation I used anyway.
(Laughter) But once the bones had fused together it would have been healthy.
So, that's an empty parka jacket.
But I quite love the way it's posed.
Nature is my greatest inspiration.
And to carry on with a theme that we've already touched with is how nature is related to architecture.
If you look at the roof of the Eden Project, or the British library, it's all this honeycomb structure.
And I'm sure those architects are inspired, as I am, by what surrounds us, by nature.
This, in fact, is a Victoria water lily leaf that floats on the top of a pond.
An amaryllis flower looking really three-dimensional.
Seaweed, ebbing in the tide.
Now, how do I do this, and where do I do this, and all of that sort of thing.
This is my new, purpose-built, X-ray shed.
And the door to my X-ray room is made of lead and steel.
It weighs 1,250 kilograms and the only exercise I get is opening and closing it.
(Laughter) The walls are 700 millimeters thick of solid dense concrete.
So, I'm using quite a lot of radiation.
A lot more than you'd get in a hospital or a vet's.
And there I am. This is a quite high-powered X-ray machine.
What's interesting really about X-ray really is, if you think about it, is that that technology is used for looking for cancer or looking for drugs, or looking for contraband or whatever.
And I use that sort of technology to create things that are quite beautiful.
So, still working with film, I'm afraid.
Technology in X-ray where it's life-size processed, apart from these large cargo-scanning machines, hasn't moved on enough for the quality of the image and the resolution to be good enough for what I want to do with it, which is show my pictures big.
So, I have to use a 1980s drum scanner, which was designed in the days when everyone shot photographs on film.
They scan each individual X-ray.
And this shows how I do my process of same-size X-rays.
So, this is, again, my daughter's dress.
Still has the tag in it from me buying it, so I can take it back to the shop if she didn't like it.
But there are four X-ray plates.
You can see them overlapping.
So, when you move forward from something fairly small, a dress which is this size, onto something like that which is done in exactly the same process, you can see that that is a lot of work.
In fact, that is three months solid X-raying.
There is over 500 separate components.
Boeing sent me a 747 in containers.
And I sent them back an X-ray.
(Laughter) I kid you not.
Okay, so Frieda is my dead skeleton.
This, unfortunately, is basically two pictures.
One on the extreme right is a photograph of an American footballer.
The one on the left is an x-ray.
But this time I had to use a real body.
Because I needed all the skin tissue to make it look real, to make it look like it was a real athlete.
So, here I had to use a recently deceased body.
And getting a hold of that was extremely difficult and laborious.
But people do donate their bodies to art and science.
And when they do, I'm in the queue.
So, I like to use them.
(Laughter) The coloring, so coloring adds another level to the X-rays.
It makes it more organic, more natural.
It's whatever takes my fancy, really.
It's not accurately colored to how it is in real life.
That flower doesn't come in bright orange, I don't think.
But I just like it in bright orange.
And also with something technical, like these are DJ decks, it sort of adds another level.
It makes a two dimensional image look more three dimensional.
The most difficult things to X-ray, the most technically challenging things to X-ray are the lightest things, the most delicate things.
To get the detail in a feather, believe me, if there is anyone out here who knows anything about X-rays, that's quite a challenge.
I'm now going to show you a short film, I'll step to the side.
Video: (Music) The thing in there is very dangerous.
If you touch that, you could possibly die through radiation poisoning.
In my career I've had two exposures to radiation, which is two too many, because it stays with you for life.
It's cumulative.
(Music) It has human connotations.
The fact that it's a child's toy that we all recognize, but also it looks like it's a robot, and it comes from a sci-fi genus.
It's a surprise that it has humanity, but also man-made, future, alien associations.
And it's just a bit spooky.
(Music) The bus was done with a cargo-scanning X-ray machine, which is used on the borders between countries, looking for contraband and illegal immigrants.
The lorry goes in front of it. And it takes slices of X-rays through the lorry.
And that's how this was done. It's actually slice, slice.
It's a bit like a CT scanner in a hospital. Slices.
And then if you look carefully, there is all little things.
He's got headphones on, reading the newspaper, got a hat on, glasses, got a bag.
So, these little details help to make it work, make it real.
(Music) The problem with using living people is that to take an X-ray, if I X-ray you, you get exposed to radiation.
So, to avoid that -- I have to avoid it somehow -- is I use dead people.
Now, that's a variety of things, from recently deceased bodies, to a skeleton that was used by student radiographers to train in taking X-rays of the human body, at different densities.
(Music) I have very high-tech equipment of gloves, scissors and a bucket.
(Music) I will show how the capillary action works, how it feeds, I'll be able to get all the cells inside that stem.
Because it transfers food from its roots to its leaves.
Look at this monster.
(Music) It's so basic. It just grows wild.
That's what I really like about it, the fact that I haven't got to go and buy it, and it hasn't been genetically modified at all.
It's just happening.
And the X-ray shows how beautiful nature can be.
Not that that is particularly beautiful when you look at it with the human eye, the way the leaves form. They're curling back on each other.
So the X-ray will show the overlaps in these little corners.
The thicker the object, the more radiation it needs, and the more time it needs.
The lighter the object, the less radiation.
Sometimes you keep the time up, because the time gives you detail.
The longer the exposure goes on for, the more detail you get.
(Music) If you look at this, just the tube, it is quite bright.
But I could get a bit darker in the tube, but everything else would suffer.
So, these leaves at the edge would start to disappear.
What I like is how hard the edges are, how sharp.
Yeah, I'm quite pleased with it.
(Music) I travel beyond the surface and show something for what it's worth, for what it's really made of, how it really works.
But also I find that I've got the benefit of taking away all the surface, which is things that people are used to seeing.
And that's the sort of thing I've been doing.
I've got the opportunity now to show you what I'm going to be doing in the future.
This is a commercial application of my most recent work.
And what's good about this, I think, is that it's like a moment in time, like you've turned around, you've got X-ray vision and you've taken a picture with the X-ray camera.
Unfortunately I haven't got X-ray vision.
I do dream in X-ray. I see my projects in my sleep.
And I know what they're going to look like in X-ray and I'm not far off.
So, what am I doing in the future?
Well, this year is the 50th anniversary of Issigonis's Mini, which is one of my favorite cars.
So, I've taken it apart, component by component, months and months and months of work.
And with this image, I'm going to be displaying it in the Victoria and Albert Museum as a light box, which is actually attached to the car.
So, I've got to saw the car in half, down the middle, not an easy task, in itself.
And then, so you can get in the driver's side, sit down, and up against you is a wall.
And if you get out and walk around to the other side of the car, you see a life-sized light box of the car showing you how it works.
And I'm going to take that idea and apply it to other sort of iconic things from my life.
Like, my first computer was a big movement in my life.
And I had a Mac Classic. And it's a little box.
And I think that would look quite neat as an X-ray.
I'm also looking to take my work from the two-dimensional form to a more three-dimensional form.
And this is quite a good way of doing it.
I'm also working now with X-ray video.
So, if you can imagine, some of these flowers, and they're actually moving and growing and you can film that in X-ray, should be quite stunning.
But that's it. I'm done. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Something called the Danish Twin Study established that only about 10 percent of how long the average person lives, within certain biological limits, is dictated by our genes.
The other 90 percent is dictated by our lifestyle.
So the premise of Blue Zones: if we can find the optimal lifestyle of longevity we can come up with a de facto formula for longevity.
But if you ask the average American what the optimal formula of longevity is, they probably couldn't tell you.
They've probably heard of the South Beach Diet, or the Atkins Diet.
You have the USDA food pyramid.
There is what Oprah tells us.
There is what Doctor Oz tells us.
The fact of the matter is there is a lot of confusion around what really helps us live longer better.
Should you be running marathons or doing yoga?
Should you eat organic meats or should you be eating tofu?
When it comes to supplements, should you be taking them?
How about these hormones or resveratrol?
And does purpose play into it?
Spirituality? And how about how we socialize?
Well, our approach to finding longevity was to team up with National Geographic, and the National Institute on Aging, to find the four demographically confirmed areas that are geographically defined.
And then bring a team of experts in there to methodically go through exactly what these people do, to distill down the cross-cultural distillation.
And at the end of this I'm going to tell you what that distillation is.
But first I'd like to debunk some common myths when it comes to longevity.
And the first myth is if you try really hard you can live to be 100.
False.
The problem is, only about one out of 5,000 people in America live to be 100.
Your chances are very low.
Even though it's the fastest growing demographic in America, it's hard to reach 100.
The problem is that we're not programmed for longevity.
We are programmed for something called procreative success.
I love that word.
It reminds me of my college days.
Biologists term procreative success to mean the age where you have children and then another generation, the age when your children have children.
After that the effect of evolution completely dissipates.
If you're a mammal, if you're a rat or an elephant, or a human, in between, it's the same story.
So to make it to age 100, you not only have to have had a very good lifestyle, you also have to have won the genetic lottery.
The second myth is, there are treatments that can help slow, reverse, or even stop aging.
False.
When you think of it, there is 99 things that can age us.
Deprive your brain of oxygen for just a few minutes, those brain cells die, they never come back.
Play tennis too hard, on your knees, ruin your cartilage, the cartilage never comes back.
Our arteries can clog. Our brains can gunk up with plaque, and we can get Alzheimer's.
There is just too many things to go wrong.
Our bodies have 35 trillion cells, trillion with a "T." We're talking national debt numbers here.
(Laughter) Those cells turn themselves over once every eight years.
And every time they turn themselves over there is some damage. And that damage builds up.
And it builds up exponentially.
It's a little bit like the days when we all had Beatles albums or Eagles albums and we'd make a copy of that on a cassette tape, and let our friends copy that cassette tape, and pretty soon, with successive generations that tape sounds like garbage.
Well, the same things happen to our cells.
That's why a 65-year-old person is aging at a rate of about 125 times faster than a 12-year-old person.
So, if there is nothing you can do to slow your aging or stop your aging, what am I doing here?
Well, the fact of the matter is the best science tells us that the capacity of the human body, my body, your body, is about 90 years, a little bit more for women.
But life expectancy in this country is only 78.
So somewhere along the line, we're leaving about 12 good years on the table.
These are years that we could get.
And research shows that they would be years largely free of chronic disease, heart disease, cancer and diabetes.
We think the best way to get these missing years is to look at the cultures around the world that are actually experiencing them, areas where people are living to age 100 at rates up to 10 times greater than we are, areas where the life expectancy is an extra dozen years, the rate of middle age mortality is a fraction of what it is in this country.
We found our first Blue Zone about 125 miles off the coast of Italy, on the island of Sardinia.
And not the entire island, the island is about 1.4 million people, but only up in the highlands, an area called the Nuoro province.
And here we have this area where men live the longest, about 10 times more centenarians than we have here in America.
And this is a place where people not only reach age 100, they do so with extraordinary vigor.
Places where 102 year olds still ride their bike to work, chop wood, and can beat a guy 60 years younger than them.
(Laughter) Their history actually goes back to about the time of Christ.
It's actually a Bronze Age culture that's been isolated.
Because the land is so infertile, they largely are shepherds, which occasions regular, low-intensity physical activity.
Their diet is mostly plant-based, accentuated with foods that they can carry into the fields.
They came up with an unleavened whole wheat bread called carta musica made out of durum wheat, a type of cheese made from grass-fed animals so the cheese is high in Omega-3 fatty acids instead of Omega-6 fatty acids from corn-fed animals, and a type of wine that has three times the level of polyphenols than any known wine in the world.
It's called Cannonau.
But the real secret I think lies more in the way that they organize their society.
And one of the most salient elements of the Sardinian society is how they treat older people.
You ever notice here in America, social equity seems to peak at about age 24?
Just look at the advertisements.
Here in Sardinia, the older you get the more equity you have, the more wisdom you're celebrated for.
You go into the bars in Sardinia, instead of seeing the Sports Illustrated swimsuit calendar, you see the centenarian of the month calendar.
This, as it turns out, is not only good for your aging parents to keep them close to the family -- it imparts about four to six years of extra life expectancy -- research shows it's also good for the children of those families, who have lower rates of mortality and lower rates of disease.
That's called the grandmother effect.
We found our second Blue Zone on the other side of the planet, about 800 miles south of Tokyo, on the archipelago of Okinawa.
Okinawa is actually 161 small islands.
And in the northern part of the main island, this is ground zero for world longevity.
This is a place where the oldest living female population is found.
It's a place where people have the longest disability-free life expectancy in the world.
They have what we want.
They live a long time, and tend to die in their sleep, very quickly, and often, I can tell you, after sex.
They live about seven good years longer than the average American.
Five times as many centenarians as we have in America.
One fifth the rate of colon and breast cancer, big killers here in America.
And one sixth the rate of cardiovascular disease.
And the fact that this culture has yielded these numbers suggests strongly they have something to teach us.
What do they do?
Once again, a plant-based diet, full of vegetables with lots of color in them.
And they eat about eight times as much tofu as Americans do.
More significant than what they eat is how they eat it.
They have all kinds of little strategies to keep from overeating, which, as you know, is a big problem here in America.
A few of the strategies we observed: they eat off of smaller plates, so they tend to eat fewer calories at every sitting.
Instead of serving family style, where you can sort of mindlessly eat as you're talking, they serve at the counter, put the food away, and then bring it to the table.
They also have a 3,000-year-old adage, which I think is the greatest sort of diet suggestion ever invented.
It was invented by Confucius.
And that diet is known as the Hara, Hatchi, Bu diet.
It's simply a little saying these people say before their meal to remind them to stop eating when their stomach is [80] percent full.
It takes about a half hour for that full feeling to travel from your belly to your brain.
And by remembering to stop at 80 percent it helps keep you from doing that very thing.
But, like Sardinia, Okinawa has a few social constructs that we can associate with longevity.
We know that isolation kills.
Fifteen years ago, the average American had three good friends.
We're down to one and half right now.
If you were lucky enough to be born in Okinawa, you were born into a system where you automatically have a half a dozen friends with whom you travel through life.
They call it a Moai. And if you're in a Moai you're expected to share the bounty if you encounter luck, and if things go bad, child gets sick, parent dies, you always have somebody who has your back.
This particular Moai, these five ladies have been together for 97 years.
Their average age is 102.
Typically in America we've divided our adult life up into two sections.
There is our work life, where we're productive.
And then one day, boom, we retire.
And typically that has meant retiring to the easy chair, or going down to Arizona to play golf.
In the Okinawan language there is not even a word for retirement.
Instead there is one word that imbues your entire life, and that word is "ikigai."
And, roughly translated, it means "the reason for which you wake up in the morning."
For this 102-year-old karate master, his ikigai was carrying forth this martial art.
For this hundred-year-old fisherman it was continuing to catch fish for his family three times a week.
And this is a question. The National Institute on Aging actually gave us a questionnaire to give these centenarians.
And one of the questions, they were very culturally astute, the people who put the questionnaire.
One of the questions was, "What is your ikigai?"
They instantly knew why they woke up in the morning.
For this 102 year old woman, her ikigai was simply her great-great-great-granddaughter.
Two girls separated in age by 101 and a half years.
And I asked her what it felt like to hold a great-great-great-granddaughter.
And she put her head back and she said, "It feels like leaping into heaven."
I thought that was a wonderful thought.
My editor at Geographic wanted me to find America's Blue Zone.
And for a while we looked on the prairies of Minnesota, where actually there is a very high proportion of centenarians.
But that's because all the young people left.
(Laughter) So, we turned to the data again.
And we found America's longest-lived population among the Seventh-Day Adventists concentrated in and around Loma Linda, California.
Adventists are conservative Methodists.
They celebrate their Sabbath from sunset on Friday till sunset on Saturday.
A "24-hour sanctuary in time," they call it.
And they follow five little habits that conveys to them extraordinary longevity, comparatively speaking.
In America here, life expectancy for the average woman is 80.
But for an Adventist woman, their life expectancy is 89.
And the difference is even more pronounced among men, who are expected to live about 11 years longer than their American counterparts.
Now, this is a study that followed about 70,000 people for 30 years.
Sterling study. And I think it supremely illustrates the premise of this Blue Zone project.
This is a heterogeneous community.
It's white, black, Hispanic, Asian.
The only thing that they have in common are a set of very small lifestyle habits that they follow ritualistically for most of their lives.
They take their diet directly from the Bible.
Genesis: Chapter one, Verse [29], where God talks about legumes and seeds, and on one more stanza about green plants, ostensibly missing is meat.
They take this sanctuary in time very serious.
For 24 hours every week, no matter how busy they are, how stressed out they are at work, where the kids need to be driven, they stop everything and they focus on their God, their social network, and then, hardwired right in the religion, are nature walks.
And the power of this is not that it's done occasionally, the power is it's done every week for a lifetime.
None of it's hard. None of it costs money.
Adventists also tend to hang out with other Adventists.
So, if you go to an Adventist's party you don't see people swilling Jim Beam or rolling a joint.
Instead they're talking about their next nature walk, exchanging recipes, and yes, they pray.
But they influence each other in profound and measurable ways.
This is a culture that has yielded Ellsworth Whareham.
Ellsworth Whareham is 97 years old.
He's a multimillionaire, yet when a contractor wanted 6,000 dollars to build a privacy fence, he said, "For that kind of money I'll do it myself."
So for the next three days he was out shoveling cement, and hauling poles around.
And predictably, perhaps, on the fourth day he ended up in the operating room.
But not as the guy on the table; the guy doing open-heart surgery.
At 97 he still does 20 open-heart surgeries every month.
Ed Rawlings, 103 years old now, an active cowboy, starts his morning with a swim.
And on weekends he likes to put on the boards, throw up rooster tails.
And then Marge Deton.
Marge is 104.
Her grandson actually lives in the Twin Cities here.
She starts her day with lifting weights.
She rides her bicycle.
And then she gets in her root-beer colored 1994 Cadillac Seville, and tears down the San Bernardino freeway, where she still volunteers for seven different organizations.
I've been on 19 hardcore expeditions.
I'm probably the only person you'll ever meet who rode his bicycle across the Sahara desert without sunscreen.
But I'll tell you, there is no adventure more harrowing than riding shotgun with Marge Deton.
"A stranger is a friend I haven't met yet!" she'd say to me.
So, what are the common denominators in these three cultures?
What are the things that they all do?
And we managed to boil it down to nine.
In fact we've done two more Blue Zone expeditions since this and these common denominators hold true.
And the first one, and I'm about to utter a heresy here, none of them exercise, at least the way we think of exercise.
Instead, they set up their lives so that they are constantly nudged into physical activity.
These 100-year-old Okinawan women are getting up and down off the ground, they sit on the floor, 30 or 40 times a day.
Sardinians live in vertical houses, up and down the stairs.
Every trip to the store, or to church or to a friend's house occasions a walk.
They don't have any conveniences.
There is not a button to push to do yard work or house work.
If they want to mix up a cake, they're doing it by hand.
That's physical activity.
That burns calories just as much as going on the treadmill does.
When they do do intentional physical activity, it's the things they enjoy. They tend to walk, the only proven way to stave off cognitive decline, and they all tend to have a garden.
They know how to set up their life in the right way so they have the right outlook.
Each of these cultures take time to downshift.
The Sardinians pray. The Seventh-Day Adventists pray.
The Okinawans have this ancestor veneration.
But when you're in a hurry or stressed out, that triggers something called the inflammatory response, which is associated with everything from Alzheimer's disease to cardiovascular disease.
When you slow down for 15 minutes a day you turn that inflammatory state into a more anti-inflammatory state.
They have vocabulary for sense of purpose, ikigai, like the Okinawans.
You know the two most dangerous years in your life are the year you're born, because of infant mortality, and the year you retire.
These people know their sense of purpose, and they activate in their life, that's worth about seven years of extra life expectancy.
There's no longevity diet.
Instead, these people drink a little bit every day, not a hard sell to the American population.
(Laughter) They tend to eat a plant-based diet.
Doesn't mean they don't eat meat, but lots of beans and nuts.
And they have strategies to keep from overeating, little things that nudge them away from the table at the right time.
And then the foundation of all this is how they connect.
They put their families first, take care of their children and their aging parents.
They all tend to belong to a faith-based community, which is worth between four and 14 extra years of life expectancy if you do it four times a month.
And the biggest thing here is they also belong to the right tribe.
They were either born into or they proactively surrounded themselves with the right people.
We know from the Framingham studies, that if your three best friends are obese there is a 50 percent better chance that you'll be overweight.
So, if you hang out with unhealthy people, that's going to have a measurable impact over time.
Instead, if your friend's idea of recreation is physical activity, bowling, or playing hockey, biking or gardening, if your friends drink a little, but not too much, and they eat right, and they're engaged, and they're trusting and trustworthy, that is going to have the biggest impact over time.
Diets don't work. No diet in the history of the world has ever worked for more than two percent of the population.
Exercise programs usually start in January; they're usually done by October.
When it comes to longevity there is no short term fix in a pill or anything else.
But when you think about it, your friends are long-term adventures, and therefore, perhaps the most significant thing you can do to add more years to your life, and life to your years. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want you to put off your preconceptions, your preconceived fears and thoughts about reptiles.
Because that is the only way I'm going to get my story across to you.
And by the way, if I come across as a sort of rabid, hippie conservationist, it's purely a figment of your imagination.
(Laughter) Okay. We are actually the first species on Earth to be so prolific to actually threaten our own survival.
And I know we've all seen images enough to make us numb, of the tragedies that we're perpetrating on the planet.
We're kind of like greedy kids, using it all up, aren't we?
And today is a time for me to talk to you about water.
It's not only because we like to drink lots of it, and its marvelous derivatives, beer, wine, etc.
And, of course, watch it fall from the sky and flow in our wonderful rivers, but for several other reasons as well.
When I was a kid, growing up in New York, I was smitten by snakes, the same way most kids are smitten by tops, marbles, cars, trains, cricket balls.
And my mother, brave lady, was partly to blame, taking me to the New York Natural History Museum, buying me books on snakes, and then starting this infamous career of mine, which has culminated in of course, arriving in India 60 years ago, brought by my mother, Doris Norden, and my stepfather, Rama Chattopadhyaya.
It's been a roller coaster ride.
Two animals, two iconic reptiles really captivated me very early on.
One of them was the remarkable gharial.
This crocodile, which grows to almost 20 feet long in the northern rivers, and this charismatic snake, the king cobra.
What my purpose of the talk today really is, is to sort of indelibly scar your minds with these charismatic and majestic creatures.
Because this is what you will take away from here, a reconnection with nature, I hope.
The king cobra is quite remarkable for several reasons.
What you're seeing here is very recently shot images in a forest nearby here, of a female king cobra making her nest.
Here is a limbless animal, capable of gathering a huge mound of leaves, and then laying her eggs inside, to withstand 5 to 10 [meters of rainfall], in order that the eggs can incubate over the next 90 days, and hatch into little baby king cobras.
So, she protects her eggs, and after three months, the babies finally do hatch out.
A majority of them will die, of course. There is very high mortality in little baby reptiles who are just 10 to 12 inches long.
My first experience with king cobras was in '72 at a magical place called Agumbe, in Karnataka, this state.
And it is a marvelous rain forest.
This first encounter was kind of like the Maasai boy who kills the lion to become a warrior.
It really changed my life totally.
And it brought me straight into the conservation fray.
I ended up starting this research and education station in Agumbe, which you are all of course invited to visit.
This is basically a base wherein we are trying to gather and learn virtually everything about the biodiversity of this incredibly complex forest system, and try to hang on to what's there, make sure the water sources are protected and kept clean, and of course, having a good time too.
You can almost hear the drums throbbing back in that little cottage where we stay when we're there.
It was very important for us to get through to the people.
And through the children is usually the way to go.
They are fascinated with snakes. They haven't got that steely thing that you end up either fearing or hating or despising or loathing them in some way.
They are interested.
And it really works to start with them.
This gives you an idea of the size of some of these snakes.
This is an average size king cobra, about 12 feet long.
And it actually crawled into somebody's bathroom, and was hanging around there for two or three days.
The people of this part of India worship the king cobra.
And they didn't kill it. They called us to catch it.
Now we've caught more than 100 king cobras over the last three years, and relocated them in nearby forests.
But in order to find out the real secrets of these creatures [it was necessary] for us to actually insert a small radio transmitter inside [each] snake.
Now we are able to follow them and find out their secrets, where the babies go after they hatch, and remarkable things like this you're about to see.
This was just a few days ago in Agumbe.
I had the pleasure of being close to this large king cobra who had caught a venomous pit viper.
And it does it in such a way that it doesn't get bitten itself.
And king cobras feed only on snakes.
This [little snake] was kind of a tid-bit for it, what we'd call a "vadai" or a donut or something like that.
(Laughter) Usually they eat something a bit larger.
In this case a rather strange and inexplicable activity happened over the last breeding season, wherein a large male king cobra actually grabbed a female king cobra, didn't mate with it, actually killed it and swallowed it.
We're still trying to explain and come to terms with what is the evolutionary advantage of this.
But they do also a lot of other remarkable things.
This is again, something [we were able to see] by virtue of the fact that we had a radio transmitter in one of the snakes.
This male snake, 12 feet long, met another male king cobra.
And they did this incredible ritual combat dance.
It's very much like the rutting of mammals, including humans, you know, sorting out our differences, but gentler, no biting allowed.
It's just a wresting match, but a remarkable activity.
Now, what are we doing with all this information?
What's the point of all this?
Well, the king cobra is literally a keystone species in these rainforests.
And our job is to convince the authorities that these forests have to be protected.
And this is one of the ways we do it, by learning as much as we can about something so remarkable and so iconic in the rainforests there, in order to help protect trees, animals and of course the water sources.
You've all heard, perhaps, of Project Tiger which started back in the early '70s, which was, in fact, a very dynamic time for conservation.
We were piloted, I could say, by a highly autocratic stateswoman, but who also had an incredible passion for environment.
And this is the time when Project Tiger emerged.
And, just like Project Tiger, our activities with the king cobra is to look at a species of animal so that we protect its habitat and everything within it.
So, the tiger is the icon.
And now the king cobra is a new one.
All the major rivers in south India are sourced in the Western Ghats, the chain of hills running along the west coast of India.
It pours out millions of gallons every hour, and supplies drinking water to at least 300 million people, and washes many, many babies, and of course feeds many, many animals, both domestic and wild, produces thousands of tons of rice.
And what do we do? How do we respond to this?
Well, basically, we dam it, we pollute it, we pour in pesticides, weedicides, fungicides.
You drink it in peril of your life.
And the thing is, it's not just big industry.
It's not misguided river engineers who are doing all this; it's us.
It seems that our citizens find the best way to dispose of garbage are in water sources.
Okay. Now we're going north, very far north.
North central India, the Chambal River is where we have our base.
This is the home of the gharial, this incredible crocodile.
It is an animal which has been on the Earth for just about 100 million years.
It survived even during the time that the dinosaurs died off.
It has remarkable features.
Even though it grows to 20 feet long, since it eats only fish it's not dangerous to human beings.
It does have big teeth, however, and it's kind of hard to convince people if an animal has big teeth, that it's a harmless creature.
But we, actually, back in the early '70s, did surveys, and found that gharial were extremely rare.
In fact, if you see the map, the range of their original habitat was all the way from the Indus in Pakistan to the Irrawaddy in Burma.
And now it's just limited to a couple of spots in Nepal and India.
So, in fact at this point there are only 200 breeding gharial left in the wild.
So, starting in the mid-'70s when conservation was at the fore, we were actually able to start projects which were basically government supported to collect eggs from the wild from the few remaining nests and release 5,000 baby gharial back to the wild.
And pretty soon we were seeing sights like this.
I mean, just incredible to see bunches of gharial basking on the river again.
But complacency does have a tendency to breed contempt.
And, sure enough, with all the other pressures on the river, like sand mining, for example, very, very heavy cultivation all the way down to the river's edge, not allowing the animals to breed anymore, we're looking at even more problems building up for the gharial, despite the early good intentions.
Their nests hatching along the riverside producing hundreds of hatchlings. It's just an amazing sight.
This was actually just taken last year.
But then the monsoon arrives, and unfortunately downriver there is always a dam or there is always a barrage, and, shoop, they get washed down to their doom.
Luckily there is still a lot of interest.
My pals in the Crocodile Specialist Group of the IUCN, the [Madras Crocodile Bank], an NGO, the World Wildlife Fund, the Wildlife Institute of India, State Forest Departments, and the Ministry of Environment, we all work together on stuff.
But it's possibly, and definitely not enough.
For example, in the winter of 2007 and 2008, there was this incredible die-off of gharial, in the Chambal River.
Suddenly dozens of gharial appearing on the river, dead.
Why? How could it happen?
This is a relatively clean river.
The Chambal, if you look at it, has clear water.
People scoop water out of the Chambal and drink it, something you wouldn't do in most north Indian rivers.
So, in order to try to find out the answer to this, we got veterinarians from all over the world working with Indian vets to try to figure out what was happening.
I was there for a lot of the necropsies on the riverside.
And we actually looked through all their organs and tried to figure out what was going on.
And it came down to something called gout, which, as a result of kidney breakdown is actually uric acid crystals throughout the body, and worse in the joints, which made the gharial unable to swim.
And it's a horribly painful death.
Just downriver from the Chambal is the filthy Yamuna river, the sacred Yamuna river.
And I hate to be so ironic and sarcastic about it but it's the truth. It's just one of the filthiest cesspools you can imagine.
It flows down through Delhi, Mathura, Agra, and gets just about every bit of effluent you can imagine.
So, it seemed that the toxin that was killing the gharial was something in the food chain, something in the fish they were eating.
And, you know, once a toxin is in the food chain everything is affected, including us.
Because these rivers are the lifeblood of people all along their course.
In order to try to answer some of these questions, we again turn to technology, to biological technology, in this case, again, telemetry, putting radios on 10 gharial, and actually following their movements. They're being watched everyday as we speak, to try to find out what this mysterious toxin is.
The Chambal river is an absolutely incredible place.
It's a place that's famous to a lot of you who know about the bandits, the dacoits who used to work up there. And there still are quite a few around.
But Poolan Devi was one [of them]. Which actually Shekhar Kapur made an incredible movie, "The Bandit Queen," which I urge you to see.
You'll get to see the incredible [Chambal] landscape as well.
But, again, heavy fishing pressures.
This is one of the last repositories of the Ganges river dolphin, various species of turtles, thousands of migratory birds, and fishing is causing problems like this.
And now [these] new elements of human intolerance for river creatures like the gharial means that if they don't drown in the net, then they simply cut their beaks off.
Animals like the Ganges river dolphin which is just down to a few left, and it is also critically endangered.
So, who is next? Us?
Because we are all dependent on these water sources.
So, we all know about the Narmada river, the tragedies of dams, the tragedies of huge projects which displace people and wreck river systems without providing livelihoods.
And development just basically going berserk, for a double figure growth index, basically.
So, we're not sure where this story is going to end, whether it's got a happy or sad ending.
And climate change is certainly going to turn all of our theories and predictions on their heads.
We're still working hard at it.
We've got a lot of a good team of people working up there.
And the thing is, you know, the decision makers, the folks in power, they're up in their bungalows and so on in Delhi, in the city capitals. They are all supplied with plenty of water. It's cool.
But out on the rivers there are still millions of people who are in really bad shape.
And it's a bleak future for them.
So, we have our Ganges and Yamuna cleanup project.
We've spent hundreds of millions of dollars on it, and nothing to show for it. Incredible.
So, people talk about political will.
During the die-off of the gharial we did galvanize a lot of action.
Government cut through all the red tape, we got foreign vets on it. It was great.
So, we can do it.
But if you stroll down to the Yamuna or to the Gomati in Lucknow, or to the Adyar river in Chennai, or the Mula-Mutha river in Pune, just see what we're capable of doing to a river. It's sad.
But I think the final note really is that we can do it.
The corporates, the artists, the wildlife nuts, the good old everyday folks can actually bring these rivers back.
And the final word is that there is a king cobra looking over our shoulders.
And there is a gharial looking at us from the river.
And these are powerful water totems.
And they are going to disturb our dreams until we do the right thing.
Namaste.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thanks, Rom. Thanks a lot.
You know, most people are terrified of snakes.
And there might be quite a few people here who would be very glad to see the last king cobra bite the dust.
Do you have those conversations with people?
How do you really get them to care?
Romulus Whitaker: I take the sort of humble approach, I guess you could say. I don't say that snakes are huggable exactly.
It's not like the teddy bear.
But I sort of -- there is an innocence in these animals.
And when the average person looks at a cobra going "Ssssss!" like that, they say, "My god, look at that angry, dangerous creature."
I look at it as a creature who is totally frightened of something so dangerous as a human being.
And that is the truth. And that's what I try to get out.
(Applause) CA: Now, incredible footage you showed of the viper being killed.
You were saying that that hasn't been filmed before.
RW: Yes, this is actually the first time anyone of us knew about it, for one thing.
As I said, it's just like a little snack for him, you know?
Usually they eat larger snakes like rat snakes, or even cobras.
But this guy who we're following right now is in the deep jungle.
Whereas other king cobras very often come into the human interface, you know, the plantations, to find big rat snakes and stuff.
This guy specializes in pit vipers.
And the guy who is working there with them, he's from Maharashtra, he said, "I think he's after the nusha."
(Laughter) Now, the nusha means the high.
Whenever he eats the pit viper he gets this little venom rush.
(Laughter) CA: Thanks Rom. Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) (Applause) (Music) (Music) (Applause) (Music) (Applause) (Applause) Herbie Hancock: Thank you.
Marcus Miller. (Applause) Harvey Mason. (Applause) Thank you. Thank you very much. (Applause)
What I'd like to start off with is an observation, which is that if I've learned anything over the last year, it's that the supreme irony of publishing a book about slowness is that you have to go around promoting it really fast.
I seem to spend most of my time these days zipping from city to city, studio to studio, interview to interview, serving up the book in really tiny bite-size chunks.
Because everyone these days wants to know how to slow down, but they want to know how to slow down really quickly. So ...
so I did a spot on CNN the other day where I actually spent more time in makeup than I did talking on air.
And I think that -- that's not really surprising though, is it?
Because that's kind of the world that we live in now, a world stuck in fast-forward.
A world obsessed with speed, with doing everything faster, with cramming more and more into less and less time.
Every moment of the day feels like a race against the clock.
To borrow a phrase from Carrie Fisher, which is in my bio there; I'll just toss it out again -- "These days even instant gratification takes too long." (Laughter) And if you think about how we to try to make things better, what do we do?
No, we speed them up, don't we? So we used to dial; now we speed dial.
We used to read; now we speed read. We used to walk; now we speed walk.
And of course, we used to date and now we speed date.
And even things that are by their very nature slow -- we try and speed them up too.
So I was in New York recently, and I walked past a gym that had an advertisement in the window for a new course, a new evening course.
And it was for, you guessed it, speed yoga.
So this -- the perfect solution for time-starved professionals who want to, you know, salute the sun, but only want to give over about 20 minutes to it.
I mean, these are sort of the extreme examples, and they're amusing and good to laugh at.
But there's a very serious point, and I think that in the headlong dash of daily life, we often lose sight of the damage that this roadrunner form of living does to us.
We're so marinated in the culture of speed that we almost fail to notice the toll it takes on every aspect of our lives -- on our health, our diet, our work, our relationships, the environment and our community.
And sometimes it takes a wake-up call, doesn't it, to alert us to the fact that we're hurrying through our lives, instead of actually living them; that we're living the fast life, instead of the good life.
And I think for many people, that wake-up call takes the form of an illness.
You know, a burnout, or eventually the body says, "I can't take it anymore," and throws in the towel.
Or maybe a relationship goes up in smoke because we haven't had the time, or the patience, or the tranquility, to be with the other person, to listen to them.
And my wake-up call came when I started reading bedtime stories to my son, and I found that at the end of day, I would go into his room and I just couldn't slow down -- you know, I'd be speed reading "The Cat In The Hat."
I'd be -- you know, I'd be skipping lines here, paragraphs there, sometimes a whole page, and of course, my little boy knew the book inside out, so we would quarrel.
And what should have been the most relaxing, the most intimate, the most tender moment of the day, when a dad sits down to read to his son, became instead this kind of gladiatorial battle of wills, a clash between my speed and his slowness.
And this went on for some time, until I caught myself scanning a newspaper article with timesaving tips for fast people.
And one of them made reference to a series of books called "The One-Minute Bedtime Story."
And I wince saying those words now, but my first reaction at the time was very different.
My first reflex was to say, "Hallelujah -- what a great idea!
This is exactly what I'm looking for to speed up bedtime even more."
But thankfully, a light bulb went on over my head, and my next reaction was very different, and I took a step back, and I thought, "Whoa -- you know, has it really come to this?
Am I really in such a hurry that I'm prepared to fob off my son with a sound byte at the end of the day?"
And I put away the newspaper -- and I was getting on a plane -- and I sat there, and I did something I hadn't done for a long time -- which is I did nothing.
I just thought, and I thought long and hard.
And by the time I got off that plane, I'd decided I wanted to do something about it.
I wanted to investigate this whole roadrunner culture, and what it was doing to me and to everyone else.
And I had two questions in my head.
The first was, how did we get so fast?
And the second is, is it possible, or even desirable, to slow down?
Now, if you think about how our world got so accelerated, the usual suspects rear their heads.
You think of, you know, urbanization, consumerism, the workplace, technology.
But I think if you cut through those forces, you get to what might be the deeper driver, the nub of the question, which is how we think about time itself.
In other cultures, time is cyclical.
It's seen as moving in great, unhurried circles.
It's always renewing and refreshing itself.
Whereas in the West, time is linear.
It's a finite resource; it's always draining away.
You either use it, or lose it.
"Time is money," as Benjamin Franklin said.
And I think what that does to us psychologically is it creates an equation.
Time is scarce, so what do we do?
Well -- well, we speed up, don't we?
We try and do more and more with less and less time.
We turn every moment of every day into a race to the finish line -- a finish line, incidentally, that we never reach, but a finish line nonetheless.
And I guess that the question is, is it possible to break free from that mindset?
And thankfully, the answer is yes, because what I discovered, when I began looking around, that there is a global backlash against this culture that tells us that faster is always better, and that busier is best.
Right across the world, people are doing the unthinkable: they're slowing down, and finding that, although conventional wisdom tells you that if you slow down, you're road kill, the opposite turns out to be true: that by slowing down at the right moments, people find that they do everything better.
They eat better; they make love better; they exercise better; they work better; they live better.
And, in this kind of cauldron of moments and places and acts of deceleration, lie what a lot of people now refer to as the "International Slow Movement."
Now if you'll permit me a small act of hypocrisy, I'll just give you a very quick overview of what's going on inside the Slow Movement. If you think of food, many of you will have heard of the Slow Food movement.
Started in Italy, but has spread across the world, and now has 100,000 members in 50 countries.
And it's driven by a very simple and sensible message, which is that we get more pleasure and more health from our food when we cultivate, cook and consume it at a reasonable pace.
I think also the explosion of the organic farming movement, and the renaissance of farmers' markets, are other illustrations of the fact that people are desperate to get away from eating and cooking and cultivating their food on an industrial timetable.
They want to get back to slower rhythms.
And out of the Slow Food movement has grown something called the Slow Cities movement, which has started in Italy, but has spread right across Europe and beyond.
And in this, towns begin to rethink how they organize the urban landscape, so that people are encouraged to slow down and smell the roses and connect with one another.
So they might curb traffic, or put in a park bench, or some green space.
And in some ways, these changes add up to more than the sum of their parts, because I think when a Slow City becomes officially a Slow City, it's kind of like a philosophical declaration.
It's saying to the rest of world, and to the people in that town, that we believe that in the 21st century, slowness has a role to play.
In medicine, I think a lot of people are deeply disillusioned with the kind of quick-fix mentality you find in conventional medicine.
And millions of them around the world are turning to complementary and alternative forms of medicine, which tend to tap into sort of slower, gentler, more holistic forms of healing.
Now, obviously the jury is out on many of these complementary therapies, and I personally doubt that the coffee enema will ever, you know, gain mainstream approval.
But other treatments such as acupuncture and massage, and even just relaxation, clearly have some kind of benefit.
And blue-chip medical colleges everywhere are starting to study these things to find out how they work, and what we might learn from them.
Sex. There's an awful lot of fast sex around, isn't there?
I was coming to -- well -- no pun intended there.
I was making my way, let's say, slowly to Oxford, and I went through a news agent, and I saw a magazine, a men's magazine, and it said on the front, "How to bring your partner to orgasm in 30 seconds."
So, you know, even sex is on a stopwatch these days.
Now, you know, I like a quickie as much as the next person, but I think that there's an awful lot to be gained from slow sex -- from slowing down in the bedroom.
You know, you tap into that -- those deeper, sort of, psychological, emotional, spiritual currents, and you get a better orgasm with the buildup.
You can get more bang for your buck, let's say.
I mean, the Pointer Sisters said it most eloquently, didn't they, when they sang the praises of "a lover with a slow hand."
Now, we all laughed at Sting a few years ago when he went Tantric, but you fast-forward a few years, and now you find couples of all ages flocking to workshops, or maybe just on their own in their own bedrooms, finding ways to put on the brakes and have better sex.
And of course, in Italy where -- I mean, Italians always seem to know where to find their pleasure -- they've launched an official Slow Sex movement.
The workplace.
Right across much of the world -- North America being a notable exception -- working hours have been coming down.
And Europe is an example of that, and people finding that their quality of life improves as they're working less, and also that their hourly productivity goes up.
Now, clearly there are problems with the 35-hour workweek in France -- too much, too soon, too rigid.
But other countries in Europe, notably the Nordic countries, are showing that it's possible to have a kick-ass economy without being a workaholic.
And Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Finland now rank among the top six most competitive nations on Earth, and they work the kind of hours that would make the average American weep with envy.
And if you go beyond sort of the country level, down at the micro-company level, more and more companies now are realizing that they need to allow their staff either to work fewer hours or just to unplug -- to take a lunch break, or to go sit in a quiet room, to switch off their Blackberrys and laptops -- you at the back -- mobile phones, during the work day or on the weekend, so that they have time to recharge and for the brain to slide into that kind of creative mode of thought.
It's not just, though, these days, adults who overwork, though, is it? It's children, too.
I'm 37, and my childhood ended in the mid-'80s, and I look at kids now, and I'm just amazed by the way they race around with more homework, more tutoring, more extracurriculars than we would ever have conceived of a generation ago.
And some of the most heartrending emails that I get on my website are actually from adolescents hovering on the edge of burnout, pleading with me to write to their parents, to help them slow down, to help them get off this full-throttle treadmill.
But thankfully, there is a backlash there in parenting as well, and you're finding that, you know, towns in the United States are now banding together and banning extracurriculars on a particular day of the month, so that people can, you know, decompress and have some family time, and slow down.
Homework is another thing. There are homework bans springing up all over the developed world in schools which had been piling on the homework for years, and now they're discovering that less can be more.
So there was a case up in Scotland recently where a fee-paying, high-achieving private school banned homework for everyone under the age of 13, and the high-achieving parents freaked out and said, "What are you -- you know, our kids will fall" -- the headmaster said, "No, no, your children need to slow down at the end of the day."
And just this last month, the exam results came in, and in math, science, marks went up 20 percent on average last year.
And I think what's very revealing is that the elite universities, who are often cited as the reason that people drive their kids and hothouse them so much, are starting to notice the caliber of students coming to them is falling. These kids have wonderful marks; they have CVs jammed with extracurriculars, to the point that would make your eyes water.
But they lack spark; they lack the ability to think creatively and think outside -- they don't know how to dream. And so what these Ivy League schools, and Oxford and Cambridge and so on, are starting to send a message to parents and students that they need to put on the brakes a little bit.
And in Harvard, for instance, they send out a letter to undergraduates -- freshmen -- telling them that they'll get more out of life, and more out of Harvard, if they put on the brakes, if they do less, but give time to things, the time that things need, to enjoy them, to savor them.
And even if they sometimes do nothing at all.
And that letter is called -- very revealing, I think -- "Slow Down!" -- with an exclamation mark on the end.
So wherever you look, the message, it seems to me, is the same: that less is very often more, that slower is very often better. But that said, of course, it's not that easy to slow down, is it?
I mean, you heard that I got a speeding ticket while I was researching my book on the benefits of slowness, and that's true, but that's not all of it.
I was actually en route to a dinner held by Slow Food at the time.
And if that's not shaming enough, I got that ticket in Italy.
And if any of you have ever driven on an Italian highway, you'll have a pretty good idea of how fast I was going.
(Laughter) But why is it so hard to slow down?
I think there are various reasons.
One is that speed is fun, you know, speed is sexy.
It's all that adrenaline rush. It's hard to give it up.
I think there's a kind of metaphysical dimension -- that speed becomes a way of walling ourselves off from the bigger, deeper questions.
We fill our head with distraction, with busyness, so that we don't have to ask, am I well? Am I happy? Are my children growing up right?
Are politicians making good decisions on my behalf?
Another reason -- although I think, perhaps, the most powerful reason -- why we find it hard to slow down is the cultural taboo that we've erected against slowing down.
"Slow" is a dirty word in our culture.
It's a byword for "lazy," "slacker," for being somebody who gives up.
You know, "he's a bit slow." It's actually synonymous with being stupid.
I guess what the Slow Movement -- the purpose of the Slow Movement, or its main goal, really, is to tackle that taboo, and to say that yes, sometimes slow is not the answer, that there is such a thing as "bad slow."
You know, I got stuck on the M25, which is a ring road around London, recently, and spent three-and-a-half hours there. And I can tell you, that's really bad slow.
But the new idea, the sort of revolutionary idea, of the Slow Movement, is that there is such a thing as "good slow," too.
And good slow is, you know, taking the time to eat a meal with your family, with the TV switched off.
Or taking the time to look at a problem from all angles in the office to make the best decision at work.
Or even simply just taking the time to slow down and savor your life.
Now, one of the things that I found most uplifting about all of this stuff that's happened around the book since it came out, is the reaction to it.
And I knew that when my book on slowness came out, it would be welcomed by the New Age brigade, but it's also been taken up, with great gusto, by the corporate world -- you know, business press, but also big companies and leadership organizations.
Because people at the top of the chain, people like you, I think, are starting to realize that there's too much speed in the system, there's too much busyness, and it's time to find, or get back to that lost art of shifting gears.
Another encouraging sign, I think, is that it's not just in the developed world that this idea's been taken up. In the developing world, in countries that are on the verge of making that leap into first world status -- China, Brazil, Thailand, Poland, and so on -- these countries have embraced the idea of the Slow Movement, many people in them, and there's a debate going on in their media, on the streets.
Because I think they're looking at the West, and they're saying, "Well, we like that aspect of what you've got, but we're not so sure about that."
So all of that said, is it, I guess, is it possible?
That's really the main question before us today. Is it possible to slow down? And I'm happy to be able to say to you that the answer is a resounding yes.
And I present myself as Exhibit A, a kind of reformed and rehabilitated speed-aholic.
I still love speed. You know, I live in London, and I work as a journalist, and I enjoy the buzz and the busyness, and the adrenaline rush that comes from both of those things.
I play squash and ice hockey, two very fast sports, and I wouldn't give them up for the world.
But I've also, over the last year or so, got in touch with my inner tortoise.
(Laughter) And what that means is that I no longer overload myself gratuitously.
My default mode is no longer to be a rush-aholic.
I no longer hear time's winged chariot drawing near, or at least not as much as I did before.
I can actually hear it now, because I see my time is ticking off.
And the upshot of all of that is that I actually feel a lot happier, healthier, more productive than I ever have.
I feel like I'm living my life rather than actually just racing through it.
And perhaps, the most important measure of the success of this is that I feel that my relationships are a lot deeper, richer, stronger.
And for me, I guess, the litmus test for whether this would work, and what it would mean, was always going to be bedtime stories, because that's sort of where the journey began. And there too the news is rosy. You know, at the end of the day, I go into my son's room.
I don't wear a watch. I switch off my computer, so I can't hear the email pinging into the basket, and I just slow down to his pace and we read.
And because children have their own tempo and internal clock, they don't do quality time, where you schedule 10 minutes for them to open up to you.
They need you to move at their rhythm.
I find that 10 minutes into a story, you know, my son will suddenly say, "You know, something happened in the playground today that really bothered me."
And we'll go off and have a conversation on that.
And I now find that bedtime stories used to be a box on my to-do list, something that I dreaded, because it was so slow and I had to get through it quickly.
It's become my reward at the end of the day, something I really cherish.
And I have a kind of Hollywood ending to my talk this afternoon, which goes a little bit like this: a few months ago, I was getting ready to go on another book tour, and I had my bags packed.
I was downstairs by the front door, and I was waiting for a taxi, and my son came down the stairs and he'd made a card for me. And he was carrying it.
He'd gone and stapled two cards, very like these, together, and put a sticker of his favorite character, Tintin, on the front.
And he said to me, or he handed this to me, and I read it, and it said, "To Daddy, love Benjamin."
And I thought, "Aw, that's really sweet.
Is that a good luck on the book tour card?"
And he said, "No, no, no, Daddy -- this is a card for being the best story reader in the world."
And I thought, "Yeah, you know, this slowing down thing really does work."
Thank you very much.
Hi. For those of you who haven't seen dancing bears, these are the dancing bears.
In 1995, we started working on a two-year investigative research project to try and find out what was going on.
Because the sloth bears in the wild were obviously getting depleted because of this.
This is the Qalandar community. They are a marginalized Islamic community who live across India, and have been in India since the 13th century.
We went about getting evidence of what was going on.
And this is footage from a hidden camera in a button.
And we went in, pretending to be buyers.
And we found this right in this very state, in Karnataka.
And the bear cubs were being harvested from across the country and being sold and traded.
These were being sold for about 2,000 dollars each, and they are used for bear paw soup, and also being trained, later on, to become dancing bears like the one you just saw.
Sadly, the family of Qalandars depended on this bear.
The couple are barely 18 years old.
They already have four children beside them. You can see them.
And the economy of the family and their livelihood depended on those animals.
So, we had to deal with it in a very practical and sustainable manner.
Now, when we started working deeper and digging deeper, we found that it's an illegal act.
These guys could go to jail for up to seven years if they were caught by authorities.
And what they were doing to the bears was really appalling.
It was unacceptable.
The mother bears are usually killed.
The cubs, which are taken, are separated.
Their teeth are basically bashed out with a metal rod.
And they use a red hot iron needle to make a hole through the muzzle.
Now we had to start changing these people and converting them from using that for a livelihood, to getting something else.
So, this is Bitu Qalandar, who was our first experiment.
And we were so unsure that this would work.
We weren't sure at all. And we managed to convince him.
And we said, "Okay, here is some seed fund.
Let's see if you can get something else." And we got the bear surrendered to -- we set up a sanctuary. We have four sanctuaries in India.
And now he sells cool drinks, he's by the highway.
He has a telephone booth.
And then it started, there was no turning back after that.
This is Sadua who came and surrendered his bear.
And now he runs a cattle fodder store and a grain store near Agra.
Then there was no looking back at all for us.
We gave cycle rickshaws.
We set up carpet-weaving units, vocational training for the women.
The women were just not allowed to come out of the community and work with mainstream society. So, we were able to address that.
Education. The kids never went to school.
They only had Islamic education, very little of it.
And they were never allowed to go to school because they were an extra earning hand at home. So we managed to get education.
So, we sponsor 600 children education programs today.
We were able to ensure brighter futures for these people.
Of course we also had to get the bears in.
This is what happens to the bears when they come in.
And this is what we turn them into.
We have a veterinary facility in our rescue centers.
So, basically in 2002 there were 1,200 dancing bears.
We rescued over 550 dancing bears.
We've been able to ensure better futures for the people and the bears.
The big news that I want to announce today is that next month we will be bringing in the very last bear of India, into our rescue center.
(Applause) And India will no longer have to witness this cruel barbaric practice which has been here for centuries.
And the people can hold their heads up high.
And the Qalandar people will rise above all this cruel barbaric past that they've lived all their lives.
And the beautiful bears can of course live in the wild again.
And there will be no more removing of these bears.
And the children, both humans and bear cubs can live peacefully. Thank you.
(Applause)
Contagious is a good word.
Even in the times of H1N1, I like the word.
Laughter is contagious. Passion is contagious.
Inspiration is contagious.
We've heard some remarkable stories from some remarkable speakers.
But for me, what was contagious about all of them was that they were infected by something I call the "I Can" bug.
So, the question is, why only them?
In a country of a billion people and some, why so few?
Is it luck? Is it chance?
Can we all not systematically and consciously get infected?
So, in the next eight minutes I would like to share with you my story.
I got infected when I was 17, when, as a student of the design college, I encountered adults who actually believed in my ideas, challenged me and had lots of cups of chai with me.
And I was struck by just how wonderful it felt, and how contagious that feeling was.
I also realized I should have got infected when I was seven.
So, when I started Riverside school 10 years ago it became a lab, a lab to prototype and refine a design process that could consciously infect the mind with the "I Can" bug.
And I uncovered that if learning is embedded in real-world context, that if you blur the boundaries between school and life, then children go through a journey of "aware," where they can see the change, "enable," be changed, and then "empower," lead the change.
And that directly increased student wellbeing.
Children became more competent, and less helpless.
But this was all common sense.
So, I'd like to show you a little glimpse of what common practice looks like at Riverside.
A little background: when my grade five was learning about child rights, they were made to roll incense sticks, agarbattis, for eight hours to experience what it means to be a child laborer.
It transformed them. What you will see is their journey, and then their utter conviction that they could go out and change the world.
(Music) That's them rolling.
And in two hours, after their backs were broke, they were changed.
And once that happened, they were out in the city convincing everybody that child labor just had to be abolished.
And look at Ragav, that moment when his face changes because he's been able to understand that he has shifted that man's mindset.
And that can't happen in a classroom.
So, when Ragav experienced that he went from "teacher told me," to "I am doing it." And that's the "I Can" mindshift.
And it is a process that can be energized and nurtured.
But we had parents who said, "Okay, making our children good human beings is all very well, but what about math and science and English?
Show us the grades."
And we did. The data was conclusive.
When children are empowered, not only do they do good, they do well, in fact very well, as you can see in this national benchmarking assessment taken by over 2,000 schools in India, Riverside children were outperforming the top 10 schools in India in math, English and science.
So, it worked. It was now time to take it outside Riverside.
So, on August 15th, Independence Day, 2007, the children of Riverside set out to infect Ahmedabad.
Now it was not about Riverside school.
It was about all children. So, we were shameless.
We walked into the offices of the municipal corporation, the police, the press, businesses, and basically said, "When are you going to wake up and recognize the potential that resides in every child?
When will you include the child in the city?
Basically, open your hearts and your minds to the child."
So, how did the city respond?
Since 2007 every other month the city closes down the busiest streets for traffic and converts it into a playground for children and childhood.
Here was a city telling its child, "You can."
A glimpse of infection in Ahmedabad.
Video: [Unclear] So, the busiest streets closed down.
We have the traffic police and municipal corporation helping us.
It gets taken over by children.
They are skating. They are doing street plays.
They are playing, all free, for all children.
(Music) Atul Karwal: aProCh is an organization which has been doing things for kids earlier.
And we plan to extend this to other parts of the city.
(Music) Kiran Bir Sethi: And the city will give free time.
And Ahmedabad got the first child-friendly zebra crossing in the world.
Geet Sethi: When a city gives to the children, in the future the children will give back to the city.
(Music) KBS: And because of that, Ahmedabad is known as India's first child-friendly city.
So, you're getting the pattern. First 200 children at Riverside.
Then 30,000 children in Ahmedabad, and growing.
It was time now to infect India.
So, on August 15th, again, Independence Day, 2009, empowered with the same process, we empowered 100,000 children to say, "I can."
How? We designed a simple toolkit, converted it into eight languages, and reached 32,000 schools.
We basically gave children a very simple challenge.
We said, take one idea, anything that bothers you, choose one week, and change a billion lives.
And they did. Stories of change poured in from all over India, from Nagaland in the east, to Jhunjhunu in the west, from Sikkim in the north, to Krishnagiri in the south.
Children were designing solutions for a diverse range of problems.
Right from loneliness to filling potholes in the street to alcoholism, and 32 children who stopped 16 child marriages in Rajasthan.
I mean, it was incredible.
Basically again reaffirming that when adults believe in children and say, "You can," then they will.
Infection in India.
This is in Rajasthan, a rural village.
Child: Our parents are illiterate and we want to teach them how to read and write.
KBS: First time, a rally and a street play in a rural school -- unheard of -- to tell their parents why literacy is important.
Look at what their parents says.
Man: This program is wonderful.
We feel so nice that our children can teach us how to read and write.
Woman: I am so happy that my students did this campaign.
In the future, I will never doubt my students' abilities.
See? They have done it.
KBS: An inner city school in Hyderabad.
Girl: 581. This house is 581 ...
We have to start collecting from 555.
KBS: Girls and boys in Hyderabad, going out, pretty difficult, but they did it.
Woman: Even though they are so young, they have done such good work.
First they have cleaned the society, then it will be Hyderabad, and soon India.
Woman: It was a revelation for me. It doesn't strike me that they had so much inside them.
Girl: Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
For our auction we have some wonderful paintings for you, for a very good cause, the money you give us will be used to buy hearing aids.
Are you ready, ladies and gentlemen? Audience: Yes!
Girl: Are you ready? Audience: Yes!
Girl: Are you ready? Audience: Yes!
KBS: So, the charter of compassion starts right here.
Street plays, auctions, petitions.
I mean, they were changing lives.
It was incredible.
So, how can we still stay immune?
How can we stay immune to that passion, that energy, that excitement?
I know it's obvious, but I have to end with the most powerful symbol of change, Gandhiji.
70 years ago, it took one man to infect an entire nation with the power of "We can."
So, today who is it going to take to spread the infection from 100,000 children to the 200 million children in India?
Last I heard, the preamble still said, "We, the people of India," right?
So, if not us, then who?
If not now, then when?
Like I said, contagious is a good word.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 2008, Cyclone Nargis devastated Myanmar.
Millions of people were in severe need of help.
The U.N. wanted to rush people and supplies to the area.
But there were no maps, no maps of roads, no maps showing hospitals, no way for help to reach the cyclone victims.
When we look at a map of Los Angeles or London, it is hard to believe that as of 2005, only 15 percent of the world was mapped to a geo-codable level of detail.
The U.N. ran headfirst into a problem that the majority of the world's populous faces: not having detailed maps.
But help was coming.
At Google, 40 volunteers used a new software to map 120,000 kilometers of roads, 3,000 hospitals, logistics and relief points.
And it took them four days.
The new software they used? Google Mapmaker.
Google Mapmaker is a technology that empowers each of us to map what we know locally.
People have used this software to map everything from roads to rivers, from schools to local businesses, and video stores to the corner store.
Maps matter.
Nobel Prize nominee Hernando De Soto recognized that the key to economic liftoff for most developing countries is to tap the vast amounts of uncapitalized land.
For example, a trillion dollars of real estate remains uncapitalized in India alone.
In the last year alone, thousands of users in 170 countries have mapped millions of pieces of information, and created a map of a level of detail never thought viable.
And this was made possible by the power of passionate users everywhere.
Let's look at some of the maps being created by users right now.
So, as we speak, people are mapping the world in these 170 countries.
You can see Bridget in Africa who just mapped a road in Senegal.
And, closer to home, Chalua, an N.G. road in Bangalore.
This is the result of computational geometry, gesture recognition, and machine learning.
This is a victory of thousands of users, in hundreds of cities, one user, one edit at a time.
This is an invitation to the 70 percent of our unmapped planet.
Welcome to the new world.
(Applause)
I am going to be talking about secrets.
Obviously the best way to divulge a secret is to tell someone to not say anything about it.
(Laughter) Secrets. I'm using PowerPoint this year just because, you know, I'm into the TED thing.
(Laughter) And when you use these things you don't have to go like that.
You just press it.
(Laughter) Oh, man. Um, yes.
(Laughter) Yes. I'm sure! Just change it!
(Laughter) Is Bill Gates here?
Change it! Come on! What?
(Laughter) Ah! Okay.
That's not my slides, but it's okay.
(Laughter) As you can see, these are all maps.
And maps are important devices for transferring information, especially if you have human cognitive ability.
We can see that all formulas are really maps.
Now, as humans, we make maps of places that we seldom even go, which seems a little wasteful of time.
This, of course, is a map of the moon.
There're some very delightful names.
Tranquilacalitis, [unclear]. My favorite is Frigoris.
What are these people thinking? Frigoris?
What the Frigoris you doing? Names are important.
Frigoris? This is the Moon. People could live there one day.
I'll meet you at Frigoris. No. I don't think so.
(Laughter) There we see Mars, again with various names.
And this is all done, by the way, by the International Astronomical Union.
This is an actual group of people that sit around naming planetary objects.
This is from their actual book.
These are some of the names that they have chosen, ladies and gentlemen.
I'll go through a little of them. Bolotnitsa.
That, of course, is the Slavic swamp mermaid.
(Laughter) Now I think the whole concept of a mermaid doesn't really blend into the swamp feel.
(Laughter) "Oh look! Mermaid come out of swamp. Oh boy!
It's time for Bolotnitsa!"
(Laughter) Djabran Fluctus.
If that don't flow off the tongue, what does?
(Laughter) I mean kids are studying this stuff and they've got the word "fluctus" up there. That's wrong.
(Laughter) One dyslexic kid and he could be ruining his life.
(Laughter) "It fluctus up, Mama."
Hikuleo Fluctus.
That's a little more flowing. Hikuleo sounds like a kind of a Leonardo DiCaprio 17 syllable thing.
And that's the Tonga underworld.
And one of my favorites is the Itoki Fluctus, who is the Nicaraguan goddess of insects, stars, and planets.
Now, if you're a goddess of stars and planets wouldn't you relegate insects to somebody else?
(Laughter) "No, no, really, I'm so busy with the stars.
Would you mind taking the insects? Thank you darling.
Oh take the spiders too. I know they're not insects, but I don't care.
Monkeys, chimps, just get rid of the hairy creatures."
(Laughter) Now, we're going to be going to Mars one day. And when we do, it's going to be unfair for the people that are living there to have to live with these ridiculous names.
So, you'll be on Mars, and you're at Hellespointica Depressio which has got to be a really "up" place.
(Laughter) Yeah, I'm at the Depressio, and I want to get over to Amazonis so I plug it into the Mars map, and click the button and there's my directions.
I go to Chrysokeras.
(Laughter) Left to the Thymiamata.
Then to Niliacus Lacus, which is not a bad name.
Niliacus Lacus, try to get the practice, slick-a-tick-a-bacus.
That's a cool name. I will say that.
So, I hold back a little of my venom for these astronomical misnomers.
And then of course Arnon to Thoth.
And of course there will be advertisements.
This is from their rule book, the International Astronomical Union.
And you know they're international because they put it "en Francais" as well.
L'Union Astronomique Internationale, for those of you who don't speak French.
I thought I'd translate for you.
From the rulebook: Nomenclature is a tool.
The first consideration, make it clear, simple and unambiguous.
And I think that Djabran Fluctus, that fits that mode.
(Laughter) That's simple, the goddess of goats, very simple.
Djabran Fluctus.
"Now, Frank is this clear to you, Djabran Fluctus?"
"Yeah, that's the goat goddess right? The Abacazanian?
(Laughter) It's clear to me."
"Listen, I'm going back to the swamp mermaid. Can you call me in a little while?"
(Laughter) Also, from the actual document I highlighted a part I thought may be of interest.
Anyone can suggest changing a name.
So, I look to you, fellow member of the Earth community.
We've got to change this stuff up fast.
So, these are actual names of people that work there.
I did some more investigation.
These are more people working for this group.
And, as you can see, they don't use their first names.
(Laughter) These are people naming planets, and they won't use their first names.
Something is askew here.
(Laughter) Is it because his name is really Jupiter Blunck?
(Laughter) Is that Ganymede Andromeda Burba?
(Laughter) Is that Mars Ya Marov?
I don't know. But it's investigative material, no doubt.
There are some mapping people who do use their names.
Witness please, Eugene Shoemaker, who, diligently, from a young boy decided he wanted to make maps of celestial bodies.
Must have been a very interesting day in the Shoemaker house.
"Mom, I want to make maps."
"That's wonderful Eugene. You could make maps of Toronto."
"No, I want to make maps of planets."
"Yeah, go to your room."
(Laughter) Martians, Venusians, Jovians.
We have names for places where people don't exist.
That seems a little silly to me.
There are no Jovians.
Getting back to my premise, I used stamps, by the way, because you don't have to pay anybody for the rights.
(Laughter) (Applause) There is obviously Einstein, Niels Bohr, de Fermat's last theorem, and I'm not sure whether that's James Coburn or Richard Harris.
(Laughter) It's definitely one of the two. I'm not really clear which one.
But obviously the point is that numbers are maps.
And within numbers, is there an underlying secret to the universe?
That is the premise of this particular presentation.
By the way, that's a natural picture of Saturn, no adjustments. I mean that's just beautiful.
So beautiful that I will even give up a laugh to explain my love of this particular planet, and the day Saturday, named after it, wonderfully.
So, formulas relate number to form.
That's Euler, his formula was one of the inspirations that lead to the beginning of string theory which is kind of cool, not that funny, but it is cool.
(Laughter) He was also famous for having no body.
(Laughter) Which a lot of you are like, "How did he figure that out?"
He's got no body, no man, just a head floating high.
Here comes Euler.
(Laughter) And that's an icosahedron, which is one of the five sacred solids, very important shapes.
You see the icosahedron again.
The dodecahedron, it's dual.
There is a dodecahedron which I had to do in my room last night.
The five sacred solids, as you can see there.
Which is not to be confused with the five sacred salads.
(Laughter) Blue cheese, ranch, oil and vinegar, thousand islands and house.
I suggest the house.
The reality, now here is something important.
What's important about this is these shapes are duals of each other.
And you can see how the icosahedron withdraws into the dodecahedron and then they just merge into each other.
So, the whole concept of branes in the universe, if the universe is shaped like a dodecahedron this is a very good map of what could possibly be.
And that is, of course, what we are here to talk about.
What a coincidence!
October 9th, in France, Jean-Pierre Luminet said that the universe is probably shaped like a dodecahedron, based on information that they got from this probe.
This would be a normal wave pattern.
But what they're seeing, way out there in the far reaches of the microwave background, is this kind of odd undulation.
It doesn't plug in to what they suspected a flat universe would be.
So, you can kind of get an idea from this extrapolating that back under this huge picture, so we get this idea of what the primal universe looked like.
And judging from this, it looks a little like a cheeseburger.
(Laughter) So, I'm thinking the universe is either a dodecahedron or a cheeseburger.
And for me, that's a win-win.
Everybody goes, I'm happy.
(Laughter) Better really hurry up.
I just threw this in because as important as all of our intellectual abilities are, without heart and without love it's just -- it's all meaningless.
And that, to me, is really beautiful.
(Laughter) Except for that creepy guy in the background.
(Laughter) Getting back to the point of my particular presentation, Kepler, one of my great heroes, who realized that these five solids, which I spoke of earlier, were related somehow to the planets, but he couldn't prove it. It freaked him out.
But it did lead to Newton discovering gravity.
So, maps of things leading to organized understandings of the universe in which we emerge.
Now this is Isaac from a Vietnamese stamp.
(Laughter) I am not suggesting at all that my Vietnamese brothers and sisters could maybe use a little art class here and there. But ...
(Laughter) that's not a good picture.
(Laughter) Not a good picture. Now, my friends in the island of Nevis are a little better. Look at that! That's Isaac Newton.
That guy is rockin'.
(Laughter) What a handsome cat.
Once again, Nicaragua let me down.
(Laughter) And Copernicus looks like Johnny Carson, which is really weird.
(Laughter) I don't get that at all.
Once again, these guys rock it out.
Isaac is kickin' ass. Man, he looks like a rock star.
This is freaky is a major way.
This is Sierra Leone.
They got little babies in there, floating in there.
(Laughter) Man. I don't really need to comment on this.
But I didn't know that Isaac Newton was in the Moody Blues. Did you?
(Laughter) When did this happen?
(Laughter) It's a different kind of course. And they've got five apples?
I mean these guys are extrapolating in realms that are not necessarily valid.
Although five is a good number, of course.
Ecuador, my friend Kepler, as you can see, they call him Juan.
(Laughter) Juan? No! Johannes, not Juan.
It wasn't Carlos Chaplain. It's wrong.
(Laughter) René Descartes, of course. Once again these Grenada people, this is like way too sick for anybody's imagination.
He's all murky. There is little kids leaning on his leg, little ghosts flying around. We gotta clean this stuff up fast, ladies and gentlemen.
(Laughter) This is, of course, the Cartesian coordinates.
Once again, that's Sierra Leone.
This is again, indicating how numbers relate to space relate to form, maps of the universe.
Because that's why we're here, really, I think to figure stuff out and to love each other.
Descartes. (Laughter) Before the horse. (Laughter) Now, Monaco took Descartes, and just flipped him around.
Now, Monaco is problematic for me, and I'll show you why.
Here is a map. All they have is a casino on it.
(Laughter) And why Franklin Delano Roosevelt is on their map I don't even want to hazard a guess.
But I'd say he'd been to Hellespointica Depressio recently.
(Laughter) This is the flag of Monaco. Ladies and gentlemen, the flag of Indonesia. Please examine.
(Laughter) (Applause) Not sure how this came to be, but it's not right.
In Monaco, "No, what are you talking about?
They are so different.
Look, ours is more red, it's longer.
They stole our flag! They stole our flag!"
(Laughter) Bode's law wasn't even his law. It was a guy named Titus.
And the reason I just bring this up because it is a law that doesn't really work.
That's Jude Law and some of his films recently didn't work.
(Laughter) Just a correlation that indicates how things are misinterpreted.
And I wonder if the photographer said, "Okay, Jude, could you touch your tooth? That's good."
Just a tip, if you're being photographed for press pictures, don't touch your teeth.
(Laughter) Prime numbers, Gauss, one of my favorites.
Golden section, I've been obsessed with this thing since before I was born.
I know that scares a lot of you, but that was my purpose entirely.
There we can see Fibonacci numbers related to the Golden Section, because Fibonacci and Golden Section relate to the unfolding of the measured meter of matter, as I refer to it.
If Fibonacci had been on Paxil, (Laughter) that would be the Fibonacci series.
"Ten milligram, 20 milligram."
"Leonardo, dinner's ready, put down those books and take your pills."
"Yes, Mama."
(Laughter) Alright where is this going? That's a good question.
Here is the premise that I began 27 years ago.
If numbers can express the laws of this incredible universe that we live, I reason, through some sort of reverse engineering, we could extrapolate from them some basic structural element of this universe.
And that's what I did. Twenty-seven years ago I started working on this.
And I tried to build a particle accelerator.
(Laughter) And that didn't work out well.
So, then I thought a calculator is a metaphor.
I can just divide numbers, that's like atom smashing.
That's what I did. That's how I found Moleeds.
Moleeds are what I believe the thing that will allow string theory to be proved.
They are the nodes on the string, patterns and relationships, 27, 37.
That was the first chart I came up with.
You can see, even if you don't go for the numbers, the beauty of the symmetry.
The numbers from one to 36, divided into six groups.
Symmetry, pairs.
Every top adds up to 37.
Bottom, all 74.
There is so many intricate relationships that I'm not going to go there now, because you would say, "Hey, go back to the Fluctus part."
(Laughter) Circle of Fifths, acoustic harmony, geometric symmetry.
I knew those two were related.
Once again, the Cartesian kind of cross-over.
So, I said if I'm going to put a circle, see what kind of patterns I get, boom, the Red System.
Look at that. You can't just make this stuff up, ladies and gentlemen.
(Laughter) You can't just go around going, "Oh, I'm going to put some triangles in a circle and they're going to be symmetrical. And they're all going to add up, and it's going to be, oh yeah, I figured that out."
This is beyond anything anybody could just make up.
There is the Orange System.
(Laughter) And you'll see over here, these are multiples of the number 27.
And they recapitulate that shape, even though that's a circle of nine and that's a circle of 36. It's nuts.
(Laughter) That's the Green System. It all folds in half on the Green System, right between 18 and 19.
The Blue System. The Violet. It's all there.
(Laughter) Look at that! I mean you cannot make that stuff up.
(Laughter) That just doesn't fall out of a tree, ladies and gentlemen.
Twenty-seven years of my life!
(Laughter) And I'm presenting it here at TED. Why?
Because this is the place if aliens land, I hope they come here.
(Laughter) "We are going to destroy the Earth. Hmmm ... maybe not."
(Laughter) In this last year I have found these subsequent systems which allow for the mathematic possibilities of the Calabi-Yau manifolds in a way that doesn't necessitate these little hidden dimensions.
Which works mathematically, but it just doesn't seem God-like to me.
It just seems like it's not sexy and elegant, it's hidden.
I don't want hidden, I want to see it.
(Laughter) I found other pairs all have symmetry, even though, unlike the master one, their symmetry is split.
Unbelievable. This is like crazy.
Am I the only one that sees this?
(Laughter) You know, I didn't just draw this in a day, by the way.
You know, try making some charts like this at home.
You gotta be accurate! There's measurement involved, increments.
These are maps, by the way.
Not stamps, but one day.
(Laughter) Okay, I'm getting to the punch. Golden Ratio, it's crazy.
And look at this, built within it is the Golden Ratio.
I start looking at that, and look at them again.
They start looking like planets.
I go to JPL.
I look at the orbits of the planets.
I find 18 examples of it in our solar system.
I never told anybody. This is the first thing. This could be history.
(Laughter) Kepler was right.
(Laughter) Eighteen and 19, the middle of the Moleeds, 0.618 is the golden section.
Multiply them together, 18.618 x 19.618 is 365.247.
Which is .005 different from the number of days in a year.
Hey, you can't make this up.
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
I love fashion.
I actually go to bed every night thinking about what I'm going to wear the next day.
Clothing transforms me, defines me, gives me confidence.
You may not feel the same way about fashion, but I bet you have a favorite T-shirt or a pair of jeans that transforms you -- makes you feel good, makes you feel confident, makes you feel like you.
When I was younger, I wanted to be Betsey Johnson.
I thought we were kindred, crazy-hair spirits together.
I did go to fashion design, I worked in the industry for years and loved it.
I married, I had three kids.
But life can be heartbreakingly ironic.
My middle child, Oliver, was born with a rare form of muscular dystrophy, or MD.
MD affects his muscle strength, his pulmonary system, distorts his body and makes everyday life more challenging than most.
From the time he could walk, which wasn't until about two and a half, he had to wear leg braces for stability.
Because he wasn't growing appropriately, he had to wear a feeding tube that was placed on his face.
He endured stares, and so did I.
But my husband Greg and I told him that no matter what, he was just like everybody else.
But everyday tasks for Oliver that we all take for granted were incredibly challenging.
That simple act of dressing yourself -- the very thing that I adore -- was a nightmare for him.
His form of MD does not affect his mind.
His brain is an A-plus, which means he's acutely aware of his shortcomings.
This became very evident when he started school, and that daily act of dressing yourself was a constant reminder of what he could and could not do.
So our solution was for Oliver to wear sweatpants every day: to school, to parties, on vacations -- his uniform.
For special occasions, he would wear proper pants.
But many times, because he couldn't manage the button and zipper, I would have to take him to the men's room, which was incredibly embarrassing for him and the other men that were in there.
But them -- I said, "Oh, please. There's nothing I haven't seen before."
(Laughter) For years we muddled through.
But when Oliver was in third grade, I found out he was more like me than I ever imagined.
Oliver, too, cared about fashion.
He came home from school one day and said very definitively that he was going to wear jeans to school like everybody else gets to wear.
Well, I certainly couldn't go to class with him and take him to the boys' room, but there was no way I was telling my eight-year-old that he couldn't wear what he wanted to wear.
So that night, I MacGyvered the hell out of his jeans.
I remembered when I was pregnant and unwilling to stop wearing my own favorite pants, even though I was busting out of them, that rubber-band trick.
You moms remember what I'm talking about?
The rubber band through the buttonhole, around the button and back?
Instant stretch.
So I removed the zipper so he could pull it up and down on his own.
I cut up the side seam of the bottom of his pants to accommodate for his leg braces, applied Velcro -- hold your ears, everybody: peel and stick, mind you -- so that it would close around it.
When I showed Oliver my arts and crafts project, he absolutely beamed.
He went into school with his head held so high.
Those jeans transformed him.
He was able to get dressed on his own, he was able to go to the bathroom on his own; those jeans gave him confidence.
I didn't realize it at the time, but this was my first foray into the world of adaptive clothing.
Adaptive clothing is defined as clothing designed for people with disabilities, the elderly and anyone who struggles with dressing themselves.
Adaptive clothing did exist, but it was missing that mainstream fashion component.
It was very medicinal and very functional but not stylish.
And that's a huge problem, because what you wear matters.
Clothing can affect your mood, your health and your self-esteem.
Now, being a fashion lover, I've known this forever, but scientists actually have a name for it.
It's called "Enclothed Cognition," the co-occurrence of two factors: the symbolic meaning of clothing and the physical experience of wearing the clothing, both of which have a direct correlation to how you feel about yourself.
There's actually a professor in the UK by the name of Karen J. Pine.
She wrote a book called "Mind What You Wear: The Psychology of Fashion."
She states in her book that when you put clothes on, you adapt the characteristics of what you're wearing, whether you realize it or not.
That's why you feel like a rock star when you put on those perfect-fitting jeans.
That's why you feel invincible when you put on that power suit, and that's why you feel beautiful in that little black dress.
But that's exactly why Oliver felt so isolated when he couldn't wear what he wanted to wear.
He even said to me one time, "Mom, wearing sweatpants every day makes me feel like I'm dressing disabled."
There are one billion people on our planet that experience some type of disability.
One billion.
If 10 percent of that billion experience clothing challenges, that's an enormous amount of people that may not be as confident, as successful or even as happy as they could be.
The morning after Oliver left for school wearing those jeans, I realized that I could do something about that.
And so I did.
In 2013, I founded an organization called Runway of Dreams.
The mission was to educate the fashion industry that modifications could be made to mainstream clothing for this community that has never been served.
And it began with an entire year of research.
I went to schools, I went to facilities, I went to hospitals.
I literally chased down people on the street who were in wheelchairs or if they had walkers or even if they had a slight limp.
(Laughter) I know I must have looked insane, but I knew that if I was really going to make a difference, I had to truly understand the clothing challenges of as many different people as I possibly could.
I met a young man who was 18 who has cerebral palsy.
He was going to Harvard University.
He said to me, "Can you imagine?
I got myself into Harvard, but my dream is to be able to wear jeans on campus, like the other freshmen will wear."
I met a little girl named Gianna, who was missing her left forearm and her hand.
Her mother told me she could not bear to see her daughter's difference magnified by a dangling sleeve, so she had every single long-sleeve shirt professionally tailored.
Can you imagine the time and money she spent?
I also had the great privilege of spending time with Eric LeGrand, former Rutgers football player who was paralyzed during a tackle in 2010.
I had, at this point, seen some unfathomable things, but this, by far, was the most heart-stopping.
You see, Eric is a really big guy, and it took two aides and a lifting machine to get him dressed.
I sat and watched this process for over two hours.
When I expressed my shock to Eric, he looked at me and said, "Mindy, this is every single day.
What can I say?
I like to look sharp."
Research done.
I knew that if I was going to make a change in the industry, I had to use my background and really figure out how to make these clothes modified.
So I took the information I gathered over that past year, and I figured out that there were actually three categories that were affected across the board.
The first were closures.
Buttons, snaps, zippers, hook-and-eyes were a challenge for almost everybody.
So I replaced them with a more manageable technology: magnets.
Magnets made our Harvard freshman able to wear jeans on campus, because he could dress himself.
Second: adjustability.
Pant lengths, sleeve lengths, waistbands were a challenge for so many different-shaped bodies.
So I added elastic, an internal hemming system.
This way, Gianna could wear a shirt right off the rack and just adjust the one sleeve.
Last: alternate ways to get the clothing on and off the body, outside the traditional way of over your head.
So I designed a way to go in arms first.
This, for somebody like Eric, could actually take five steps off his dressing process and give him back the gift of time.
So I went out, I bought clothing right off the rack, I sat at my kitchen table, ripped them apart, did prototype after prototype, until I felt I had great modifications.
And then I was ready for the big leagues: the fashion industry.
Rather than designing my own collection, I knew if I was really going to make a difference, I had to go mainstream.
I believed that I just needed to educate the industry of the enormity of this population and the fact that these were consumers that simply weren't being considered.
And I am thrilled to say that the industry heard me.
Runway of Dreams collaborated with the most amazing, forward-thinking brand on our planet -- (Applause) who took my vision to market and made fashion history by launching the first mainstream adaptive collection.
And the rest is yet to come.
(Applause) So -- (Applause) Fashion holds the key to a vital lifeline.
Clothing can be transformative.
Clothing equals confidence.
So tomorrow, when you are starting your day and you're thinking about what you're going to wear, I hope you appreciate the process and think about how what you chose makes you feel.
Today, Oliver is 13.
He wears his adaptive khakis, his magnetic button-front shirt -- feels like the coolest kid around.
My boy has total swagger.
(Laughter) As I mentioned, Oliver's disease is degenerative, which means his muscles are going to break down over time.
This, by far, is the most devastating part for me.
I have to sit on the sidelines and watch my boy deteriorate.
And there's nothing I can do about it.
So I am looking up from the things that I cannot control to the things that I can, because I have no option.
And so, I am looking up.
And I'm asking the fashion industry to look up.
And now, I'm asking all of you to look up, too.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It's 1996 in Uvira in eastern Congo.
This is Bukeni.
Militia commanders walk into his village, knock on his neighbors' doors and whisk their children away to training camps.
Bukeni borrows a video camera from a local wedding photographer, he disguises as a journalist and he walks into the camps to negotiate the release of the children.
He filmed footage of the children being trained as soldiers.
[Soldiers don't worry!] [You'll wear uniforms!] [You'll have free cars!] [Free beans!] Many of these children are under 15 years old, and that is a war crime.
[Free!] But you don't have to go to eastern Congo to find human rights abuses.
In America, a country with a rapidly aging population, experts estimate that one in 10 people over 60 will experience abuse.
It's a hidden epidemic, and most of that abuse actually happens at the hands of close caretakers or family.
This is Vicky.
Vicky put an iron gate on her bedroom door and she became a prisoner, in fact, in her own house, out of fear for her nephew who had taken over her home as a drug den.
And this is Mary.
Mary picked up a video camera for the first time in her life when she was 65 years old, and she asked Vicky and 99 other older people who had experienced abuse to tell their stories on camera.
And I am Dutch, so in the Netherlands we are obsessed with the truth.
Now, when you are a child, that's a great thing, because you can basically get away with anything, like "Yes, Mama, it was me who smoked the cigars."
(Laughter) But I think this is why I have dedicated my life to promoting citizen video to expose human rights violations, because I believe in the power of video to create undeniable truths.
And my organization, WITNESS, helped use the Congolese videos to help convict and send a notorious warlord called Thomas Lubanga to jail.
And the videos that Mary shot, we trained Mary and many other elder justice advocates, to make sure that the stories of elder abuse reached lawmakers, and those stories helped convince lawmakers to pass landmark legislation to protect older Americans.
So I wonder, billions of us now have this powerful tool right at our fingertips.
It's a camera.
So why are all of us not a more powerful army of civic witnesses, like Mary and Bukeni?
Why is it that so much more video is not leading to more rights and more justice?
And I think it is because being an eyewitness is hard.
Your story will get denied, your video will get lost in a sea of images, your story will not be trusted, and you will be targeted.
So how do we help witnesses?
In Oaxaca, in Mexico, the teachers' movement organized a protest after the president pushed down very undemocratic reforms.
The federal police came down in buses and started shooting at the protesters.
At least seven people died and many, many more were wounded.
Images started circulating of the shootings, and the Mexican government did what it always does.
It issued a formal statement, and the statement basically accused the independent media of creating fake news.
It said, "We were not there, that was not us doing the shooting, this did not happen."
But we had just trained activists in Mexico to use metadata strategically with their images.
Now, metadata is the kind of information that your camera captures that shows the date, the location, the temperature, the weather.
It can even show the very unique way you hold your camera when you capture something.
So the images started recirculating, and this time with the very verifying, validating information on top of them.
And the federal government had to retract their statement.
Now, justice for the people for Oaxaca is still far off, but their stories, their truths, can no longer be denied.
So we started thinking: What if you had "Proof Mode?"
What if everybody had a camera in their hands and all the platforms had that kind of validating ability.
So we developed -- together with amazing Android developers called the Guardian Project, we developed something called a technology that's called Proof Mode, that marries those metadata together with your image, and it validates and it verifies your video.
Now, imagine there is a deluge of images coming from the world's camera phones.
Imagine if that information could be trusted just a little bit more, what the potential would be for journalists, for human rights investigators, for human rights lawyers.
So we started sharing Proof Mode with our partners in Brazil who are an amazing media collective called Coletivo Papo Reto.
Brazil is a tough place for human rights.
The Brazilian police kills thousands of people every year.
The only time that there's an investigation, guess when?
When there's video.
Seventeen-year-old Eduardo was killed in broad daylight by the Rio police, and look what happens after they kill him.
They put a gun in the dead boy's hand, they shoot the gun twice -- (Shot) to fabricate their story of self-defense.
The woman who filmed this was a very, very courageous eyewitness, and she had to go into hiding after she posted her video for fear of her life.
But people are filming, and they're not going to stop filming, so we're now working together with media collectives so the residents on their WhatsApp frequently get guidance and tips, how to film safely, how to upload the video that you shoot safely, how to capture a scene so that it can actually count as evidence.
And here is an inspiration from a group called Mídia Ninja in Brazil.
The man on left is a heavily armed military policeman.
He walks up to a protester -- when you protest in Brazil, you can be arrested or worse -- and he says to the protester, "Watch me, I am going to search you right now."
And the protester is a live-streaming activist -- he wears a little camera -- and he says to the military policeman, he says, "I am watching you, and there are 5,000 people watching you with me."
Now, the tables are turned.
The distant witnesses, the watching audience, they matter.
So we started thinking, what if you could tap into that power, the power of distant witnesses?
What if you could pull in their expertise, their leverage, their solidarity, their skills when a frontline community needs them to be there?
And we started developing a project that's called Mobilize Us, because many of us, I would assume, want to help and lend our skills and our expertise, but we are often not there when a frontline community or a single individual faces an abuse.
And it could be as simple as this little app that we created that just shows the perpetrator on the other side of the phone how many people are watching him.
But now, imagine that you could put a layer of computer task routing on top of that.
Imagine that you're a community facing an immigration raid, and at that very moment, at that right moment, via livestream, you could pull in a hundred legal observers.
How would that change the situation?
So we started piloting this with our partner communities in Brazil.
This is a woman called Camilla, and she was able -- she's the leader in a favela called Favela Skol -- she was able to pull in distant witnesses via livestream to help translation, to help distribution, to help amplify her story after her community was forcibly evicted to make room for a very glossy Olympic event last summer.
So we're talking about good witnessing, but what happens if the perpetrators are filming?
What happens if a bystander films and doesn't do anything?
This is the story of Chrissy.
Chrissy is a transgender woman who walked into a McDonald's in Maryland to use the women's bathroom.
Two teens viciously beat her for using that woman's bathroom, and the McDonald's employee filmed this on his mobile phone.
And he posted his video, and it has garnered thousands of racist and transphobic comments.
So we started a project that's called Capturing Hate.
We took a very, very small sample of eyewitness videos that showed abuse against transgender and gender-nonconforming people.
We searched two words, "tranny fight" and "stud fight."
And those 329 videos were watched and are still being watched as we sit here in this theater, a stunning almost 90 million times, and there are hundreds of thousands of comments with these videos, egging on to more violence and more hate.
So we started developing a methodology that took all that unquantified visual evidence and turned it into data, turning video into data, and with that tool, LGBT organizations are now using that data to fight for rights.
And we take that data and we take it back to Silicon Valley, and we say to them: "How is it possible that these videos are still out there in a climate of hate egging on more hate, summoning more violence, when you have policies that actually say you do not allow this kind of content? -- urging them to change their policies.
So I have hope.
I have hope that we can turn more video into more rights and more justice.
Ten billion video views on Snapchat, per day.
So what if we could turn that Snapchat generation into effective and safe civic witnesses?
What if they could become the Bukenis of this new generation?
In India, women have already started using Snapchat filters to protect their identity when they speak out about domestic violence.
[They tortured me at home and never let me go out.] The truth is, the real truth, the truth that doesn't fit into any TED Talk, is fighting human rights abuse is hard.
There are no easy solutions for human rights abuse.
And there's not a single piece of technology that can ever stop the perpetrators.
But for the survivors, for the victims, for the marginalized communities, their stories, their truths, matter.
And that is where justice begins.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I'm starting talks like this, I usually do a whole spiel about sustainability because a lot of people out there don't know what that is.
This is a crowd that does know what it is, so I'll like just do like the 60-second crib-note version. Right?
So just bear with me. We'll go real fast, you know?
Fill in the blanks.
So, you know, sustainability, small planet.
Right? Picture a little Earth, circling around the sun.
You know, about a million years ago, a bunch of monkeys fell out of trees, got a little clever, harnessed fire, invented the printing press, made, you know, luggage with wheels on it.
And, you know, built the society that we now live in.
Unfortunately, while this society is, without a doubt, the most prosperous and dynamic the world has ever created, it's got some major, major flaws.
One of them is that every society has an ecological footprint.
It has an amount of impact on the planet that's measurable.
How much stuff goes through your life, how much waste is left behind you.
And we, at the moment, in our society, have a really dramatically unsustainable level of this.
We're using up about five planets.
If everybody on the planet lived the way we did, we'd need between five, six, seven, some people even say 10 planets to make it.
Clearly we don't have 10 planets.
Again, you know, mental, visual, 10 planets, one planet, 10 planets, one planet. Right?
We don't have that. So that's one problem.
The second problem is that the planet that we have is being used in wildly unfair ways. Right?
North Americans, such as myself, you know, we're basically sort of wallowing, gluttonous hogs, and we're eating all sorts of stuff.
And, you know, then you get all the way down to people who live in the Asia-Pacific region, or even more, Africa.
And people simply do not have enough to survive.
This is producing all sorts of tensions, all sorts of dynamics that are deeply disturbing.
And there's more and more people on the way. Right?
So, this is what the planet's going to look like in 20 years.
It's going to be a pretty crowded place, at least eight billion people.
So to make matters even more difficult, it's a very young planet.
A third of the people on this planet are kids.
And those kids are growing up in a completely different way than their parents did, no matter where they live.
They've been exposed to this idea of our society, of our prosperity.
And they may not want to live exactly like us.
They may not want to be Americans, or Brits, or Germans, or South Africans, but they want their own version of a life which is more prosperous, and more dynamic, and more, you know, enjoyable.
And all of these things combine to create an enormous amount of torque on the planet.
And if we cannot figure out a way to deal with that torque, we are going to find ourselves more and more and more quickly facing situations which are simply unthinkable.
Everybody in this room has heard the worst-case scenarios.
I don't need to go into that.
But I will ask the question, what's the alternative?
And I would say that, at the moment, the alternative is unimaginable.
You know, so on the one hand we have the unthinkable; on the other hand we have the unimaginable.
We don't know yet how to build a society which is environmentally sustainable, which is shareable with everybody on the planet, which promotes stability and democracy and human rights, and which is achievable in the time-frame necessary to make it through the challenges we face.
We don't know how to do this yet.
So what's Worldchanging?
Well, Worldchanging you might think of as being a bit of a news service for the unimaginable future.
You know, what we're out there doing is looking for examples of tools, models and ideas, which, if widely adopted, would change the game.
A lot of times, when I do a talk like this, I talk about things that everybody in this room I'm sure has already heard of, but most people haven't.
So I thought today I'd do something a little different, and talk about what we're looking for, rather than saying, you know, rather than giving you tried-and-true examples.
Talk about the kinds of things we're scoping out.
Give you a little peek into our editorial notebook.
And given that I have 13 minutes to do this, this is going to go kind of quick.
So, I don't know, just stick with me. Right?
So, first of all, what are we looking for? Bright Green city.
