We spend 50 billion dollars on vegetables, which is why we need all the diet aids.
We spend 200 billion dollars a year on diet-related illness today, with nine percent of our kids having type 2 diabetes.
200 billion.
So you know what, when we talk about needing 8 billion more, it's not a lot.
That 8 billion comes down to two dollars and 49 cents -- that's what the government allocates for lunch.
Most school districts spend two thirds of that on payroll and overhead.
That means we spend less than a dollar a day on food for kids in schools -- most schools, 80 to 90 cents. In L.A., it's 56 cents.
So we're spending less than a dollar, OK, on lunch.
Now I don't know about you, but I go to Starbucks and Pete's and places like that, and venti latte in San Francisco is five dollars.
One gourmet coffee, one, is more -- we spend more on than we are spending to feed kids for an entire week in our schools.
You know what? We should be ashamed.
We, as a country, should be ashamed at that.
The richest country.
In our country, it's the kids that need it the most, who get this really, really lousy food.
It's the kids who have parents and grandparents and uncles and aunts that can't even afford to pay for school lunch that gets this food.
And those are the same kids who are going to be getting sick.
Those are the same kids who we should be taking care of.
We can all make a difference.
That every single one of us, whether we have children, whether we care about children, whether we have nieces or nephews, or anything -- that we can make a difference.
Whether you sit down and eat a meal with your kids, whether you take your kids, or grandchildren, or nieces and nephews shopping to a farmers' market. Just do tastings with them.
Sit down and care.
And on the macro level, we're in what seems to be a 19-month presidential campaign, and of all the things we're asking all of these potential leaders, what about asking for the health of our children?
Thank you.
Hi. I'm here to talk to you about the importance of praise, admiration and thank you, and having it be specific and genuine.
And the way I got interested in this was, I noticed in myself, when I was growing up, and until about a few years ago, that I would want to say thank you to someone, I would want to praise them, I would want to take in their praise of me and I'd just stop it.
And I asked myself, why?
I felt shy, I felt embarrassed.
And then my question became, am I the only one who does this?
So, I decided to investigate.
I'm fortunate enough to work in the rehab facility, so I get to see people who are facing life and death with addiction.
And sometimes it comes down to something as simple as, their core wound is their father died without ever saying he's proud of them.
But then, they hear from all the family and friends that the father told everybody else that he was proud of him, but he never told the son.
It's because he didn't know that his son needed to hear it.
So my question is, why don't we ask for the things that we need?
I know a gentleman, married for 25 years, who's longing to hear his wife say, "Thank you for being the breadwinner, so I can stay home with the kids," but won't ask.
I know a woman who's good at this.
She, once a week, meets with her husband and says, "I'd really like you to thank me for all these things I did in the house and with the kids."
And he goes, "Oh, this is great, this is great."
And praise really does have to be genuine, but she takes responsibility for that.
And a friend of mine, April, who I've had since kindergarten, she thanks her children for doing their chores.
And she said, "Why wouldn't I thank it, even though they're supposed to do it?"
So, the question is, why was I blocking it?
Why were other people blocking it?
Why can I say, "I'll take my steak medium rare, I need size six shoes," but I won't say, "Would you praise me this way?"
And it's because I'm giving you critical data about me.
I'm telling you where I'm insecure.
I'm telling you where I need your help.
And I'm treating you, my inner circle, like you're the enemy.
Because what can you do with that data?
You could neglect me.
You could abuse it.
Or you could actually meet my need.
And I took my bike into the bike store-- I love this -- same bike, and they'd do something called "truing" the wheels.
The guy said, "You know, when you true the wheels, it's going to make the bike so much better."
I get the same bike back, and they've taken all the little warps out of those same wheels I've had for two and a half years, and my bike is like new.
So, I'm going to challenge all of you.
I want you to true your wheels: be honest about the praise that you need to hear.
What do you need to hear? Go home to your wife -- go ask her, what does she need?
Go home to your husband -- what does he need?
Go home and ask those questions, and then help the people around you.
And it's simple.
And why should we care about this?
We talk about world peace.
How can we have world peace with different cultures, different languages?
I think it starts household by household, under the same roof.
So, let's make it right in our own backyard.
And I want to thank all of you in the audience for being great husbands, great mothers, friends, daughters, sons.
And maybe somebody's never said that to you, but you've done a really, really good job.
And thank you for being here, just showing up and changing the world with your ideas.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Well, I thought there would be a podium, so I'm a bit scared.
(Laughter) Chris asked me to tell again how we found the structure of DNA.
And since, you know, I follow his orders, I'll do it.
But it slightly bores me.
(Laughter) And, you know, I wrote a book. So I'll say something -- (Laughter) -- I'll say a little about, you know, how the discovery was made, and why Francis and I found it.
And then, I hope maybe I have at least five minutes to say what makes me tick now.
In back of me is a picture of me when I was 17.
I was at the University of Chicago, in my third year, and I was in my third year because the University of Chicago let you in after two years of high school.
So you -- it was fun to get away from high school -- (Laughter) -- because I was very small, and I was no good in sports, or anything like that.
But I should say that my background -- my father was, you know, raised to be an Episcopalian and Republican, but after one year of college, he became an atheist and a Democrat.
(Laughter) And my mother was Irish Catholic, and -- but she didn't take religion too seriously.
And by the age of 11, I was no longer going to Sunday Mass, and going on birdwatching walks with my father.
So early on, I heard of Charles Darwin.
I guess, you know, he was the big hero.
And, you know, you understand life as it now exists through evolution.
And at the University of Chicago I was a zoology major, and thought I would end up, you know, if I was bright enough, maybe getting a Ph.D. from Cornell in ornithology.
Then, in the Chicago paper, there was a review of a book called "What is Life?" by the great physicist, Schrodinger.
And that, of course, had been a question I wanted to know.
You know, Darwin explained life after it got started, but what was the essence of life?
And Schrodinger said the essence was information present in our chromosomes, and it had to be present on a molecule. I'd never really thought of molecules before.
You know chromosomes, but this was a molecule, and somehow all the information was probably present in some digital form. And there was the big question of, how did you copy the information?
So that was the book. And so, from that moment on, I wanted to be a geneticist -- understand the gene and, through that, understand life.
So I had, you know, a hero at a distance.
It wasn't a baseball player; it was Linus Pauling.
And so I applied to Caltech and they turned me down.
(Laughter) So I went to Indiana, which was actually as good as Caltech in genetics, and besides, they had a really good basketball team. (Laughter) So I had a really quite happy life at Indiana.
And it was at Indiana I got the impression that, you know, the gene was likely to be DNA.
And so when I got my Ph.D., I should go and search for DNA.
So I first went to Copenhagen because I thought, well, maybe I could become a biochemist, but I discovered biochemistry was very boring.
It wasn't going anywhere toward, you know, saying what the gene was; it was just nuclear science. And oh, that's the book, little book.
You can read it in about two hours.
And -- but then I went to a meeting in Italy.
And there was an unexpected speaker who wasn't on the program, and he talked about DNA.
And this was Maurice Wilkins. He was trained as a physicist, and after the war he wanted to do biophysics, and he picked DNA because DNA had been determined at the Rockefeller Institute to possibly be the genetic molecules on the chromosomes.
Most people believed it was proteins.
But Wilkins, you know, thought DNA was the best bet, and he showed this x-ray photograph.
Sort of crystalline. So DNA had a structure, even though it owed it to probably different molecules carrying different sets of instructions.
So there was something universal about the DNA molecule.
So I wanted to work with him, but he didn't want a former birdwatcher, and I ended up in Cambridge, England.
So I went to Cambridge, because it was really the best place in the world then for x-ray crystallography. And x-ray crystallography is now a subject in, you know, chemistry departments.
I mean, in those days it was the domain of the physicists.
So the best place for x-ray crystallography was at the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge.
And there I met Francis Crick.
I went there without knowing him. He was 35. I was 23.
And within a day, we had decided that maybe we could take a shortcut to finding the structure of DNA.
Not solve it like, you know, in rigorous fashion, but build a model, an electro-model, using some coordinates of, you know, length, all that sort of stuff from x-ray photographs.
But just ask what the molecule -- how should it fold up?
And the reason for doing so, at the center of this photograph, is Linus Pauling. About six months before, he proposed the alpha helical structure for proteins. And in doing so, he banished the man out on the right, Sir Lawrence Bragg, who was the Cavendish professor.
This is a photograph several years later, when Bragg had cause to smile.
He certainly wasn't smiling when I got there, because he was somewhat humiliated by Pauling getting the alpha helix, and the Cambridge people failing because they weren't chemists.
And certainly, neither Crick or I were chemists, so we tried to build a model. And he knew, Francis knew Wilkins.
So Wilkins said he thought it was the helix.
X-ray diagram, he thought was comparable with the helix.
So we built a three-stranded model.
The people from London came up.
Wilkins and this collaborator, or possible collaborator, Rosalind Franklin, came up and sort of laughed at our model.
They said it was lousy, and it was.
So we were told to build no more models; we were incompetent.
(Laughter) And so we didn't build any models, and Francis sort of continued to work on proteins.
And basically, I did nothing. And -- except read.
You know, basically, reading is a good thing; you get facts.
And we kept telling the people in London that Linus Pauling's going to move on to DNA.
If DNA is that important, Linus will know it.
He'll build a model, and then we're going to be scooped.
And, in fact, he'd written the people in London: Could he see their x-ray photograph?
And they had the wisdom to say "no." So he didn't have it.
But there was ones in the literature.
Actually, Linus didn't look at them that carefully.
But about, oh, 15 months after I got to Cambridge, a rumor began to appear from Linus Pauling's son, who was in Cambridge, that his father was now working on DNA.
And so, one day Peter came in and he said he was Peter Pauling, and he gave me a copy of his father's manuscripts.
And boy, I was scared because I thought, you know, we may be scooped.
I have nothing to do, no qualifications for anything.
(Laughter) And so there was the paper, and he proposed a three-stranded structure.
And I read it, and it was just -- it was crap.
(Laughter) So this was, you know, unexpected from the world's -- (Laughter) -- and so, it was held together by hydrogen bonds between phosphate groups.
Well, if the peak pH that cells have is around seven, those hydrogen bonds couldn't exist.
We rushed over to the chemistry department and said, "Could Pauling be right?" And Alex Hust said, "No." So we were happy.
(Laughter) And, you know, we were still in the game, but we were frightened that somebody at Caltech would tell Linus that he was wrong.
And so Bragg said, "Build models."
And a month after we got the Pauling manuscript -- I should say I took the manuscript to London, and showed the people.
Well, I said, Linus was wrong and that we're still in the game and that they should immediately start building models.
But Wilkins said "no." Rosalind Franklin was leaving in about two months, and after she left he would start building models.
And so I came back with that news to Cambridge, and Bragg said, "Build models."
Well, of course, I wanted to build models.
And there's a picture of Rosalind. She really, you know, in one sense she was a chemist, but really she would have been trained -- she didn't know any organic chemistry or quantum chemistry.
She was a crystallographer.
And I think part of the reason she didn't want to build models was, she wasn't a chemist, whereas Pauling was a chemist.
And so Crick and I, you know, started building models, and I'd learned a little chemistry, but not enough.
Well, we got the answer on the 28th February '53.
And it was because of a rule, which, to me, is a very good rule: Never be the brightest person in a room, and we weren't.
We weren't the best chemists in the room.
I went in and showed them a pairing I'd done, and Jerry Donohue -- he was a chemist -- he said, it's wrong.
You've got -- the hydrogen atoms are in the wrong place.
I just put them down like they were in the books.
He said they were wrong.
So the next day, you know, after I thought, "Well, he might be right."
So I changed the locations, and then we found the base pairing, and Francis immediately said the chains run in absolute directions.
And we knew we were right.
So it was a pretty, you know, it all happened in about two hours.
From nothing to thing.
And we knew it was big because, you know, if you just put A next to T and G next to C, you have a copying mechanism.
So we saw how genetic information is carried.
It's the order of the four bases.
So in a sense, it is a sort of digital-type information.
And you copy it by going from strand-separating.
So, you know, if it didn't work this way, you might as well believe it, because you didn't have any other scheme.
(Laughter) But that's not the way most scientists think.
Most scientists are really rather dull.
They said, we won't think about it until we know it's right.
But, you know, we thought, well, it's at least 95 percent right or 99 percent right.
So think about it. The next five years, there were essentially something like five references to our work in "Nature" -- none.
And so we were left by ourselves, and trying to do the last part of the trio: how do you -- what does this genetic information do?
It was pretty obvious that it provided the information to an RNA molecule, and then how do you go from RNA to protein?
For about three years we just -- I tried to solve the structure of RNA.
It didn't yield. It didn't give good x-ray photographs.
I was decidedly unhappy; a girl didn't marry me.
It was really, you know, sort of a shitty time.
(Laughter) So there's a picture of Francis and I before I met the girl, so I'm still looking happy.
(Laughter) But there is what we did when we didn't know where to go forward: we formed a club and called it the RNA Tie Club.
George Gamow, also a great physicist, he designed the tie.
He was one of the members. The question was: How do you go from a four-letter code to the 20-letter code of proteins?
Feynman was a member, and Teller, and friends of Gamow.
But that's the only -- no, we were only photographed twice.
And on both occasions, you know, one of us was missing the tie.
There's Francis up on the upper right, and Alex Rich -- the M.D.-turned-crystallographer -- is next to me.
This was taken in Cambridge in September of 1955.
And I'm smiling, sort of forced, I think, because the girl I had, boy, she was gone.
(Laughter) And so I didn't really get happy until 1960, because then we found out, basically, you know, that there are three forms of RNA.
And we knew, basically, DNA provides the information for RNA.
RNA provides the information for protein.
And that let Marshall Nirenberg, you know, take RNA -- synthetic RNA -- put it in a system making protein. He made polyphenylalanine, polyphenylalanine. So that's the first cracking of the genetic code, and it was all over by 1966.
So there, that's what Chris wanted me to do, it was -- so what happened since then?
Well, at that time -- I should go back.
When we found the structure of DNA, I gave my first talk at Cold Spring Harbor. The physicist, Leo Szilard, he looked at me and said, "Are you going to patent this?"
And -- but he knew patent law, and that we couldn't patent it, because you couldn't. No use for it.
(Laughter) And so DNA didn't become a useful molecule, and the lawyers didn't enter into the equation until 1973, 20 years later, when Boyer and Cohen in San Francisco and Stanford came up with their method of recombinant DNA, and Stanford patented it and made a lot of money.
At least they patented something which, you know, could do useful things.
And then, they learned how to read the letters for the code.
And, boom, we've, you know, had a biotech industry. And, but we were still a long ways from, you know, answering a question which sort of dominated my childhood, which is: How do you nature-nurture?
And so I'll go on. I'm already out of time, but this is Michael Wigler, a very, very clever mathematician turned physicist. And he developed a technique which essentially will let us look at sample DNA and, eventually, a million spots along it.
There's a chip there, a conventional one. Then there's one made by a photolithography by a company in Madison called NimbleGen, which is way ahead of Affymetrix.
And we use their technique.
And what you can do is sort of compare DNA of normal segs versus cancer.
And you can see on the top that cancers which are bad show insertions or deletions.
So the DNA is really badly mucked up, whereas if you have a chance of surviving, the DNA isn't so mucked up.
So we think that this will eventually lead to what we call "DNA biopsies." Before you get treated for cancer, you should really look at this technique, and get a feeling of the face of the enemy.
It's not a -- it's only a partial look, but it's a -- I think it's going to be very, very useful.
So, we started with breast cancer because there's lots of money for it, no government money.
And now I have a sort of vested interest: I want to do it for prostate cancer. So, you know, you aren't treated if it's not dangerous.
But Wigler, besides looking at cancer cells, looked at normal cells, and made a really sort of surprising observation.
Which is, all of us have about 10 places in our genome where we've lost a gene or gained another one.
So we're sort of all imperfect. And the question is well, if we're around here, you know, these little losses or gains might not be too bad.
But if these deletions or amplifications occurred in the wrong gene, maybe we'll feel sick.
So the first disease he looked at is autism.
And the reason we looked at autism is we had the money to do it.
Looking at an individual is about 3,000 dollars. And the parent of a child with Asperger's disease, the high-intelligence autism, had sent his thing to a conventional company; they didn't do it.
Couldn't do it by conventional genetics, but just scanning it we began to find genes for autism.
And you can see here, there are a lot of them.
So a lot of autistic kids are autistic because they just lost a big piece of DNA.
I mean, big piece at the molecular level.
We saw one autistic kid, about five million bases just missing from one of his chromosomes.
We haven't yet looked at the parents, but the parents probably don't have that loss, or they wouldn't be parents.
Now, so, our autism study is just beginning. We got three million dollars.
I think it will cost at least 10 to 20 before you'd be in a position to help parents who've had an autistic child, or think they may have an autistic child, and can we spot the difference?
So this same technique should probably look at all.
It's a wonderful way to find genes.
And so, I'll conclude by saying we've looked at 20 people with schizophrenia.
And we thought we'd probably have to look at several hundred before we got the picture. But as you can see, there's seven out of 20 had a change which was very high.
And yet, in the controls there were three.
So what's the meaning of the controls?
Were they crazy also, and we didn't know it?
Or, you know, were they normal? I would guess they're normal.
And what we think in schizophrenia is there are genes of predisposure, and whether this is one that predisposes -- and then there's only a sub-segment of the population that's capable of being schizophrenic.
Now, we don't have really any evidence of it, but I think, to give you a hypothesis, the best guess is that if you're left-handed, you're prone to schizophrenia.
30 percent of schizophrenic people are left-handed, and schizophrenia has a very funny genetics, which means 60 percent of the people are genetically left-handed, but only half of it showed. I don't have the time to say.
Now, some people who think they're right-handed are genetically left-handed. OK. I'm just saying that, if you think, oh, I don't carry a left-handed gene so therefore my, you know, children won't be at risk of schizophrenia. You might. OK?
(Laughter) So it's, to me, an extraordinarily exciting time.
We ought to be able to find the gene for bipolar; there's a relationship.
And if I had enough money, we'd find them all this year.
I thank you.
I'm a, or was, or kind of am a toy designer.
And before I was a toy designer, oh, I was a mime, a street mime, actually.
And then I was an entertainer, I guess.
And before that, I was a silversmith, and before that, I was -- I was out of the house at about 15 and a half, and I never wound up going into college.
I didn't really -- I didn't see the point at the time.
I do now, after learning about all the quantum stuff.
(Laughter) It's really cool.
Anyway, I wanted to show you a little bit about the world of toy design, at least from my small aperture of the world.
This is a video I made when I first started doing toy design.
I'm in my garage, making weird stuff.
And then you go to these toy companies and there's some guy across the table, and he goes, "Pass. Pass. Pass."
You know, you think it's so cool, but they -- anyway, I made this little tape that I'd always show when I go in.
This is the name of my company, Giving Toys.
So I used to work at Mattel, actually.
And after I left Mattel, I started all these hamburger makers, and then got the license to make the maker.
So this is a hamburger maker that you take the peanut butter and stuff and you put it in there, and it makes -- and this is a French fry maker, little, tiny food you can eat.
I beat up the pasta maker to make that.
Then this is a McNugget maker, I think.
This, now that's the McNugget maker, and this is a -- this is my oldest daughter making a McApple Pie.
And let's see, you can make the pie and cinnamon and sugar, and then you eat, and you eat, and you eat, and you -- she's about 300 pounds now.
No, she's not, she's beautiful.
This is how they looked when they came out at the end.
These are a -- this is like a 15 million dollar line.
And it got me through some -- I didn't make any royalties on this, but it got me through.
Next is a compilation of a bunch of stuff.
That was a missile foam launcher that didn't get sold.
This is a squishy head, for no apparent reason.
This is some effects that I did for "Wig, Rattle and Roll."
That was a robot eye thing controlling it in the back.
That paid the rent for about a month.
This is a walking Barbie -- I said, "Oh, this is it!"
And they go, "Oh, that's really nice," and out it goes.
So this is some fighting robots. I thought everyone would want these.
They fight, they get back up, you know? Wouldn't this be cool?
And they made it into a toy, and then they dropped it like a hot rock.
They're pretty cool.
This is a-- we're doing some flight-testing on my little pug, seeing if this can really grab.
It does pretty good.
I'm using little phone connectors to make them so they can spin.
It's how they, see, have those album things -- kids don't know what they are.
This is a clay maker.
You know, I said -- I went to Play-Doh, and said, "Look, I can animate this."
They said, "Don't talk to us about Play-Doh."
And then, I made a Lego animator.
I thought, this would be so great!
And you know, Lego -- don't take Legos to Lego.
That's the answer. They know everything about it.
Then I started doing animatronics.
I loved dinosaurs.
I used to be in the film business, kind of, and actually, Nicholas Negroponte saw this when I was, like, 12, and anyway, so then they said, "No, you have to make two and they have to fight."
You know, how -- why would a kid want a dinosaur?
This is me using [unclear] or 3-D Studio, back in the '80s.
That's David Letterman.
You can see how old this stuff is.
That's my youngest cousin.
This is a segment called, "Dangerous Toys You Won't See at Christmas."
We had my first saw blade launcher and we had a flamethrower chair.
My career basically peaked here.
And in the back are foam-core cutouts of the people who couldn't make it to the show.
This is MEK going through a windshield wiper motor.
So this is a -- I used to kind of be an actor.
And I'm really not very good at it.
But the -- this is a guy named Dr. Yatz, who would take toys apart and show kids about engineering.
And you can see the massively parallel processing Nintendos there.
And over to the left is a view master of the CD-ROM.
And a guy named Stan Reznikov did this as a pilot.
This is a -- you can see the little window there.
You can actually see the Steadicam with a bubble on the bottom.
You see the keyboard strapped to my wrist.
Way ahead of my time here.
(Video) I'm getting dizzy ...
Narrator: I love toys!
Caleb Chung: That's all I wanted to say there. I love toys.
OK, so, so that was a, that was the first kind of a -- that was the first batch of products.
Most of them did not go.
You get one out of 20, one out of 30 products.
And every now and then, we do something like a, you know, an automated hair wrap machine, you know, that tangles your hair and pulls your scalp out, and -- and we'd make some money on that, you know. And we'd give it out.
But eventually, we left L.A., and we moved to Idaho, where there was actually a lot of peace and quiet.
And I started working on this project -- oh, I have to tell you about this real quick.
Throughout this whole thing, making toys, I think there is a real correlation with innovation and art and science.
There's some kind of a blend that happens that allows, you know, to find innovation.
And I tried to sum this up in some kind of symbol that means something, to me anyway.
And so, art and science have a kind of dynamic balance, that's where I think innovation happens.
And actually, this is, to me, how I can come up with great ideas.
But it's not how you actually get leverage.
Actually, you have to put a circle around that, and call it business.
And those three together, I think, give you leverage in the world.
But moving on.
So, this is a quick tale I'm going to tell. This is the Furby tale.
As he said, I was co-inventor of the Furby.
I did the body and creature -- well, you'll see.
So by way of showing you this, you can kind of get an understanding of what it is to, hopefully, try to create robotic life forms, or technology that has an emotional connection with the user.
So this is my family.
This is my wife, Christi, and Abby, and Melissa, and my 17-year-old now, Emily, who was just a pack of trouble.
All right, there's that robot again.
I came out of the movie business, as I said, and I said, let's make these animatronic robots.
Let's make these things.
And so I've always had a big interest in this.
This one actually didn't go anywhere, but I got my feet wet doing this.
This is a smaller one, and I have a little moving torso on there.
A little, tiny guy walks along. More servo drives, lots of servo hacking, lots of mechanical stuff.
There's another one.
He actually has skeletor legs, I think, he's wearing there.
Oh, this is a little pony, little pony -- very cute little thing.
The point of showing these is I've always been interested in little artificial life pieces.
So the challenge was -- I worked for Microsoft for a little bit, working on the Microsoft Barney.
And this is a -- you know, the purple dinosaur with kind of bloat wear.
And, you know, they had lots, just lots of stuff in there that you didn't need, I thought.
And then Microsoft can just fill a, you know, a warehouse full of this stuff and see if they sell.
So it's a really strange business model compared to coming from a toy company.
But anyway, a friend of mine and I, Dave Hampton, decided to see if we could do like a single-cell organism.
What's the fewest pieces we could use to make a little life form?
And that's our little, thirty-cent Mabuchi motor.
And so, I have all these design books, like I'm sure many of you have.
And throughout the books -- this is the first page on Furby -- I have kind of the art and science.
I have the why over here, and the how over there.
I try to do a lot of philosophy, a lot of thinking about all of these projects.
Because they're not just "bing" ideas; you have to really dig deep in these things.
So there's some real pseudo-code over here, and getting the idea of different kind of drives, things like that.
And originally, Furby only had two eyes and some batteries on the bottom.
And then we said, well, you're going to feed him, and he needs to talk, and it got more complicated.
And then I had to figure out how I'm going to use that one motor to make the eyes move, and the ears move, and the body to move, and the mouth to move.
And, you know, I want to make it blink and do all that at the same time.
Well, I came up with this kind of linear expression thing with these cams and feedback. And that worked pretty well.
Then I started to get a little more realistic and I have to start drawing the stuff.
And there's my "note to self" at the top: "lots of engineering."
So that turned out to be a little more than true.
There's my first exploded view and all the little pieces and the little worm drive and all that stuff.
And then I've got to start building it, so this is the real thing.
I get up and start cutting my finger and gluing things together.
And that's my little workshop.
And there's the first little cam that drove Furby.
And there's Furby on the half shell.
You can see the little BB in the box is my tilt sensor.
I just basically gnawed all this stuff out of plastic.
So there's the back of his head with a billion holes in it.
And there I am. I'm done. There's my little Furby.
No, it's a little robot on heroin or something, I think.
(Laughter) So right now, you see, I love little robots.
So my wife says, "Well, you may like it, but nobody else will."
So she comes to the rescue.
This is my wife Christi, who is just, you know, my muse and my partner for eternity here.
And she does drawings, right?
She's an actual, you know, artist.
And she starts doing all these different drawings and does color patterns and coloring books.
And I like the guy with the cigar at the bottom there.
He didn't test so well, but I like him.
And then she started doing these other images.
At that time, Beanie Babies was a big hit, and we thought, we'll do a bunch of different ones.
So here's a little pink one, a little pouf on his head.
And here's -- this didn't do so well in testing either, I don't know why.
There's my favorite, Demon Furby.
That was a good one.
Anyway, finally settled on kind of this kind of a look, little poufy body, a little imaginary character.
And there he is, a little bush baby on -- caught in the headlights there.
I actually went to Toys"R"Us, got a little furry cat, ripped it apart and made this.
And since then, every time I come home from Toys"R"Us with dolls or something, they disappear from my desk and they get hidden in the house.
I have three girls and they just, they -- it's like a rescue animal thing they're going there.
(Laughter) So, a little tether coming off, it's just a control for the Fur's mouth and his eyes.
It's just a little server control and I made a little video going: "Hi, my name's Furby, and I'm good," you know, and then I'd reach my hand.
He'd -- you can tickle him. When I put my hand up, "Ha, ha, ha, ha" and that's how we sold him.
And Hasbro actually said, I meant Tiger Electronics at the time, said, "Yeah, we want to do this.
We have, you know, 13 weeks or something to Toy Fair, and we're going to hire you guys to do this."
And so Dave and I got working.
Mostly me, because it was all mechanics at this point.
So now I have to really figure out all kinds of stuff I don't know how to do.
And I started working with Solid Works and a whole other group to do that.
And we started -- this was way back before there was really much SLA going on, not a lot of rapid prototyping.
We certainly didn't have the money to do this.
They only paid me, like, a little bit of money to do this, so I had to call a friend of a friend who was running the GM prototype plant, SLA plant, that was down.
And they said, "Yeah, well, we'll run them."
So they ran all the shells for us, which was nice of them.
And the cams I got cut at Hewlett Packard.
We snuck in on the weekend.
And so we just had a disc of the files.
But they have a closed system, so you couldn't print the things out on the machine.
So we actually printed them out on clear and taped them on the monitors.
And on the weekend we ran the parts for that.
So this is how they come out close to the end.
And then they looked like little Garfields there.
Eight months later -- you may remember this, this was a -- total, total, total chaos.
For a while, they were making two million Furbys a month.
They actually wound up doing about 40 million Furbys.
I -- it's unbelievable how -- I don't know how that can be.
And Hasbro made about, you know, a billion and a half dollars.
And I just a little bit on each one.
So full circle -- why do I do this?
Why do you, you know, try to do this stuff?
And it's, of course, for your kids.
And there's my youngest daughter with her Furbys.
And she still actually has those.
So I kind of retired, and we're already living in paradise up in Boise, on a river, you know. So and then I started another company called Toy Innovation and we did some projects with Mattel with actually with a lady who's here, Ivy Ross, and we did Miracle Moves Baby, made it in Wired magazine, did a bunch of other stuff.
And then I started another company.
We did a little hand-held device for teens that could hook up to the Internet, won "Best Innovations" at CES, but really I kind of slowed down and said, OK, I just ... After a while, I had this old tape of this dinosaur, and I gave it to this guy, and this other guy saw it, and then people started to want to do it.
And they said they'd spend all this time.
So I said, "OK, let's try to do this dinosaur project."
The crazy idea is we're going to try to clone a dinosaur as much as we can with today's technology.
And it's not really -- but as close as we can do.
And we're going to try to really pull this off, intentfully try to make something that seems like it's alive.
Not a robot that kind of does, but let's really go for it.
So I picked a Camarasaurus, because the Camarasaurus was the most abundant of the sauropods in North America.
And you could actually find full fossil evidence of these.
That's a juvenile.
And so we actually went in.
There's a book called "Walking on Eggshells," where they found actual sauropod skin in Patagonia.
And the picture from the book, so when I -- I told the sculptor to use this bump pattern, whatever you can to copy that.
Very, very obsessive.
There's a kind of truncated Camarasaurus skeleton, but the geometry's correct.
And then I went in, and measured all the geometry because I figured, hey, biomimicry.
If I do it kind of right, it might move kind of like the real thing.
So there's the motor.
And about this time, you know, all these other people are starting to help.
Here's an example of what we did with the skull.
There's the skull, there's my drawing of a skull.
There's kind of the skin version of the soft tissue.
There's the mechanism that would go in there, kind of a Geneva drive.
There's some Solid Works versions of it.
Here's some SLA parts of the same thing.
And then, these are really crude pieces. We were just doing some tests here.
There's the skull, pretty much the same shape as the Camarasaurus.
There's a photorealistic eye behind a lens.
And there's kind of the first exploded view, or see-through view.
There's the first SLA version, and it already kind of has the feel, it has kind of a cuteness already.
And the thing about blending science and art in this multidisciplinary stuff is you can do a robot, and then you go back and do the shape, and then you go back and forth.
The servos in the front legs, we had to shape those like muscles.
They had to fit within the envelope.
There was a tremendous amount of work to get all that working right.
All the neck and the tail are cable, so it moves smoothly and organically.
And then, of course, you're not done yet.
You have to get the look for the skin.
The skin's a whole another thing, probably the hardest part.
So you hire artists, and you try to get the look and feel of the character.
Now, this is not -- we're character designers, right?
And we're still trying to keep with the real character.
So, now you go back and you cover the whole thing with clay.
Now you start doing the sculpture for this.
And you can see we got a guy from -- who's just a fanatic about dinosaurs to do the sculpting for us, down to the spoon-shaped teeth and everything.
And then more sculpting, and then more sculpting, and then more sculpting, and then more sculpting.
And then, four years and 10 million dollars later, we have a little Pleo.
John, do you want to bring him up?
John Sosoka is our CTO, and is really the man that's done most of the work with our 40-person company.
I'd like to give John a hand. He never gets recognition. This is John Sosoka.
(Applause) So, thank you, John, thank you, and get back to work, all right, man?
All right -- (Laughter) -- no, it's very painful, so -- (Laughter) -- these are little Pleos and you can probably see them.
This -- I on purpose -- they go through life stages.
So when you first get them, they're babies.
And you -- more you have them, kind of the older they get, and they kind of learn through their behavior.
So this one, this one's actually asleep, and -- hang on.
Pleo, wake up. Pleo, come on.
So this guy's listening to my voice here.
But they have 40 sensors all over their body.
They have seven processors, they have 14 motors, they have -- but you don't care, do you?
They're just cute, right? That's the idea, that's the idea.
So you see -- hey, come on. Hey, did you feel that?
There's something big and loud over here.
Hey.
(Laughter) That's good, wake up, wake up, wake up.
Yeah, they're like kids, you know.
You, yeah, yeah. Okay, he's hungry.
I'll show you what he's been doing for, for four years.
Here, here, here. Have some money, Pleo.
(Laughter) There you go.
That's what the investors think, that it's just -- (Laughter) -- right, right. So they're really sweet little guys.
And we're hoping that -- you know, our belief is that humans need to feel empathy towards things in order to be more human.
And we think we can help that out by having little creatures that you can love.
Now these are not robots, they're kind of lovebots, you know.
They do change over time.
But mostly they evoke a feeling of caring.
And we have a -- I have a little something here.
Now I do want to say that, you know, Ugobe is not there yet.
We've just opened the door, and it's for all of you to step through it.
We did include some things that are hopefully useful.
Excuse me, Pleo.
They -- he has a USB and he has a SD card, so it's completely open architecture.
So anyone can plug him -- (Applause) -- thank you.
This is John over here.
Anyone can take Pleo and they can totally redo his personality.
You can make him bipolar, or as someone said, a -- (Laughter) -- you can change his homeostatic drives, or whatever you want to call them.
Kids can just drag and drop, put in new sounds.
We -- actually, it's very hard to keep people from doing this.
We have one animator who's taken it and he's done a take on the Budweiser beer commercial, and they're going, "Whassup," you know?
(Laughter) You -- so it's -- yes, he likes that.
So they're a handful. We hope you get one.
I don't know what I'm missing to say, but as a last thing, I'd like to say is that if we continue along this path, we are designing our children's best friends.
And there's a lot of social responsibility in that.
That's why Pleo's soft and gentle and loving.
And so I just -- I hope we all dream well.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If you ask people about what part of psychology do they think is hard, and you say, "Well, what about thinking and emotions?"
Most people will say, "Emotions are terribly hard.
They're incredibly complex. They can't -- I have no idea of how they work.
But thinking is really very straightforward: it's just sort of some kind of logical reasoning, or something.
But that's not the hard part."
So here's a list of problems that come up.
One nice problem is, what do we do about health?
The other day, I was reading something, and the person said probably the largest single cause of disease is handshaking in the West.
And there was a little study about people who don't handshake, and comparing them with ones who do handshake.
And I haven't the foggiest idea of where you find the ones that don't handshake, because they must be hiding.
And the people who avoid that have 30 percent less infectious disease or something.
Or maybe it was 31 and a quarter percent.
So if you really want to solve the problem of epidemics and so forth, let's start with that. And since I got that idea, I've had to shake hundreds of hands.
And I think the only way to avoid it is to have some horrible visible disease, and then you don't have to explain.
Education: how do we improve education?
Well, the single best way is to get them to understand that what they're being told is a whole lot of nonsense.
And then, of course, you have to do something about how to moderate that, so that anybody can -- so they'll listen to you.
Pollution, energy shortage, environmental diversity, poverty.
How do we make stable societies? Longevity.
Okay, there're lots of problems to worry about.
Anyway, the question I think people should talk about -- and it's absolutely taboo -- is, how many people should there be?
And I think it should be about 100 million or maybe 500 million.
And then notice that a great many of these problems disappear.
If you had 100 million people properly spread out, then if there's some garbage, you throw it away, preferably where you can't see it, and it will rot.
Or you throw it into the ocean and some fish will benefit from it.
The problem is, how many people should there be?
And it's a sort of choice we have to make.
Most people are about 60 inches high or more, and there's these cube laws. So if you make them this big, by using nanotechnology, I suppose -- (Laughter) -- then you could have a thousand times as many.
That would solve the problem, but I don't see anybody doing any research on making people smaller.
Now, it's nice to reduce the population, but a lot of people want to have children.
And there's one solution that's probably only a few years off.
You know you have 46 chromosomes. If you're lucky, you've got 23 from each parent. Sometimes you get an extra one or drop one out, but -- so you can skip the grandparent and great-grandparent stage and go right to the great-great-grandparent. And you have 46 people and you give them a scanner, or whatever you need, and they look at their chromosomes and each of them says which one he likes best, or she -- no reason to have just two sexes any more, even. So each child has 46 parents, and I suppose you could let each group of 46 parents have 15 children.
Wouldn't that be enough? And then the children would get plenty of support, and nurturing, and mentoring, and the world population would decline very rapidly and everybody would be totally happy.
Timesharing is a little further off in the future.
And there's this great novel that Arthur Clarke wrote twice, called "Against the Fall of Night" and "The City and the Stars."
They're both wonderful and largely the same, except that computers happened in between.
And Arthur was looking at this old book, and he said, "Well, that was wrong.
The future must have some computers."
So in the second version of it, there are 100 billion or 1,000 billion people on Earth, but they're all stored on hard disks or floppies, or whatever they have in the future.
And you let a few million of them out at a time.
A person comes out, they live for a thousand years doing whatever they do, and then, when it's time to go back for a billion years -- or a million, I forget, the numbers don't matter -- but there really aren't very many people on Earth at a time.
And you get to think about yourself and your memories, and before you go back into suspension, you edit your memories and you change your personality and so forth.
The plot of the book is that there's not enough diversity, so that the people who designed the city make sure that every now and then an entirely new person is created.
And in the novel, a particular one named Alvin is created. And he says, maybe this isn't the best way, and wrecks the whole system.
I don't think the solutions that I proposed are good enough or smart enough.
I think the big problem is that we're not smart enough to understand which of the problems we're facing are good enough.
Therefore, we have to build super intelligent machines like HAL.
As you remember, at some point in the book for "2001," HAL realizes that the universe is too big, and grand, and profound for those really stupid astronauts. If you contrast HAL's behavior with the triviality of the people on the spaceship, you can see what's written between the lines.
Well, what are we going to do about that? We could get smarter.
I think that we're pretty smart, as compared to chimpanzees, but we're not smart enough to deal with the colossal problems that we face, either in abstract mathematics or in figuring out economies, or balancing the world around.
So one thing we can do is live longer.
And nobody knows how hard that is, but we'll probably find out in a few years.
You see, there's two forks in the road. We know that people live twice as long as chimpanzees almost, and nobody lives more than 120 years, for reasons that aren't very well understood.
But lots of people now live to 90 or 100, unless they shake hands too much or something like that.
And so maybe if we lived 200 years, we could accumulate enough skills and knowledge to solve some problems.
So that's one way of going about it.
And as I said, we don't know how hard that is. It might be -- after all, most other mammals live half as long as the chimpanzee, so we're sort of three and a half or four times, have four times the longevity of most mammals. And in the case of the primates, we have almost the same genes. We only differ from chimpanzees, in the present state of knowledge, which is absolute hogwash, maybe by just a few hundred genes.
What I think is that the gene counters don't know what they're doing yet.
And whatever you do, don't read anything about genetics that's published within your lifetime, or something.
(Laughter) The stuff has a very short half-life, same with brain science.
And so it might be that if we just fix four or five genes, we can live 200 years.
Or it might be that it's just 30 or 40, and I doubt that it's several hundred.
So this is something that people will be discussing and lots of ethicists -- you know, an ethicist is somebody who sees something wrong with whatever you have in mind.
(Laughter) And it's very hard to find an ethicist who considers any change worth making, because he says, what about the consequences?
And, of course, we're not responsible for the consequences of what we're doing now, are we? Like all this complaint about clones.
And yet two random people will mate and have this child, and both of them have some pretty rotten genes, and the child is likely to come out to be average.
Which, by chimpanzee standards, is very good indeed.
If we do have longevity, then we'll have to face the population growth problem anyway. Because if people live 200 or 1,000 years, then we can't let them have a child more than about once every 200 or 1,000 years.
And so there won't be any workforce.
And one of the things Laurie Garrett pointed out, and others have, is that a society that doesn't have people of working age is in real trouble. And things are going to get worse, because there's nobody to educate the children or to feed the old.
And when I'm talking about a long lifetime, of course, I don't want somebody who's 200 years old to be like our image of what a 200-year-old is -- which is dead, actually.
You know, there's about 400 different parts of the brain which seem to have different functions.
Nobody knows how most of them work in detail, but we do know that there're lots of different things in there.
And they don't always work together. I like Freud's theory that most of them are cancelling each other out.
And so if you think of yourself as a sort of city with a hundred resources, then, when you're afraid, for example, you may discard your long-range goals, but you may think deeply and focus on exactly how to achieve that particular goal.
You throw everything else away. You become a monomaniac -- all you care about is not stepping out on that platform.
And when you're hungry, food becomes more attractive, and so forth.
So I see emotions as highly evolved subsets of your capability.
Emotion is not something added to thought. An emotional state is what you get when you remove 100 or 200 of your normally available resources.
So thinking of emotions as the opposite of -- as something less than thinking is immensely productive. And I hope, in the next few years, to show that this will lead to smart machines.
And I guess I better skip all the rest of this, which are some details on how we might make those smart machines and -- (Laughter) -- and the main idea is in fact that the core of a really smart machine is one that recognizes that a certain kind of problem is facing you.
This is a problem of such and such a type, and therefore there's a certain way or ways of thinking that are good for that problem.
So I think the future, main problem of psychology is to classify types of predicaments, types of situations, types of obstacles and also to classify available and possible ways to think and pair them up.
So you see, it's almost like a Pavlovian -- we lost the first hundred years of psychology by really trivial theories, where you say, how do people learn how to react to a situation? What I'm saying is, after we go through a lot of levels, including designing a huge, messy system with thousands of ports, we'll end up again with the central problem of psychology.
Saying, not what are the situations, but what are the kinds of problems and what are the kinds of strategies, how do you learn them, how do you connect them up, how does a really creative person invent a new way of thinking out of the available resources and so forth.
So, I think in the next 20 years, if we can get rid of all of the traditional approaches to artificial intelligence, like neural nets and genetic algorithms and rule-based systems, and just turn our sights a little bit higher to say, can we make a system that can use all those things for the right kind of problem? Some problems are good for neural nets; we know that others, neural nets are hopeless on them.
Genetic algorithms are great for certain things; I suspect I know what they're bad at, and I won't tell you.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
Good morning.
My name is David Rose.
And by the use of pitching PowerPoints to VCs, I have personally raised tens of millions of dollars from VCs through PowerPoint pitches.
And turning to the other side of the equation, I've personally supervised the investment of tens of millions of dollars into companies who have pitched me with PowerPoint presentations.
So I think it's safe to say I know a little bit about the process of pitching.
So, the very first question you've got to figure out is: What is the single most important thing that a VC is looking for when you come to them pitching your new business idea?
There are obviously all kinds of things -- business models and financials and markets and this and that.
Overall, of all the things that you have to do, what is the single most important thing the VC is going to be investing in?
Somebody? What?
Audience: People!
David Rose: People! You! That's it -- you are the person.
Therefore, the entire purpose of a VC pitch is to convince them that you are the entrepreneur in whom they are going to invest their money and make a lot of money in return.
Now, how do you do this?
You can't just walk up and say, "Hi, I'm a really good guy, good girl, and you should invest in me." Right?
So in the course of your VC pitch -- you have a very few minutes; most VC pitches, angel pitches, are about 15 minutes, most should be less than half an hour -- people's attention span, after 18 minutes, begins to drop off.
Tests have shown.
So in that 18 or 10 or five minutes, you have to convey a whole bunch of different characteristics, about 10 different characteristics, while you're standing up there.
What's the single most important thing you've got to convey? What?
Audience: Integrity.
DR: Boy, oh boy, oh boy!
That's a straight line, look at that!
Right, integrity. The key thing.
I would much rather invest in, take a chance on, somebody who I know is straight than where there's any possible question of who are they looking out for, and what's going on.
So the most important thing is integrity.
What's the second most important thing?
Let's see if you can get this one.
Audience: Self-confidence.
DR: Close enough. Passion.
Right? Entrepreneurs, by definition, are people who are leaving something else, starting a new world, creating and putting their lifeblood into this thing.
You've got to convey passion.
If you're not passionate, why should anyone else be, or put money into your company if you're not passionate about it?
Then there's a whole panoply of other things you've got to wrap up in this package you're presenting to a VC.
Experience: you've got to be able to say, "Hey, you know, I've done this before."
"Done this before" is starting an enterprise, creating value, and taking something from beginning to end.
That's why VCs love to fund serial entrepreneurs -- even if you didn't do it right the first time, you've learned the lessons, which puts you in good stead the next time.
Along with the experience of starting an enterprise or running something -- doesn't have to be a business, it can be an organization in a school, a not-for-profit.
But experience in creating an organization.
Next: knowledge.
If you tell me you're going to be the developer of the map of the human genome, you better know what a human genome is; I want you to have expertise.
I don't want somebody who says, "I've got a great idea in a business I know nothing about.
I don't know who the players are, what the market is like."
You've got to know your market, your area.
And you have to have the skills that it takes to get a company going.
Those skills include everything from technical skills if it's a technology business, to marketing and sales and management and so on.
But, you know, not everybody has all these skills.
Very few people have the full set of skills it takes to run a company.
What else do you require? Well, leadership.
You've got to be able to convince us that you either have developed a team that has all those factors in it, or else you can.
And you have the charisma and the management style and the ability to get people to follow your lead, to inspire them, to motivate them to be part of your team.
Having done all that, what else do I want to know as a VC?
I want to know that you have commitment.
That you are going to be here to the end.
I want you to say -- or I want you to convey -- that you are going to die if you have to, with your very last breath, your fingernails scratching as they draw you out.
You'll keep my money alive and make more from it.
I don't want someone who'll cut and run at the first opportunity.
Bad things happen.
There's never been a venture-funded company where bad things didn't happen.
So know that you're committed to the very end.
You've got to have vision to see where this is going.
I don't want another "me too" product.
But on top of that, I need realism, Because while changing the world is great, it doesn't always happen.
And before you get to change the world, bad things are going to take place; you have to deal with that.
Finally, you're asking for my money -- not just because it's my money, but because it's me.
You need to be coachable.
We've had a lot of experience.
People who are VCs or angels investing in you have had experience, and they'd like to know that you want to hear that experience.
So how do you convey these 10 things in 10 minutes without saying them?
You can't say, "I've got integrity, invest in me!"
You've got to do a whole pitch that conveys this without conveying it.
Think about your pitch as a timeline.
It starts off, you walk in the door.
They know nothing whatsoever about you.
You can take them on an emotional -- all pitches, all sales presentations, are emotional at some level.
You can go up, you can go down, right?
You walk in, the first thing you've got to do, the overall arc of your presentation, it's got to start like a rocket.
You've got maybe 10 seconds -- between 10 and 30 seconds, depending on how long the pitch is -- to get their attention.
In my case, I've invested.
I've gotten millions of dollars from PowerPoint pitches.
"I've invested millions." That should get you right there.
This can be a fact or something counterintuitive.
It can be a story or an experience.
But you've got to grab their emotional attention, focused on you, within that first few seconds.
And then from there, you've got to take them on a very solid, steady, upward path, right from beginning to end.
Everything has to reinforce this.
And you've got to get better and better and better, revving up to the very end, then you've got to -- boom! -- knock them out of the park.
You want to get them to such an emotional high they're ready to write you a check, throw money at you, before you leave.
How do you do that?
Any time you go backwards, any time you skip a step -- imagine walking up a staircase where some of the treads are missing, or the heights are different.
You stop, you need to figure out a nice, logical progression.
Start with what the market is: Why are you going to do X, Y or Z?
And then you've got to tell me how you're going to do it, and what you're going to do.
And it's got to flow from beginning to end.
You've got to let me know there are touchstones, to tie in to the rest of the world out there.
For example, reference companies I've heard of, or basic items in your business.
I want to know about things that I can relate to: validators, or anything that tells me somebody else has approved this, or there's outside validation.
It can be sales; it can be you got an award for something; it can be people have done it before; it can be your beta tests are going great, whatever.
I want to know validation -- not just what you're telling me, but that somebody or something else out there says this makes sense.
And then, I'm looking for the upside; I need a believable upside.
That's two parts; it's got to be upside and believable.
The upside means if you tell me that five years out, you're making a million dollars a year, that's not really upside.
Telling me you'll be making a billion dollars a year -- that's not believable.
So it's got to be both.
On the other hand are things that take the emotional level down.
You have to recover from those.
For example, anything that I know is not true.
"We have no competition. Nobody makes a widget like this."
Odds are I know somebody who's made a widget, and the minute you tell me that, I discount half of what you're saying from then on.
Anything I don't understand, where I have to make the leap myself, in my own head, will stop the flow of the presentation.
So you've got to take me through like a sixth-grader -- dub, dub, dub -- but without patronizing me.
And it's a very tricky path.
But if you can do it, it works really well.
Anything that's inconsistent within your concept -- if you tell me sales of X, Y or Z are 10 million dollars, five slides later, they're five million dollars ...
One may have been gross sales, one may have been net sales, but I want to know that all the numbers make sense together.
And then, finally: anything that's an error or a typo, or a stupid mistake or a line that's in the wrong place -- that shows me that if you can't do a presentation, how can you run a company?
So this all feeds in together.
The best way to do this is to look at our betters, people who have done this before.
Let's look at the most successful technology executive in the business, and see how a presentation goes.
Bill Gates's PowerPoint presentation over here.
Here's Gates doing a thing for Windows.
Is this how to do a PowerPoint presentation? What do you think?
No. Who do you think we should look at as our role model?
Oh, isn't that funny! There's another great one over here.
OK, Steve Jobs.
Here he is, one little guy, black jeans and stuff, on a totally empty stage.
What are you focusing on?
So are these wonderful long bullet points, whole list of things good?
No, they're not. The long bullet points are bad.
What's good? Short. Short bullet points.
But you know what? Even better than short bullet points are no bullet points.
Just give me the headline.
And you know what?
Basically, none.
What do you do?
I look at the image; a picture's worth a thousand words.
You look at the image and you've got the whole thing.
Then you come back to me; you're focused on me, why I'm such a great guy, why you want to invest, why this all makes sense.
That said, we only have a very short time, so let's run through the things to include in your presentation.
First of all, none of these big, long-titled slides with blah, blah, I'm presenting to so-and-so on X date.
I know the day, I know who I am -- I don't need all that.
Just give me your company logo.
I look at the logo, and it ties it to my brain.
You give me your quick, 15-second or 30-second intro, grab my attention.
Then you give me a quick business overview.
This is not a five-minute pitch. This is, you know, two sentences.
"We build widgets for the X, Y, Z market."
And that is like the picture on the outside of a jigsaw puzzle box.
That lets me know the context.
It gives me the armature for the whole thing you'll be going through; it lets me put everything in relation to what you've told me.
Then you've got to walk me through, show me who your management team is.
I want to know the size of the market. Why is this market worth getting at?
I want to know your product, that's very important.
Now, this is not a product pitch or sales pitch.
I don't want to know all the ins and outs, just what the heck is it?
If it's a website, show me a screenshot of your website.
Don't do a live demo. Never do a live demo.
Do a canned demo, or something that lets me know why people are going to buy whatever it is.
Now that I know what you're selling, tell me how you make money on it.
I want to know what the business model is on a per-unit basis, or for the actual product you're selling.
I want to know who you're selling to in terms of customers and if you have any special relationships that will help you, whether it's a distribution relationship or a producing partner.
Again, validation.
But everybody has competition.
There's never been a company with no competition, even if the competition is the old way of doing something.
I want to know exactly what your competition is, and that will help me judge how you fit into the whole operation.
I want to know how you're special.
I know what your competition does -- how are you going to prevent them from eating your lunch?
And you can't do a VC pitch without giving me your financials.
I want to know a year or two back, or as long as you've been in existence.
And I want to know four or five years forward.
Five is a bit much. Probably four.
And I want to know how that business model, on a product basis, will translate into a company model: How many widgets will you sell?
You make X amount per widget. I want to know what the driver is.
We'll have 1,000 customers this year and 10,000 the next, our revenues will do this and that.
That gives me the whole picture for the next several years into which I'm investing.
And I want to know how the money from me will help you get there.
You're going to open an offshore plant in China, you're going to spend it all on sales and marketing, you're going to go to Tahiti, whatever.
But then comes the ask, where you tell me how much you want.
You're looking for 5 million -- at what valuation?
Two million? 100,000?
I hope you invested -- if you can't invest in your own thing, why should I?
So I like to know if you have friends and family, or angel investors, or more VCs before.
Finally, having done all that, you've now told me the whole thing, so now you bring it back to that conclusion.
This is that rocket going up.
Hopefully everything has been positive.
And everything you say clicks, it all makes sense.
And I'm thinking, "This is really great!"
Then you take me back to just your logo on the screen.
And I look at the logo -- OK, good.
Now I come back to you. Nothing else to look at, right?
Now you've got to wrap it up to give me the final -- boom! -- the final pitch that's going to send me into space.
Now, in the process of doing this, how do you remember the sequences and do it?
You've noticed I'm not looking at the screen, right?
The screen is in front of me, so I couldn't even see if I wanted to.
So how do I know what's going on?
Well, I have a laptop in front of me.
What am I looking at?
You think that I'm looking at that?
No, I'm looking, actually, at a special version of PowerPoint over here, which shows me the slides ahead and behind, my notes, so I can see what's going on.
PowerPoint has this built into every copy of it that's shipped.
If you use Apple's Keynote, it's got an even better version.
There's another program called Ovation you can get from Adobe that they bought last summer, which helps you run the timers and lets you figure out what's going on.
So, here's my wrap-up to take you to the moon, right?
I usually do a Top 10, but we don't have time, so: David's Top Five Presentation Tips.
Number five: always use presenter mode, or Ovation, or presenter tools.
It lets you know exactly where you're going, helps you pace yourself, gives you a timer, the whole bit.
Number four: always use remote control.
Have you seen me touch the computer? No. Why not?
Because I'm using remote control. Always use remote control.
Number three: the handouts you give are not your presentation.
If you follow my suggestions, you'll have a very spare, Zen-like presentation, which is great to convey who you are and get people emotionally involved, but not good as a handout.
Number two: don't read your speech. Can you imagine?
(Reading) "You should invest in my company ... " It doesn't work.
And the number one presentation tip: never, ever look at the screen.
You're making a connection with your audience, and you always want a one-on-one connection.
The screen should come up behind you and supplement what you're doing, instead of replace you.
I want to start out with quoting Helen Keller, that great woman that we all admire.
And she had a statement that is very profound, and this statement is that science has been able to find cures for many evils, but never the greatest evil of all in human beings, and that evil is apathy.
So, we know that apathy really costs us a lot, especially in our democracy.
And when we think of why people do not get involved, why they do not become activists, it's often that people are so worn down with their own familial responsibilities, and women especially.
You know, women, they have so many inhibitions.
Many of them have suffered so much trauma in their lives, so many aggressions in their lives.
And so it's very hard for them to realize that they have leadership capacities.
That they can get out there, and they could change the world.
Another thing that many women -- we think that we have to do everything.
That we are the only ones responsible for our families, and it is so hard for us to delegate and just get others to help us do the duties that we are responsible for.
We feel embarrassed or we feel guilty.
But we know that we have to make this happen, because if not, we will never have time to be able to volunteer to help on these many causes that are now facing us.
One of the areas that women can give up a little bit of time and that is in shopping, OK?
(Laughter) And especially when we go out there shopping for things that we don't even need.
(Laughter) You know, you never saw a hearse with a U-Haul behind it.
(Laughter) We have to live simply, so that others can simply live.
And when we think of the kind of inheritance that we want to leave to our children or our grandchildren, think of leaving them a legacy of justice.
This is a legacy that they can not only imitate, but they can be proud of for the rest of their lives.
If we leave them a lot of material goods, all they're going to do is fight, and they're going to hate each other.
Just remember that, when we think about what we're doing.
The other thing that we have to do to liberate our women, eventually, so that we can do the kind of volunteer work that we need to do to change this world, is we have to have a different kind of an education for our young women.
Unfortunately, in our societies around the world, women are taught to be victims.
Women are not taught that they are going to have to defend themselves, that they're going to have to support themselves and they have to protect themselves.
Because, you know, when we actually look at the animal kingdom, and we see who are the most ferocious, the male or the female?
We know it's the female, right?
So something went wrong with us at the top of that animal kingdom as women.
(Laughter) So I want to give you an example of how I found my voice.
And I was very fortunate in that, when I was 25 years old, I met a gentleman named Fred Ross Sr., who organized a chapter of a group called the Community Service Organization in my hometown of Stockton, California.
This was a grassroots organization, and I was recruited to be a volunteer.
So, one day, while we were sitting in the office, a farm worker comes in.
And he's paralyzed, he can hardly walk, he has a crutch.
And he needs help.
He needs someone to help him go down to the welfare office and make an application.
So, I volunteered to do that.
But when I got to the welfare office, they would not let me make an application for this gentleman.
So I didn't know what to do, I was at a loss.
So I went back to the office, and I told Mr. Ross, "They won't let me make an application."
And he said to me, very sternly, "You go right back down to that welfare office, and you demand to see a supervisor.
And you demand that they let him make an application."
And I thought, "Wow, I can do that?"
(Laughter) So I thought about it, and I kind of overcame my anxieties and my fears.
I went down to the welfare office and I demanded to see the supervisor.
Sure enough, he came out, and they had to let Mr. Ruiz make an application for welfare.
And he got his disability for himself and his family.
But that taught me a lesson.
That taught me that I had a voice.
Well, Mr. Ross also taught many of us many other things, including Cesar Chavez and many other volunteers.
And he taught us not only that we can make demands of people, especially our public officials.
And this is something we should always keep in mind: every public official -- guess what -- they work for us.
Because we pay their salaries with out taxes.
And they are actually our servants.
Some of them turn out to be leaders, but not all of them.
(Laughter) Once in a while we get a leader out of there.
The other thing that Mr. Ross taught us is that voting is extremely important.
And not just voting, but going out there and getting other people to vote.
Going door to door.
Phone banking, talking to voters, because many voters have a lot of doubts and they don't know how to vote.
And unfortunately, we know that in many countries people are not allowed to vote because we have voter suppression in other countries, like we do here in the United States of America.
But the thing is, if we can get out there as individuals and talk to people, so we can remove their apathy and make sure that they can vote.
So, I want to give you an example of a woman in our foundation, the Dolores Huerta Foundation, and just to show you that sometimes people have power, but they don't know it.
But once they find it, they do miraculous things.
So, Leticia Prado is an immigrant from Mexico, only has a sixth-grade education and speaks very limited English.
But she was very concerned because the children at the middle school in their town called Weedpatch -- this is in California, Central Valley -- they couldn't go out and play in the schoolyard, because the air quality is so bad in the southern part of Kern County, California in our United States of America.
So she and her husband went out there, and they passed a bond issue to build a brand new, state-of-the-art gymnasium for the kids at their middle school.
That was a big success.
Then she heard a rumor that the principal was going to end the breakfast program for the farm worker children, because the principal thought it was just too much paperwork.
So, Leticia got herself elected to the school board.
And they kept the breakfast program, and she got rid of the principal.
(Laughter) (Applause) So there were other rumors about some corruption in the local water district.
So, Leticia got herself elected to the water district.
Then she looked into all of the finances of the water district and found there was 250,000 dollars missing from their bank account.
So, Leticia called in the grand jury, and several arrests have been made.
And this is just an example of a woman who never went to high school, never went to college, but she found her power.
And in addition, she has recruited other people in the community to also run for public office, and guess what -- they've all gotten themselves elected.
So, I take that Leticia really embodies something that Coretta Scott King said.
And I want to share this with you. Coretta Scott King said, "We will never have peace in the world until women take power."
(Applause) Now, I have amended that statement to say that we will never have peace in the world until feminists take power.
(Laughter) Because we know there is a difference, right?
Not only that, but if we want to define what is a feminist -- a person who stands up for reproductive rights, for immigrants' rights, for the environment, for LGBT rights and also for labor unions and working people.
(Applause) Which also means that men can also be feminists.
(Applause) So when we think of feminization, we should also think of how can we feminize the policies, and not only of our major countries, the wealthy countries like the United States, but all over the world, our domestic and foreign policy.
And one of the things that we can do to stop wars and to have peace is to make sure that the wealthiest countries in the world also help the developing countries.
Now, we did this in the past.
After World War II, when Japan and Germany were devastated after the war, United States of America gave many tax dollars to those two countries, so that they can rebuild their economies and rebuild their corporations.
And we can do that again.
And if we can think about how we can help these other countries.
And I want to give an example of issues that we are facing in the United States of America, for instance.
We know that right now we have a lot of refugees from Central America that are at the border of the United States.
Why do people leave their homes, their beautiful homes that we go to as tourists?
Because they don't have opportunities there.
And then we think, "Hm, bananas."
How many jillions of bananas do we consume in the United States every single day?
And throughout the world.
Now, do the people in Central America get the profits from the bananas that we consume?
No, they don't.
The profits go to corporations from the United States of America.
And we think that this is wrong.
Now, if the people in Central America were to be able to get some of that money that we pay for bananas, then they wouldn't have to leave their homes.
They wouldn't have to come as asylum seekers to the borders of the United States of America.
And then maybe, many children would not have to be separated from their parents.
Now, we know that there are countries in the world that actually have free education and have free health care for all of the people in their country.
And that country is Cuba.
Cuba has health care for every one of their citizens, and they have a free college education for every one of their citizens.
They're 11 million citizens.
Now, we think, if a poor country like Cuba can have these kind of resources, and we know that they're a poor country, then why can't some of the other wealthier countries, like the United States of America, do the same?
I think that we can make that happen.
(Applause) But we know it's not going to happen until we, the people of the United States of America, and people throughout the world, start making sure that they get public officials elected to their governments that really care about the constituents, they care about people, they will commit to make sure that the resources that they have are going to be used for their citizens, and not to be used for war.
So, how do we make this happen?
We have to get rid of the apathy, we have to get more people involved.
We know that if we can't have a democracy in the United States, we can't have democracies throughout the world, unless people participate.
So it is imperative that all of us get out there and we say, "Get rid of the apathy, get off of the sidewalk, come and join the march for peace and justice, let's make Coretta Scott's vision a reality, to have peace in the world."
We recently had midterm elections in the United States of America.
And what did we see?
We saw that so many more women, young people, people of color, LGBT folks, were all elected to public office.
And we know this happened -- why?
Because so many women were on the march.
We had the Women's March in the United States.
They had the Women's Marches all over the world.
And so we now see that we have this potential.
We have this potential to get rid of the apathy.
And if we get everyone involved, get everyone committed, then, I think, we can make Coretta Scott's vision come true.
So, I want to just remind everybody, throughout the world, one of the things is, we have power, poor people have power, every citizen has power.
But in order to achieve the peace that we all yearn for, then we've all got to get involved.
So, what do we say?
Can we do it?
We say, "Yes, we can!"
And in Spanish, we say, "S, se puede."
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A year ago, I spoke to you about a book that I was just in the process of completing, that has come out in the interim, and I would like to talk to you today about some of the controversies that that book inspired.
The book is called "The Blank Slate," based on the popular idea that the human mind is a blank slate, and that all of its structure comes from socialization, culture, parenting, experience.
The "blank slate" was an influential idea in the 20th century.
Here are a few quotes indicating that: "Man has no nature," from the historian Jose Ortega y Gasset; "Man has no instincts," from the anthropologist Ashley Montagu; "The human brain is capable of a full range of behaviors and predisposed to none," from the late scientist Stephen Jay Gould.
There are a number of reasons to doubt that the human mind is a blank slate, and some of them just come from common sense.
As many people have told me over the years, anyone who's had more than one child knows that kids come into the world with certain temperaments and talents; it doesn't all come from the outside.
Oh, and anyone who has both a child and a house pet has surely noticed that the child, exposed to speech, will acquire a human language, whereas the house pet won't, presumably because of some innate different between them.
And anyone who's ever been in a heterosexual relationship knows that the minds of men and the minds of women are not indistinguishable.
There are also, I think, increasing results from the scientific study of humans that, indeed, we're not born blank slates.
One of them, from anthropology, is the study of human universals.
If you've ever taken anthropology, you know that it's a -- kind of an occupational pleasure of anthropologists to show how exotic other cultures can be, and that there are places out there where, supposedly, everything is the opposite to the way it is here.
But if you instead look at what is common to the world's cultures, you find that there is an enormously rich set of behaviors and emotions and ways of construing the world that can be found in all of the world's 6,000-odd cultures.
The anthropologist Donald Brown has tried to list them all, and they range from aesthetics, affection and age statuses all the way down to weaning, weapons, weather, attempts to control, the color white and a worldview.
Also, genetics and neuroscience are increasingly showing that the brain is intricately structured.
This is a recent study by the neurobiologist Paul Thompson and his colleagues in which they -- using MRI -- measured the distribution of gray matter -- that is, the outer layer of the cortex -- in a large sample of pairs of people.
They coded correlations in the thickness of gray matter in different parts of the brain using a false color scheme, in which no difference is coded as purple, and any color other than purple indicates a statistically significant correlation.
Well, this is what happens when you pair people up at random.
By definition, two people picked at random can't have correlations in the distribution of gray matter in the cortex.
This is what happens in people who share half of their DNA -- fraternal twins.
And as you can see, large amounts of the brain are not purple, showing that if one person has a thicker bit of cortex in that region, so does his fraternal twin.
And here's what happens if you get a pair of people who share all their DNA -- namely, clones or identical twins.
And you can see huge areas of cortex where there are massive correlations in the distribution of gray matter.
Now, these aren't just differences in anatomy, like the shape of your ear lobes, but they have consequences in thought and behavior that are well illustrated in this famous cartoon by Charles Addams: "Separated at birth, the Mallifert twins meet accidentally."
As you can see, there are two inventors with identical contraptions in their lap, meeting in the waiting room of a patent attorney.
Now, the cartoon is not such an exaggeration, because studies of identical twins who were separated at birth and then tested in adulthood show that they have astonishing similarities.
And this happens in every pair of identical twins separated at birth ever studied -- but much less so with fraternal twins separated at birth.
My favorite example is a pair of twins, one of whom was brought up as a Catholic in a Nazi family in Germany, the other brought up in a Jewish family in Trinidad.
When they walked into the lab in Minnesota, they were wearing identical navy blue shirts with epaulettes; both of them liked to dip buttered toast in coffee, both of them kept rubber bands around their wrists, both of them flushed the toilet before using it as well as after, and both of them liked to surprise people by sneezing in crowded elevators to watch them jump.
Now -- the story might seem to good to be true, but when you administer batteries of psychological tests, you get the same results -- namely, identical twins separated at birth show quite astonishing similarities.
Now, given both the common sense and scientific data calling the doctrine of the blank slate into question, why should it have been such an appealing notion?
Well, there are a number of political reasons why people have found it congenial.
The foremost is that if we're blank slates, then, by definition, we are equal, because zero equals zero equals zero.
But if something is written on the slate, then some people could have more of it than others, and according to this line of thinking, that would justify discrimination and inequality.
Another political fear of human nature is that if we are blank slates, we can perfect mankind -- the age-old dream of the perfectibility of our species through social engineering.
Whereas, if we're born with certain instincts, then perhaps some of them might condemn us to selfishness, prejudice and violence.
Well, in the book, I argue that these are, in fact, non sequiturs.
And just to make a long story short: first of all, the concept of fairness is not the same as the concept of sameness.
And so when Thomas Jefferson wrote in the Declaration of Independence, "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal," he did not mean "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are clones."
Rather, that all men are equal in terms of their rights, and that every person ought to be treated as an individual, and not prejudged by the statistics of particular groups that they may belong to.
Also, even if we were born with certain ignoble motives, they don't automatically lead to ignoble behavior.
That is because the human mind is a complex system with many parts, and some of them can inhibit others.
For example, there's excellent reason to believe that virtually all humans are born with a moral sense, and that we have cognitive abilities that allow us to profit from the lessons of history.
So even if people did have impulses towards selfishness or greed, that's not the only thing in the skull, and there are other parts of the mind that can counteract them.
In the book, I go over controversies such as this one, and a number of other hot buttons, hot zones, Chernobyls, third rails, and so on -- including the arts, cloning, crime, free will, education, evolution, gender differences, God, homosexuality, infanticide, inequality, Marxism, morality, Nazism, parenting, politics, race, rape, religion, resource depletion, social engineering, technological risk and war.
And needless to say, there were certain risks in taking on these subjects.
When I wrote a first draft of the book, I circulated it to a number of colleagues for comments, and here are some of the reactions that I got: "Better get a security camera for your house."
"Don't expect to get any more awards, job offers or positions in scholarly societies."
"Tell your publisher not to list your hometown in your author bio."
"Do you have tenure?"
(Laughter) Well, the book came out in October, and nothing terrible has happened.
I -- I like -- There was indeed reason to be nervous, and there were moments in which I did feel nervous, knowing the history of what has happened to people who've taken controversial stands or discovered disquieting findings in the behavioral sciences.
There are many cases, some of which I talk about in the book, of people who have been slandered, called Nazis, physically assaulted, threatened with criminal prosecution for stumbling across or arguing about controversial findings.
And you never know when you're going to come across one of these booby traps.
My favorite example is a pair of psychologists who did research on left-handers, and published some data showing that left-handers are, on average, more susceptible to disease, more prone to accidents and have a shorter lifespan.
It's not clear, by the way, since then, whether that is an accurate generalization, but the data at the time seemed to support that.
Well, pretty soon they were barraged with enraged letters, death threats, ban on the topic in a number of scientific journals, coming from irate left-handers and their advocates, and they were literally afraid to open their mail because of the venom and vituperation that they had inadvertently inspired.
Well, the night is young, but the book has been out for half a year, and nothing terrible has happened.
None of the dire professional consequences has taken place -- I haven't been exiled from the city of Cambridge.
But what I wanted to talk about are two of these hot buttons that have aroused the strongest response in the 80-odd reviews that The Blank Slate has received.
I'll just put that list up for a few seconds, and see if you can guess which two -- I would estimate that probably two of these topics inspired probably 90 percent of the reaction in the various reviews and radio interviews.
It's not violence and war, it's not race, it's not gender, it's not Marxism, it's not Nazism.
They are: the arts and parenting.
(Laughter) So let me tell you what aroused such irate responses, and I'll let you decide if whether they -- the claims are really that outrageous.
Let me start with the arts.
I note that among the long list of human universals that I presented a few slides ago are art.
There is no society ever discovered in the remotest corner of the world that has not had something that we would consider the arts.
Visual arts -- decoration of surfaces and bodies -- appears to be a human universal.
The telling of stories, music, dance, poetry -- found in all cultures, and many of the motifs and themes that give us pleasure in the arts can be found in all human societies: a preference for symmetrical forms, the use of repetition and variation, even things as specific as the fact that in poetry all over the world, you have lines that are very close to three seconds long, separated by pauses.
Now, on the other hand, in the second half of the 20th century, the arts are frequently said to be in decline.
And I have a collection, probably 10 or 15 headlines, from highbrow magazines deploring the fact that the arts are in decline in our time.
I'll give you a couple of representative quotes: "We can assert with some confidence that our own period is one of decline, that the standards of culture are lower than they were 50 years ago, and that the evidences of this decline are visible in every department of human activity."
That's a quote from T. S. Eliot, a little more than 50 years ago.
And a more recent one: "The possibility of sustaining high culture in our time is becoming increasing problematical.
Serious book stores are losing their franchise, nonprofit theaters are surviving primarily by commercializing their repertory, symphony orchestras are diluting their programs, public television is increasing its dependence on reruns of British sitcoms, classical radio stations are dwindling, museums are resorting to blockbuster shows, dance is dying."
That's from Robert Brustein, the famous drama critic and director, in The New Republic about five years ago.
Well, in fact, the arts are not in decline.
I don't think this will as a surprise to anyone in this room, but by any standard they have never been flourishing to a greater extent.
There are, of course, entirely new art forms and new media, many of which you've heard over these few days.
By any economic standard, the demand for art of all forms is skyrocketing, as you can tell from the price of opera tickets, by the number of books sold, by the number of books published, the number of musical titles released, the number of new albums and so on.
The only grain of truth to this complaint that the arts are in decline come from three spheres.
One of them is in elite art since the 1930s -- say, the kinds of works performed by major symphony orchestras, where most of the repertory is before 1930, or the works shown in major galleries and prestigious museums.
In literary criticism and analysis, probably 40 or 50 years ago, literary critics were a kind of cultural hero; now they're kind of a national joke.
And the humanities and arts programs in the universities, which by many measures, indeed are in decline.
Students are staying away in droves, universities are disinvesting in the arts and humanities.
Well, here's a diagnosis.
They didn't ask me, but by their own admission, they need all the help that they can get.
And I would like to suggest that it's not a coincidence that this supposed decline in the elite arts and criticism occurred in the same point in history in which there was a widespread denial of human nature.
A famous quotation can be found -- if you look on the web, you can find it in literally scores of English core syllabuses -- "In or about December 1910, human nature changed."
A paraphrase of a quote by Virginia Woolf, and there's some debate as to what she actually meant by that.
But it's very clear, looking at these syllabuses, that -- it's used now as a way of saying that all forms of appreciation of art that were in place for centuries, or millennia, in the 20th century were discarded.
The beauty and pleasure in art -- probably a human universal -- were -- began to be considered saccharine, or kitsch, or commercial.
Barnett Newman had a famous quote that "the impulse of modern art is the desire to destroy beauty" -- which was considered bourgeois or tacky.
And here's just one example.
I mean, this is perhaps a representative example of the visual depiction of the female form in the 15th century; here is a representative example of the depiction of the female form in the 20th century.
And, as you can see, there -- something has changed in the way the elite arts appeal to the senses.
Indeed, in movements of modernism and post-modernism, there was visual art without beauty, literature without narrative and plot, poetry without meter and rhyme, architecture and planning without ornament, human scale, green space and natural light, music without melody and rhythm, and criticism without clarity, attention to aesthetics and insight into the human condition.
(Laughter) Let me give just you an example to back up that last statement.
But here, there -- one of the most famous literary English scholars of our time is the Berkeley professor, Judith Butler.
And here is an example of one of her analyses: "The move from a structuralist account in which capital is understood to structure social relations in relatively homologous ways to a view of hegemony in which power relations are subject to repetition, convergence and rearticulation brought the question of temporality into the thinking of structure, and marked a shift from the form of Althusserian theory that takes structural totalities as theoretical objects ..."
Well, you get the idea.
By the way, this is one sentence -- you can actually parse it.
Well, the argument in "The Blank Slate" was that elite art and criticism in the 20th century, although not the arts in general, have disdained beauty, pleasure, clarity, insight and style.
People are staying away from elite art and criticism.
What a puzzle -- I wonder why.
Well, this turned out to be probably the most controversial claim in the book.
Someone asked me whether I stuck it in in order to deflect ire from discussions of gender and Nazism and race and so on. I won't comment on that.
But it certainly inspired an energetic reaction from many university professors.
Well, the other hot button is parenting.
And the starting point is the -- for that discussion was the fact that we have all been subject to the advice of the parenting industrial complex.
Now, here is -- here is a representative quote from a besieged mother: "I'm overwhelmed with parenting advice.
I'm supposed to do lots of physical activity with my kids so I can instill in them a physical fitness habit so they'll grow up to be healthy adults.
And I'm supposed to do all kinds of intellectual play so they'll grow up smart.
And there are all kinds of play -- clay for finger dexterity, word games for reading success, large motor play, small motor play. I feel like I could devote my life to figuring out what to play with my kids."
I think anyone who's recently been a parent can sympathize with this mother.
Well, here's some sobering facts about parenting.
Most studies of parenting on which this advice is based are useless. They're useless because they don't control for heritability. They measure some correlation between what the parents do, how the children turn out and assume a causal relation: that the parenting shaped the child.
Parents who talk a lot to their kids have kids who grow up to be articulate, parents who spank their kids have kids who grow up to be violent and so on.
And very few of them control for the possibility that parents pass on genes for -- that increase the chances a child will be articulate or violent and so on.
Until the studies are redone with adoptive children, who provide an environment but not genes to their kids, we have no way of knowing whether these conclusions are valid.
The genetically controlled studies have some sobering results.
Remember the Mallifert twins: separated at birth, then they meet in the patent office -- remarkably similar.
Well, what would have happened if the Mallifert twins had grown up together?
You might think, well, then they'd be even more similar, because not only would they share their genes, but they would also share their environment.
That would make them super-similar, right?
Wrong. Identical twins, or any siblings, who are separated at birth are no less similar than if they had grown up together.
Everything that happens to you in a given home over all of those years appears to leave no permanent stamp on your personality or intellect.
A complementary finding, from a completely different methodology, is that adopted siblings reared together -- the mirror image of identical twins reared apart, they share their parents, their home, their neighborhood, don't share their genes -- end up not similar at all.
OK -- two different bodies of research with a similar finding.
What it suggests is that children are shaped not by their parents over the long run, but in part -- only in part -- by their genes, in part by their culture -- the culture of the country at large and the children's own culture, namely their peer group -- as we heard from Jill Sobule earlier today, that's what kids care about -- and, to a very large extent, larger than most people are prepared to acknowledge, by chance: chance events in the wiring of the brain in utero; chance events as you live your life.
So let me conclude with just a remark to bring it back to the theme of choices.
I think that the sciences of human nature -- behavioral genetics, evolutionary psychology, neuroscience, cognitive science -- are going to, increasingly in the years to come, upset various dogmas, careers and deeply-held political belief systems.
And that presents us with a choice.
The choice is whether certain facts about humans, or topics, are to be considered taboos, forbidden knowledge, where we shouldn't go there because no good can come from it, or whether we should explore them honestly.
I have my own answer to that question, which comes from a great artist of the 19th century, Anton Chekhov, who said, "Man will become better when you show him what he is like."
And I think that the argument can't be put any more eloquently than that.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
This is the Hogeweyk.
It's a neighborhood in a small town very near Amsterdam, in the Netherlands.
There are 27 houses for six, seven people each.
There's a small mall with a restaurant, a pub, a supermarket, a club room.
There are streets, alleys, there's a theater.
It actually is a nursing home.
A nursing home for people that live with an advanced dementia and that need 24-7 care and support.
Dementia is a terrible disease, and we still don't have any cure for it.
It's getting to be a major problem in the world, for the people, for the politicians, for the world -- it's getting to be a big problem.
We see that we have waiting lists in the nursing homes.
Most people that come to the nursing homes with dementia are women.
And that's also because women are used to taking care of people, so they can manage to take care of their husband with dementia, but the other way around is not so easy for the gentlemen.
Dementia is a disease that affects the brain.
The brain is confused.
People don't know anymore what the time is, what's going on, who people are.
They're very confused.
And because of that confusion, they get to be anxious, depressed, aggressive.
This is a traditional nursing home.
I worked there in 1992.
I was a care manager.
And we often spoke together about the fact that what we were doing there was not what we wanted for our parents, for our friends, for ourselves.
And one day, we said, "When we keep on saying this, nothing is going to change.
We are in charge here.
We should do something about this, so that we do want to have our parents here."
We talked about that, and what we saw every day was that the people that lived in our nursing home were confused about their environment, because what they saw was a hospital-like environment, with doctors and nurses and paramedics in uniform, and they lived on a ward.
And they didn't understand why they lived there.
And they looked for the place to get away.
They looked and hoped to find the door to go home again.
And we said what we are doing in this situation is offering these people that already have a confused brain some more confusion.
We were adding confusion to confusion.
And that was not what these people needed.
These people wanted to have a life, and the help, our help, to deal with that dementia.
These people wanted to live in a normal house, not in a ward.
They wanted to have a normal household, where they would smell their dinner on the stove in the kitchen.
Or be free to go to the kitchen and grab something to eat or drink.
That's what these people needed.
And that's what we should organize for them.
And we said we should organize this like at home, so they wouldn't live with a group of 15 or 20 or 30, like in a ward.
No, a small group of people, six or seven, family-like.
Like living with friends.
And we should find a way to select people based on their ideas about life so that they did have a good chance to become friends, when they lived together.
And we interviewed all the families of the residents about "what is important for your father," "what's important for your mother," "what is their life like," "what do they want."
And we found seven groups, and we call them lifestyle groups.
And for instance, we found this formal lifestyle.
In this lifestyle, people have a more formal way of interacting with each other, a distant way.
Their daily rhythm starts later in the day, ends later in the day.
Classical music is more heard in this lifestyle group than in other lifestyle groups.
And their menu, well, is more French cuisine than traditional Dutch.
(Laughter) In contrary to the craftsman lifestyle.
That's a very traditional lifestyle, and they get up early in the morning, go to bed early, because they have worked hard their whole life, mostly with their hands, very often had a very small family business, a small farm, a shop, or like Mr. B, he was a farmhand.
And he told me that he would go to his work every morning with a paper bag with his lunch and one cigar.
That one cigar was the only luxury he could afford for himself.
And after lunch, he would have that one cigar.
And until the day he died in the Hogeweyk, he was in this little shed, every day, after lunch, to smoke his cigar.
This is my mother.
She's of the cultural lifestyle, she's been living in the Hogeweyk six weeks now.
And that lifestyle is about traveling, meeting other people, other cultures, interest in arts and music.
There are more lifestyles.
But that's what we talked about, and that's what we did.
But that's not life in a house with a group of people, like-minded people, your own life, your own household.
There's more in life, everybody wants fun in life and a meaningful life.
We are social animals -- we need a social life.
And that's what we started.
We want to go out of our house and do some shopping, and meet other people.
Or go to the pub, have a beer with friends.
Or like Mr. W -- he likes to go out every day, see if there are nice ladies around.
(Laughter) And he's very courteous to them, and he hopes for smiles and he gets them.
And he dances with them in the pub.
It's a feast every day.
There are people that would rather go to the restaurant, have a wine with friends, or lunch or dinner with friends and celebrate life.
And my mother, she takes a walk in the park, and sits on a bench in the sun, hoping that a passerby will come and sit next to her and have a conversation about life or about the ducks in the pond.
That social life is important.
It means that you're part of society, that you belong.
And that's what we people need.
Even if you're living with advanced dementia.
This is what I see from my office window.
And one day, I saw a lady coming from one side, and the other lady from the other side, and they met at the corner.
And I knew both ladies very well.
I often saw them walking around outside.
And now and then, I tried to have a conversation with them, but their conversation was ...
rather hard to understand.
But I saw them meeting, and I saw them talking, and I saw them gesturing.
And they had fun together.
And then they said goodbye, and each went their own way.
And that's what you want in life, meeting other people and being part of society.
And that's what I saw happening.
The Hogeweyk has become a place where people with very advanced dementia can live, have freedom and safety, because the professionals working there and the volunteers working there know how to deal with dementia.
And the professionals know how to do their professional work in a way that it fits in a natural way in the life of our residents.
And that means that the management has to provide everything those people need to do their work.
It needs a management that dares to do this.
To do things differently than we always have done in a traditional nursing home.
We see that it works.
We think this can be done everywhere, because this is not for the rich.
We've been doing this with the same budget as any traditional nursing home has in our country.
We work only with the state budget.
(Applause) Because it has to do with thinking different, and looking at the person in front of you and looking at what does this person need now.
And it's about a smile, it's about thinking different, it's about how you act, and that costs nothing.
And there's something else: it's about making choices.
It's about making choices what you spend your money on.
I always say, "Red curtains are as expensive as gray ones."
(Laughter) It's possible, everywhere.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What I want to tell you about today is how I see robots invading our lives at multiple levels, over multiple timescales.
And when I look out in the future, I can't imagine a world, 500 years from now, where we don't have robots everywhere.
Assuming -- despite all the dire predictions from many people about our future -- assuming we're still around, I can't imagine the world not being populated with robots.
And then the question is, well, if they're going to be here in 500 years, are they going to be everywhere sooner than that?
Are they going to be around in 50 years?
Yeah, I think that's pretty likely -- there's going to be lots of robots everywhere.
And in fact I think that's going to be a lot sooner than that.
I think we're sort of on the cusp of robots becoming common, and I think we're sort of around 1978 or 1980 in personal computer years, where the first few robots are starting to appear.
Computers sort of came around through games and toys.
And you know, the first computer most people had in the house may have been a computer to play Pong, a little microprocessor embedded, and then other games that came after that.
And we're starting to see that same sort of thing with robots: LEGO Mindstorms, Furbies -- who here -- did anyone here have a Furby?
Yeah, there's 38 million of them sold worldwide.
They are pretty common. And they're a little tiny robot, a simple robot with some sensors, a little bit of processing actuation.
On the right there is another robot doll, who you could get a couple of years ago.
And just as in the early days, when there was a lot of sort of amateur interaction over computers, you can now get various hacking kits, how-to-hack books.
And on the left there is a platform from Evolution Robotics, where you put a PC on, and you program this thing with a GUI to wander around your house and do various stuff.
And then there's a higher price point sort of robot toys -- the Sony Aibo. And on the right there, is one that the NEC developed, the PaPeRo, which I don't think they're going to release.
But nevertheless, those sorts of things are out there.
And we've seen, over the last two or three years, lawn-mowing robots, Husqvarna on the bottom, Friendly Robotics on top there, an Israeli company.
And then in the last 12 months or so we've started to see a bunch of home-cleaning robots appear.
The top left one is a very nice home-cleaning robot from a company called Dyson, in the U.K. Except it was so expensive -- 3,500 dollars -- they didn't release it.
But at the bottom left, you see Electrolux, which is on sale.
Another one from Karcher.
At the bottom right is one that I built in my lab about 10 years ago, and we finally turned that into a product.
And let me just show you that.
We're going to give this away I think, Chris said, after the talk.
This is a robot that you can go out and buy, and that will clean up your floor.
And it starts off sort of just going around in ever-increasing circles.
If it hits something -- you people see that?
Now it's doing wall-following, it's following around my feet to clean up around me. Let's see, let's -- oh, who stole my Rice Krispies? They stole my Rice Krispies!
(Laughter) Don't worry, relax, no, relax, it's a robot, it's smart!
(Laughter) See, the three-year-old kids, they don't worry about it.
It's grown-ups that get really upset.
(Laughter) We'll just put some crap here.
(Laughter) Okay.
(Laughter) I don't know if you see -- so, I put a bunch of Rice Krispies there, I put some pennies, let's just shoot it at that, see if it cleans up.
Yeah, OK. So -- we'll leave that for later.
(Applause) Part of the trick was building a better cleaning mechanism, actually; the intelligence on board was fairly simple.
And that's true with a lot of robots.
We've all, I think, become, sort of computational chauvinists, and think that computation is everything, but the mechanics still matter.
Here's another robot, the PackBot, that we've been building for a bunch of years.
It's a military surveillance robot, to go in ahead of troops -- looking at caves, for instance.
But we had to make it fairly robust, much more robust than the robots we build in our labs.
(Laughter) On board that robot is a PC running Linux.
It can withstand a 400G shock. The robot has local intelligence: it can flip itself over, can get itself into communication range, can go upstairs by itself, et cetera.
Okay, so it's doing local navigation there.
A soldier gives it a command to go upstairs, and it does.
That was not a controlled descent.
(Laughter) Now it's going to head off.
And the big breakthrough for these robots, really, was September 11th.
We had the robots down at the World Trade Center late that evening.
Couldn't do a lot in the main rubble pile, things were just too -- there was nothing left to do.
But we did go into all the surrounding buildings that had been evacuated, and searched for possible survivors in the buildings that were too dangerous to go into.
Let's run this video.
Reporter: ...battlefield companions are helping to reduce the combat risks.
Nick Robertson has that story.
Rodney Brooks: Can we have another one of these?
Okay, good.
So, this is a corporal who had seen a robot two weeks previously.
He's sending robots into caves, looking at what's going on.
The robot's being totally autonomous.
The worst thing that's happened in the cave so far was one of the robots fell down ten meters.
So one year ago, the US military didn't have these robots.
Now they're on active duty in Afghanistan every day.
And that's one of the reasons they say a robot invasion is happening.
There's a sea change happening in how -- where technology's going.
Thanks.
And over the next couple of months, we're going to be sending robots in production down producing oil wells to get that last few years of oil out of the ground.
Very hostile environments, 150 C, 10,000 PSI.
Autonomous robots going down, doing this sort of work.
But robots like this, they're a little hard to program.
How, in the future, are we going to program our robots and make them easier to use?
And I want to actually use a robot here -- a robot named Chris -- stand up. Yeah. Okay.
Come over here. Now notice, he thinks robots have to be a bit stiff.
He sort of does that. But I'm going to -- Chris Anderson: I'm just British. RB: Oh.
(Laughter) (Applause) I'm going to show this robot a task. It's a very complex task.
Now notice, he nodded there, he was giving me some indication he was understanding the flow of communication.
And if I'd said something completely bizarre he would have looked askance at me, and regulated the conversation.
So now I brought this up in front of him.
I'd looked at his eyes, and I saw his eyes looked at this bottle top.
And I'm doing this task here, and he's checking up.
His eyes are going back and forth up to me, to see what I'm looking at -- so we've got shared attention.
And so I do this task, and he looks, and he looks to me to see what's happening next. And now I'll give him the bottle, and we'll see if he can do the task. Can you do that?
(Laughter) Okay. He's pretty good. Yeah. Good, good, good.
I didn't show you how to do that.
Now see if you can put it back together.
(Laughter) And he thinks a robot has to be really slow.
Good robot, that's good.
So we saw a bunch of things there.
We saw when we're interacting, we're trying to show someone how to do something, we direct their visual attention.
The other thing communicates their internal state to us, whether he's understanding or not, regulates a social interaction.
There was shared attention looking at the same sort of thing, and recognizing socially communicated reinforcement at the end.
And we've been trying to put that into our lab robots because we think this is how you're going to want to interact with robots in the future.
I just want to show you one technical diagram here.
The most important thing for building a robot that you can interact with socially is its visual attention system.
Because what it pays attention to is what it's seeing and interacting with, and what you're understanding what it's doing.
So in the videos I'm about to show you, you're going to see a visual attention system on a robot which has -- it looks for skin tone in HSV space, so it works across all human colorings.
It looks for highly saturated colors, from toys.
And it looks for things that move around.
And it weights those together into an attention window, and it looks for the highest-scoring place -- the stuff where the most interesting stuff is happening -- and that is what its eyes then segue to.
And it looks right at that.
At the same time, some top-down sort of stuff: might decide that it's lonely and look for skin tone, or might decide that it's bored and look for a toy to play with.
And so these weights change.
And over here on the right, this is what we call the Steven Spielberg memorial module.
Did people see the movie "AI"? (Audience: Yes.) RB: Yeah, it was really bad, but -- remember, especially when Haley Joel Osment, the little robot, looked at the blue fairy for 2,000 years without taking his eyes off it?
Well, this gets rid of that, because this is a habituation Gaussian that gets negative, and more and more intense as it looks at one thing.
And it gets bored, so it will then look away at something else.
So, once you've got that -- and here's a robot, here's Kismet, looking around for a toy. You can tell what it's looking at.
You can estimate its gaze direction from those eyeballs covering its camera, and you can tell when it's actually seeing the toy.
And it's got a little bit of an emotional response here.
(Laughter) But it's still going to pay attention if something more significant comes into its field of view -- such as Cynthia Breazeal, the builder of this robot, from the right.
It sees her, pays attention to her.
Kismet has an underlying, three-dimensional emotional space, a vector space, of where it is emotionally.
And at different places in that space, it expresses -- can we have the volume on here?
Can you hear that now, out there? (Audience: Yeah.) Kismet: Do you really think so? Do you really think so?
Do you really think so?
RB: So it's expressing its emotion through its face and the prosody in its voice.
And when I was dealing with my robot over here, Chris, the robot, was measuring the prosody in my voice, and so we have the robot measure prosody for four basic messages that mothers give their children pre-linguistically.
Here we've got naive subjects praising the robot: Voice: Nice robot.
You're such a cute little robot.
(Laughter) RB: And the robot's reacting appropriately.
Voice: ...very good, Kismet.
(Laughter) Voice: Look at my smile.
RB: It smiles. She imitates the smile. This happens a lot.
These are naive subjects.
Here we asked them to get the robot's attention and indicate when they have the robot's attention.
Voice: Hey, Kismet, ah, there it is.
RB: So she realizes she has the robot's attention.
Voice: Kismet, do you like the toy? Oh.
RB: Now, here they're asked to prohibit the robot, and this first woman really pushes the robot into an emotional corner.
Voice: No. No. You're not to do that. No.
(Laughter) Not appropriate. No. No.
(Laughter) RB: I'm going to leave it at that.
We put that together. Then we put in turn taking.
When we talk to someone, we talk.
Then we sort of raise our eyebrows, move our eyes, give the other person the idea it's their turn to talk.
And then they talk, and then we pass the baton back and forth between each other.
So we put this in the robot.
We got a bunch of naive subjects in, we didn't tell them anything about the robot, sat them down in front of the robot and said, talk to the robot.
Now what they didn't know was, the robot wasn't understanding a word they said, and that the robot wasn't speaking English.
It was just saying random English phonemes.
And I want you to watch carefully, at the beginning of this, where this person, Ritchie, who happened to talk to the robot for 25 minutes -- (Laughter) -- says, "I want to show you something.
I want to show you my watch."
And he brings the watch center, into the robot's field of vision, points to it, gives it a motion cue, and the robot looks at the watch quite successfully.
We don't know whether he understood or not that the robot -- Notice the turn-taking.
Ritchie: OK, I want to show you something. OK, this is a watch that my girlfriend gave me.
Robot: Oh, cool.
Ritchie: Yeah, look, it's got a little blue light in it too. I almost lost it this week.
(Laughter) RB: So it's making eye contact with him, following his eyes.
Ritchie: Can you do the same thing? Robot: Yeah, sure.
RB: And they successfully have that sort of communication.
And here's another aspect of the sorts of things that Chris and I were doing.
This is another robot, Cog.
They first make eye contact, and then, when Christie looks over at this toy, the robot estimates her gaze direction and looks at the same thing that she's looking at.
(Laughter) So we're going to see more and more of this sort of robot over the next few years in labs.
But then the big questions, two big questions that people ask me are: if we make these robots more and more human-like, will we accept them, will we -- will they need rights eventually?
And the other question people ask me is, will they want to take over?
(Laughter) And on the first -- you know, this has been a very Hollywood theme with lots of movies. You probably recognize these characters here -- where in each of these cases, the robots want more respect.
Well, do you ever need to give robots respect?
They're just machines, after all.
But I think, you know, we have to accept that we are just machines.
After all, that's certainly what modern molecular biology says about us.
You don't see a description of how, you know, Molecule A, you know, comes up and docks with this other molecule.
And it's moving forward, you know, propelled by various charges, and then the soul steps in and tweaks those molecules so that they connect.
It's all mechanistic. We are mechanism.
If we are machines, then in principle at least, we should be able to build machines out of other stuff, which are just as alive as we are.
But I think for us to admit that, we have to give up on our special-ness, in a certain way.
And we've had the retreat from special-ness under the barrage of science and technology many times over the last few hundred years, at least.
500 years ago we had to give up the idea that we are the center of the universe when the earth started to go around the sun; 150 years ago, with Darwin, we had to give up the idea we were different from animals.
And to imagine -- you know, it's always hard for us.
Recently we've been battered with the idea that maybe we didn't even have our own creation event, here on earth, which people didn't like much. And then the human genome said, maybe we only have 35,000 genes. And that was really -- people didn't like that, we've got more genes than that.
We don't like to give up our special-ness, so, you know, having the idea that robots could really have emotions, or that robots could be living creatures -- I think is going to be hard for us to accept.
But we're going to come to accept it over the next 50 years or so.
And the second question is, will the machines want to take over?
And here the standard scenario is that we create these things, they grow, we nurture them, they learn a lot from us, and then they start to decide that we're pretty boring, slow.
They want to take over from us.
And for those of you that have teenagers, you know what that's like.
(Laughter) But Hollywood extends it to the robots.
And the question is, you know, will someone accidentally build a robot that takes over from us?
And that's sort of like this lone guy in the backyard, you know -- "I accidentally built a 747."
I don't think that's going to happen.
And I don't think -- (Laughter) -- I don't think we're going to deliberately build robots that we're uncomfortable with.
We'll -- you know, they're not going to have a super bad robot.
Before that has to come to be a mildly bad robot, and before that a not so bad robot.
(Laughter) And we're just not going to let it go that way.
(Laughter) So, I think I'm going to leave it at that: the robots are coming, we don't have too much to worry about, it's going to be a lot of fun, and I hope you all enjoy the journey over the next 50 years.
(Applause)
On August 28th, 1963, Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his I Have a Dream speech at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.
That day, nearly a quarter million people gathered on the national mall to demand an end to the discrimination, segregation, violence, and economic exclusion black people still faced across the United States.
None of it would have been possible without the marchs chief organizer  a man named Bayard Rustin.
Rustin grew up in a Quaker household, and began peacefully protesting racial segregation in high school.
He remained committed to pacifism throughout his life, and was jailed in 1944 as a conscientious objector to World War II.
During his two-year imprisonment, he protested the segregated facilities from within.
Wherever Rustin went, he organized and advocated, and was constantly attuned to the methods, groups, and people who could help further messages of equality.
He joined the Communist Party when black Americans civil rights were one of its priorities, but soon became disillusioned by the partys authoritarian leanings and left.
In 1948, he traveled to India to learn the peaceful resistance strategies of the recently assassinated Mahatma Gandhi.
He returned to the United States armed with strategies for peaceful protest, including civil disobedience.
He began to work with Martin Luther King Jr in 1955, and shared these ideas with him.
As Kings prominence increased, Rustin became his main advisor, as well as a key strategist in the broader civil rights movement.
He brought his organizing expertise to the 1956 bus boycotts in Montgomery, Alabama in fact, he had organized and participated in a transportation protest that helped inspire the boycotts almost a decade before.
His largest-scale organizing project came in 1963, when he led the planning for the national march on Washington.
The possibility of riots that could injure marchers and undermine their message of peaceful protest was a huge concern.
Rustin not only worked with the DC police and hospitals to prepare, but organized and trained a volunteer force of 2,000 security marshals.
In spite of his deft management, some of the other organizers did not want Rustin to march in front with other leaders from the south, because of his homosexuality.
Despite these slights, Rustin maintained his focus, and on the day of the march he delivered the marchers' demands in a speech directed at President John F. Kennedy.
The march itself proceeded smoothly, without any violence.
It has been credited with helping pass the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which ended segregation in public places and banned employment discrimination, and the 1965 Voting Rights Act, which outlawed discriminatory voting practices.
In spite of his decades of service, Rustins positions on certain political issues were unpopular among his peers.
Some thought he wasnt critical enough of the Vietnam War, or that he was too eager to collaborate with the political establishment including the president and congress.
Others were uncomfortable with his former communist affiliation.
But ultimately, both his belief in collaboration with the government and his membership to the communist party had been driven by his desire to maximize tangible gains in liberties for black Americans, and to do so as quickly as possible.
Rustin was passed over for several influential roles in the 1960s and 70s, but he never stopped his activism.
In the 1980s, he publicly came out as gay, and was instrumental in drawing attention to the AIDS crisis until his death in 1987.
In 2013, fifty years after the March On Washington, President Barack Obama posthumously awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom, praising Rustins march towards true equality, no matter who we are or who we love.
I was here about four years ago, talking about the relationship of design and happiness.
At the very end of it, I showed a list under that title.
I learned very few things in addition since (Laughter) -- but made a whole number of them into projects since.
These are inflatable monkeys in every city in Scotland: "Everybody always thinks they are right."
They were combined in the media.
"Drugs are fun in the beginning but become a drag later on."
We're doing changing media.
This is a projection that can see the viewer as the viewer walks by.
You can't help but actually ripping that spider web apart.
All of these things are pieces of graphic design.
We do them for our clients.
They are commissioned.
I would never have the money to actually pay for the installment or pay for all the billboards or the production of these, so there's always a client attached to them.
These are 65,000 coat hangers in a street that's lined with fashion stores.
"Worrying solves nothing."
"Money does not make me happy" appeared first as double-page spreads in a magazine.
The printer lost the file, didn't tell us.
When the magazine -- actually, when I got the subscription -- it was 12 following pages.
It said, "Money does does make me happy."
And a friend of mine in Austria felt so sorry for me that he talked the largest casino owner in Linz into letting us wrap his building.
So this is the big pedestrian zone in Linz.
It just says "Money," and if you look down the side street, it says, "does not make me happy."
We had a show that just came down last week in New York.
We steamed up the windows permanently, and every hour we had a different designer come in and write these things that they've learned into the steam in the window.
Everybody participated -- Milton Glaser, Massimo Vignelli.
Singapore was quite in discussion.
This is a little spot that we filmed there that's to be displayed on the large JumboTrons in Singapore.
And, of course, it's one that's dear to my heart, because all of these sentiments -- some banal, some a bit more profound -- all originally had come out of my diary.
And I do go often into the diary and check if I wanted to change something about the situation.
If it's -- see it for a long enough time, I actually do something about it.
And the very last one is a billboard.
This is our roof in New York, the roof of the studio.
This is newsprint plus stencils that lie on the newsprint.
We let that lie around in the sun.
As you all know, newsprint yellows significantly in the sun.
After a week, we took the stencils and the leaves off, shipped the newsprints to Lisbon to a very sunny spot, so on day one the billboard said, "Complaining is silly. Either act or forget."
Three days later it faded, and a week later, no more complaining anywhere.
(Laughter) Thank you so much.
(Applause)
I'm going to begin with a scary question: Are we headed toward a future without jobs?
The remarkable progress that we're seeing in technologies like self-driving cars has led to an explosion of interest in this question, but because it's something that's been asked so many times in the past, maybe what we should really be asking is whether this time is really different.
The fear that automation might displace workers and potentially lead to lots of unemployment goes back at a minimum 200 years to the Luddite revolts in England.
And since then, this concern has come up again and again.
I'm going to guess that most of you have probably never heard of the Triple Revolution report, but this was a very prominent report.
It was put together by a brilliant group of people -- it actually included two Nobel laureates -- and this report was presented to the President of the United States, and it argued that the US was on the brink of economic and social upheaval because industrial automation was going to put millions of people out of work.
Now, that report was delivered to President Lyndon Johnson in March of 1964.
So that's now over 50 years, and, of course, that hasn't really happened.
And that's been the story again and again.
This alarm has been raised repeatedly, but it's always been a false alarm.
And because it's been a false alarm, it's led to a very conventional way of thinking about this.
And that says essentially that yes, technology may devastate entire industries.
It may wipe out whole occupations and types of work.
But at the same time, of course, progress is going to lead to entirely new things.
So there will be new industries that will arise in the future, and those industries, of course, will have to hire people.
There'll be new kinds of work that will appear, and those might be things that today we can't really even imagine.
And that has been the story so far, and it's been a positive story.
It turns out that the new jobs that have been created have generally been a lot better than the old ones.
They have, for example, been more engaging.
They've been in safer, more comfortable work environments, and, of course, they've paid more.
So it has been a positive story.
That's the way things have played out so far.
But there is one particular class of worker for whom the story has been quite different.
For these workers, technology has completely decimated their work, and it really hasn't created any new opportunities at all.
And these workers, of course, are horses.
(Laughter) So I can ask a very provocative question: Is it possible that at some point in the future, a significant fraction of the human workforce is going to be made redundant in the way that horses were?
Now, you might have a very visceral, reflexive reaction to that.
You might say, "That's absurd.
How can you possibly compare human beings to horses?"
Horses, of course, are very limited, and when cars and trucks and tractors came along, horses really had nowhere else to turn.
People, on the other hand, are intelligent; we can learn, we can adapt.
And in theory, that ought to mean that we can always find something new to do, and that we can always remain relevant to the future economy.
But here's the really critical thing to understand.
The machines that will threaten workers in the future are really nothing like those cars and trucks and tractors that displaced horses.
The future is going to be full of thinking, learning, adapting machines.
And what that really means is that technology is finally beginning to encroach on that fundamental human capability -- the thing that makes us so different from horses, and the very thing that, so far, has allowed us to stay ahead of the march of progress and remain relevant, and, in fact, indispensable to the economy.
So what is it that is really so different about today's information technology relative to what we've seen in the past?
I would point to three fundamental things.
The first thing is that we have seen this ongoing process of exponential acceleration.
I know you all know about Moore's law, but in fact, it's more broad-based than that; it extends in many cases, for example, to software, it extends to communications, bandwidth and so forth.
But the really key thing to understand is that this acceleration has now been going on for a really long time.
In fact, it's been going on for decades.
If you measure from the late 1950s, when the first integrated circuits were fabricated, we've seen something on the order of 30 doublings in computational power since then.
That's just an extraordinary number of times to double any quantity, and what it really means is that we're now at a point where we're going to see just an extraordinary amount of absolute progress, and, of course, things are going to continue to also accelerate from this point.
So as we look forward to the coming years and decades, I think that means that we're going to see things that we're really not prepared for.
We're going to see things that astonish us.
The second key thing is that the machines are, in a limited sense, beginning to think.
And by this, I don't mean human-level AI, or science fiction artificial intelligence; I simply mean that machines and algorithms are making decisions.
They're solving problems, and most importantly, they're learning.
In fact, if there's one technology that is truly central to this and has really become the driving force behind this, it's machine learning, which is just becoming this incredibly powerful, disruptive, scalable technology.
One of the best examples I've seen of that recently was what Google's DeepMind division was able to do with its AlphaGo system.
Now, this is the system that was able to beat the best player in the world at the ancient game of Go.
Now, at least to me, there are two things that really stand out about the game of Go.
One is that as you're playing the game, the number of configurations that the board can be in is essentially infinite.
There are actually more possibilities than there are atoms in the universe.
So what that means is, you're never going to be able to build a computer to win at the game of Go the way chess was approached, for example, which is basically to throw brute-force computational power at it.
So clearly, a much more sophisticated, thinking-like approach is needed.
The second thing that really stands out is that, if you talk to one of the championship Go players, this person cannot necessarily even really articulate what exactly it is they're thinking about as they play the game.
It's often something that's very intuitive, it's almost just like a feeling about which move they should make.
So given those two qualities, I would say that playing Go at a world champion level really ought to be something that's safe from automation, and the fact that it isn't should really raise a cautionary flag for us.
And the reason is that we tend to draw a very distinct line, and on one side of that line are all the jobs and tasks that we perceive as being on some level fundamentally routine and repetitive and predictable.
And we know that these jobs might be in different industries, they might be in different occupations and at different skill levels, but because they are innately predictable, we know they're probably at some point going to be susceptible to machine learning, and therefore, to automation.
And make no mistake -- that's a lot of jobs.
But then on the other side of that line, we have all the jobs that require some capability that we perceive as being uniquely human, and these are the jobs that we think are safe.
Now, based on what I know about the game of Go, I would've guessed that it really ought to be on the safe side of that line.
But the fact that it isn't, and that Google solved this problem, suggests that that line is going to be very dynamic.
It's going to shift, and it's going to shift in a way that consumes more and more jobs and tasks that we currently perceive as being safe from automation.
The other key thing to understand is that this is by no means just about low-wage jobs or blue-collar jobs, or jobs and tasks done by people that have relatively low levels of education.
There's lots of evidence to show that these technologies are rapidly climbing the skills ladder.
So we already see an impact on professional jobs -- tasks done by people like accountants, financial analysts, journalists, lawyers, radiologists and so forth.
So a lot of the assumptions that we make about the kind of occupations and tasks and jobs that are going to be threatened by automation in the future are very likely to be challenged going forward.
So as we put these trends together, I think what it shows is that we could very well end up in a future with significant unemployment.
Or at a minimum, we could face lots of underemployment or stagnant wages, maybe even declining wages.
And, of course, soaring levels of inequality.
All of that, of course, is going to put a terrific amount of stress on the fabric of society.
But beyond that, there's also a fundamental economic problem, and that arises because jobs are currently the primary mechanism that distributes income, and therefore purchasing power, to all the consumers that buy the products and services we're producing.
In order to have a vibrant market economy, you've got to have lots and lots of consumers that are really capable of buying the products and services that are being produced.
If you don't have that, then you run the risk of economic stagnation, or maybe even a declining economic spiral, as there simply aren't enough customers out there to buy the products and services being produced.
It's really important to realize that all of us as individuals rely on access to that market economy in order to be successful.
You can visualize that by thinking in terms of one really exceptional person.
Imagine for a moment you take, say, Steve Jobs, and you drop him on an island all by himself.
On that island, he's going to be running around, gathering coconuts just like anyone else.
He's really not going to be anything special, and the reason, of course, is that there is no market for him to scale his incredible talents across.
So access to this market is really critical to us as individuals, and also to the entire system in terms of it being sustainable.
So the question then becomes: What exactly could we do about this?
And I think you can view this through a very utopian framework.
You can imagine a future where we all have to work less, we have more time for leisure, more time to spend with our families, more time to do things that we find genuinely rewarding and so forth.
And I think that's a terrific vision.
That's something that we should absolutely strive to move toward.
But at the same time, I think we have to be realistic, and we have to realize that we're very likely to face a significant income distribution problem.
A lot of people are likely to be left behind.
And I think that in order to solve that problem, we're ultimately going to have to find a way to decouple incomes from traditional work.
And the best, more straightforward way I know to do that is some kind of a guaranteed income or universal basic income.
Now, basic income is becoming a very important idea.
It's getting a lot of traction and attention, there are a lot of important pilot projects and experiments going on throughout the world.
My own view is that a basic income is not a panacea; it's not necessarily a plug-and-play solution, but rather, it's a place to start.
It's an idea that we can build on and refine.
For example, one thing that I have written quite a lot about is the possibility of incorporating explicit incentives into a basic income.
To illustrate that, imagine that you are a struggling high school student.
Imagine that you are at risk of dropping out of school.
And yet, suppose you know that at some point in the future, no matter what, you're going to get the same basic income as everyone else.
Now, to my mind, that creates a very perverse incentive for you to simply give up and drop out of school.
So I would say, let's not structure things that way.
Instead, let's pay people who graduate from high school somewhat more than those who simply drop out.
And we can take that idea of building incentives into a basic income, and maybe extend it to other areas.
For example, we might create an incentive to work in the community to help others, or perhaps to do positive things for the environment, and so forth.
So by incorporating incentives into a basic income, we might actually improve it, and also, perhaps, take at least a couple of steps towards solving another problem that I think we're quite possibly going to face in the future, and that is, how do we all find meaning and fulfillment, and how do we occupy our time in a world where perhaps there's less demand for traditional work?
So by extending and refining a basic income, I think we can make it look better, and we can also, perhaps, make it more politically and socially acceptable and feasible -- and, of course, by doing that, we increase the odds that it will actually come to be.
I think one of the most fundamental, almost instinctive objections that many of us have to the idea of a basic income, or really to any significant expansion of the safety net, is this fear that we're going to end up with too many people riding in the economic cart, and not enough people pulling that cart.
And yet, really, the whole point I'm making here, of course, is that in the future, machines are increasingly going to be capable of pulling that cart for us.
That should give us more options for the way we structure our society and our economy, And I think eventually, it's going to go beyond simply being an option, and it's going to become an imperative.
The reason, of course, is that all of this is going to put such a degree of stress on our society, and also because jobs are that mechanism that gets purchasing power to consumers so they can then drive the economy.
If, in fact, that mechanism begins to erode in the future, then we're going to need to replace it with something else or we're going to face the risk that our whole system simply may not be sustainable.
But the bottom line here is that I really think that solving these problems, and especially finding a way to build a future economy that works for everyone, at every level of our society, is going to be one of the most important challenges that we all face in the coming years and decades.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When you walk around the place where you live, most of the times, you feel pretty safe and comfortable, right?
Now imagine if there were land mines buried right here, scattered around, and you'd never know when you might step on one.
That's how it is for many in my home country, Colombia.
As a result of a 50-year internal armed conflict, we have an undetermined number of land mines buried throughout the countryside, affecting more than one third of the Colombian population.
These anti-personnel mines are designed to maim, not to kill their targets.
The logic behind this, which is awful, is that more resources are taken up caring for an injured soldier than dealing with a person who has been killed.
I met Adriana Rodriguez about five years ago while I was working for the Colombian government as a documentary filmmaker.
During the conflict, she was forced to leave her house ...
with her kids in her arms.
One day, one of her neighbors was killed while he stepped on a land mine.
He was actually inside an abandoned house, not outside, a house exactly like the one Adriana was forced to leave.
Ever since, she has been living with the fear that she, or her children, might step on a land mine.
You know, the Colombian conflict has been running for so long that neither me nor my mom have seen our country in peace, and for someone like me, who has been living detached from all this suffering, there was only two options: either I get used to it, or I can try to change it with all my heart.
And I have to admit that for almost 30 years, I was getting used to it, you know?
But something changed for me when I met my wife.
She is a political scientist completely passionate about the Colombian armed conflict.
She helped me to understand how deeply our country has been affected by land mines and by war.
We decided to come here to the United States in search of new skills that would enable us to contribute in a fair way to our society, and maybe even help heal it.
While in grad school, I started developing an augmented reality, really broad application to help military personnel to deactivate land mines more safely.
During that time, I also realized that Colombia is not the only country in the world that has to worry about land mines.
In fact, more than 58 countries are still contaminated with any sort of explosive device.
Only in 2015, due to an escalation of war in countries like Libya, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen, the number of [land mine casualties] almost doubled, from 3,695 to 6,461 people.
Imagine that.
While some countries are trying to get rid of land mines, some others are increasing their use.
But what happens when a conflict that involved land mines comes to an end?
There are two consequences.
On the one hand, the internally displaced population will start returning to their lands, and on the other hand, hidden land mines are going to start exploding more often on the civilian side.
That's the reason why I decided to join the Computer Science Department at NYU, along with Professor Claudio Silva to start to develop an app called MineSafe.
MineSafe uses information from the community to suggest paths that have been declared as the most transited without accident or incident caused by a land mine.
These traffic patterns can also be used to determine the top priority zones to be de-mined.
Almost 15 million people are living now in the countryside of Colombia.
Imagine, for a moment, if we can crowdsource information from all of them to help people like Adriana and her children to find safe and reliable paths.
This information can not only be used for that.
This information can also help them to become more productive.
Farmers will be able to find which lands have been cleared from explosive devices, and in that way, they will be able to find new, fertile grounds to start growing food again.
MineSafe has now a partnership with the Colombian government for the initial pilot, and we have now some connections with Cambodia and Somalia as well.
This project is being funded by private money here in the United States, but we don't want to stop here.
We want to go big, and we want to scale the project to every single place where land mines are still a threat.
The Colombian armed conflict is finally coming to an end, but the consequences of years of war are still buried under our feet.
We at MineSafe are working to help both people and land to find peace.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I could fit all movies ever made inside of this tube.
If you can't see it, that's kind of the point.
(Laughter) Before we understand how this is possible, it's important to understand the value of this feat.
All of our thoughts and actions these days, through photos and videos -- even our fitness activities -- are stored as digital data.
Aside from running out of space on our phones, we rarely think about our digital footprint.
But humanity has collectively generated more data in the last few years than all of preceding human history.
Big data has become a big problem.
Digital storage is really expensive, and none of these devices that we have really stand the test of time.
There's this nonprofit website called the Internet Archive.
In addition to free books and movies, you can access web pages as far back as 1996.
Now, this is very tempting, but I decided to go back and look at the TED website's very humble beginnings.
As you can see, it's changed quite a bit in the last 30 years.
So this led me to the first-ever TED, back in 1984, and it just so happened to be a Sony executive explaining how a compact disk works.
(Laughter) Now, it's really incredible to be able to go back in time and access this moment.
It's also really fascinating that after 30 years, after that first TED, we're still talking about digital storage.
Now, if we look back another 30 years, IBM released the first-ever hard drive back in 1956.
Here it is being loaded for shipping in front of a small audience.
It held the equivalent of one MP3 song and weighed over one ton.
At 10,000 dollars a megabyte, I don't think anyone in this room would be interested in buying this thing, except maybe as a collector's item.
But it's the best we could do at the time.
We've come such a long way in data storage.
Devices have evolved dramatically.
But all media eventually wear out or become obsolete.
If someone handed you a floppy drive today to back up your presentation, you'd probably look at them kind of strange, maybe laugh, but you'd have no way to use the damn thing.
These devices can no longer meet our storage needs, although some of them can be repurposed.
All technology eventually dies or is lost, along with our data, all of our memories.
There's this illusion that the storage problem has been solved, but really, we all just externalize it.
We don't worry about storing our emails and our photos.
They're just in the cloud.
But behind the scenes, storage is problematic.
After all, the cloud is just a lot of hard drives.
Now, most digital data, we could argue, is not really critical.
Surely, we could just delete it.
But how can we really know what's important today?
We've learned so much about human history from drawings and writings in caves, from stone tablets.
We've deciphered languages from the Rosetta Stone.
You know, we'll never really have the whole story, though.
Our data is our story, even more so today.
We won't have our record recorded on stone tablets.
But we don't have to choose what is important now.
There's a way to store it all.
It turns out that there's a solution that's been around for a few billion years, and it's actually in this tube.
DNA is nature's oldest storage device.
After all, it contains all the information necessary to build and maintain a human being.
But what makes DNA so great?
Well, let's take our own genome as an example.
If we were to print out all three billion A's, T's, C's and G's on a standard font, standard format, and then we were to stack all of those papers, it would be about 130 meters high, somewhere between the Statue of Liberty and the Washington Monument.
Now, if we converted all those A's, T's, C's and G's to digital data, to zeroes and ones, it would total a few gigs.
And that's in each cell of our body.
We have more than 30 trillion cells.
You get the idea: DNA can store a ton of information in a minuscule space.
DNA is also very durable, and it doesn't even require electricity to store it.
We know this because scientists have recovered DNA from ancient humans that lived hundreds of thousands of years ago.
One of those is tzi the Iceman.
Turns out, he's Austrian.
(Laughter) He was found high, well-preserved, in the mountains between Italy and Austria, and it turns out that he has living genetic relatives here in Austria today.
So one of you could be a cousin of tzi.
(Laughter) The point is that we have a better chance of recovering information from an ancient human than we do from an old phone.
It's also much less likely that we'll lose the ability to read DNA than any single man-made device.
Every single new storage format requires a new way to read it.
We'll always be able to read DNA.
If we can no longer sequence, we have bigger problems than worrying about data storage.
Storing data on DNA is not new.
Nature's been doing it for several billion years.
In fact, every living thing is a DNA storage device.
But how do we store data on DNA?
This is Photo 51.
It's the first-ever photo of DNA, taken about 60 years ago.
This is around the time that that same hard drive was released by IBM.
So really, our understanding of digital storage and of DNA have coevolved.
We first learned to sequence, or read DNA, and very soon after, how to write it, or synthesize it.
This is much like how we learn a new language.
And now we have the ability to read, write and copy DNA.
We do it in the lab all the time.
So anything, really anything, that can be stored as zeroes and ones can be stored in DNA.
To store something digitally, like this photo, we convert it to bits, or binary digits.
Each pixel in a black-and-white photo is simply a zero or a one.
And we can write DNA much like an inkjet printer can print letters on a page.
We just have to convert our data, all of those zeroes and ones, to A's, T's, C's and G's, and then we send this to a synthesis company.
So we write it, we can store it, and when we want to recover our data, we just sequence it.
Now, the fun part of all of this is deciding what files to include.
We're serious scientists, so we had to include a manuscript for good posterity.
We also included a $50 Amazon gift card -- don't get too excited, it's already been spent, someone decoded it -- as well as an operating system, one of the first movies ever made and a Pioneer plaque.
Some of you might have seen this.
It has a depiction of a typical -- apparently -- male and female, and our approximate location in the Solar System, in case the Pioneer spacecraft ever encounters extraterrestrials.
So once we decided what sort of files we want to encode, we package up the data, convert those zeroes and ones to A's, T's, C's and G's, and then we just send this file off to a synthesis company.
And this is what we got back.
Our files were in this tube.
All we had to do was sequence it.
This all sounds pretty straightforward, but the difference between a really cool, fun idea and something we can actually use is overcoming these practical challenges.
Now, while DNA is more robust than any man-made device, it's not perfect.
It does have some weaknesses.
We recover our message by sequencing the DNA, and every time data is retrieved, we lose the DNA.
That's just part of the sequencing process.
We don't want to run out of data, but luckily, there's a way to copy the DNA that's even cheaper and easier than synthesizing it.
We actually tested a way to make 200 trillion copies of our files, and we recovered all the data without error.
So sequencing also introduces errors into our DNA, into the A's, T's, C's and G's.
Nature has a way to deal with this in our cells.
But our data is stored in synthetic DNA in a tube, so we had to find our own way to overcome this problem.
We decided to use an algorithm that was used to stream videos.
When you're streaming a video, you're essentially trying to recover the original video, the original file.
When we're trying to recover our original files, we're simply sequencing.
But really, both of these processes are about recovering enough zeroes and ones to put our data back together.
And so, because of our coding strategy, we were able to package up all of our data in a way that allowed us to make millions and trillions of copies and still always recover all of our files back.
This is the movie we encoded.
It's one of the first movies ever made, and now the first to be copied more than 200 trillion times on DNA.
Soon after our work was published, we participated in an "Ask Me Anything" on the website reddit.
If you're a fellow nerd, you're very familiar with this website.
Most questions were thoughtful.
Some were comical.
For example, one user wanted to know when we would have a literal thumb drive.
Now, the thing is, our DNA already stores everything needed to make us who we are.
It's a lot safer to store data on DNA in synthetic DNA in a tube.
Writing and reading data from DNA is obviously a lot more time-consuming than just saving all your files on a hard drive -- for now.
So initially, we should focus on long-term storage.
Most data are ephemeral.
It's really hard to grasp what's important today, or what will be important for future generations.
But the point is, we don't have to decide today.
There's this great program by UNESCO called the "Memory of the World" program.
It's been created to preserve historical materials that are considered of value to all of humanity.
Items are nominated to be added to the collection, including that film that we encoded.
While a wonderful way to preserve human heritage, it doesn't have to be a choice.
Instead of asking the current generation -- us -- what might be important in the future, we could store everything in DNA.
Storage is not just about how many bytes but how well we can actually store the data and recover it.
There's always been this tension between how much data we can generate and how much we can recover and how much we can store.
Every advance in writing data has required a new way to read it.
We can no longer read old media.
How many of you even have a disk drive in your laptop, never mind a floppy drive?
This will never be the case with DNA.
As long as we're around, DNA is around, and we'll find a way to sequence it.
Archiving the world around us is part of human nature.
This is the progress we've made in digital storage in 60 years, at a time when we were only beginning to understand DNA.
Yet, we've made similar progress in half that time with DNA sequencers, and as long as we're around, DNA will never be obsolete.
Thank you.
(Applause)
To avoid dangerous climate change, we're going to need to cut emissions rapidly.
That should be a pretty uncontentious statement, certainly with this audience.
But here's something that's slightly more contentious: it's not going to be enough.
We will munch our way through our remaining carbon budget for one and a half degrees in a few short years, and the two degree budget in about two decades.
We need to not only cut emissions extremely rapidly, we also need to take carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere.
Thank you.
(Laughter) I work assessing a whole range of these proposed techniques to see if they can work.
We could use plants to take CO2 out, and then store it in trees, in the soil, deep underground or in the oceans.
We could build large machines, so-called artificial trees, that will scrub CO2 from the air.
For these ideas to be feasible, we need to understand whether they can be applied at a vast scale in a way that is safe, economic and socially acceptable.
All of these ideas come with tradeoffs.
None of them are perfect, but many have potential.
It's unlikely that any one of them will solve it on its own.
There is no silver bullet, but potentially together, they may form the silver buckshot that we need to stop climate change in its tracks.
I'm working independently on one particular idea which uses natural gas to generate electricity in a way that takes carbon dioxide out of the air.
Huh? How does that work?
So the Origen Power Process feeds natural gas into a fuel cell.
About half the chemical energy is converted into electricity, and the remainder into heat, which is used to break down limestone into lime and carbon dioxide.
Now at this point, you're probably thinking that I'm nuts.
It's actually generating carbon dioxide.
But the key point is, all of the carbon dioxide generated, both from the fuel cell and from the lime kiln, is pure, and that's really important, because it means you can either use that carbon dioxide or you can store it away deep underground at low cost.
And then the lime that you produce can be used in industrial processes, and in being used, it scrubs CO2 out of the air.
Overall, the process is carbon negative.
It removes carbon dioxide from the air.
If you normally generate electricity from natural gas, you emit about 400 grams of CO2 into the air for every kilowatt-hour.
With this process, that figure is minus 600.
At the moment, power generation is responsible for about a quarter of all carbon dioxide emissions.
Hypothetically, if you replaced all power generation with this process, then you would not only eliminate all of the emissions from power generation but you would start removing emissions from other sectors as well, potentially cutting 60 percent of overall carbon emissions.
You could even use the lime to add it directly to seawater to counteract ocean acidification, one of the other issues that is caused by CO2 in the atmosphere.
In fact, you get more bang for your buck.
You absorb about twice as much carbon dioxide when you add it to seawater as when you use it industrially.
But this is where it gets really complicated.
While counteracting ocean acidification is a good thing, we don't fully understand what the environmental consequences are, and so we need to assess whether this treatment is actually better than the disease that it is seeking to cure.
We need to put in place step-by-step governance for experiments to assess this safely.
And the scale: to avoid dangerous climate change, we are going to need to remove trillions -- and yes, that's trillions with a T -- trillions of tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in the decades ahead.
It will cost a few percent of GDP -- think defense-sized expenditure, lots of industrial activity and inevitably harmful side effects.
But if the scale seems enormous, it is only because of the scale of the problem that we are seeking to solve.
It's enormous as well.
We can no longer avoid these thorny issues.
We face risks whichever way we turn: a world changed by climate change or a world changed by climate change and our efforts to counter climate change.
Would that it were not so, but we can no longer afford to close our eyes, block our ears, and say la-la-la.
We need to grow up and face the consequences of our actions.
(Applause) Does talk of curing climate change undermine the will to cut emissions?
This is a real concern, so we need to emphasize the paramount importance of reducing emissions and how speculative these ideas are.
But having done so, we still need to examine them.
Can we cure climate change?
I don't know, but we certainly can't if we don't try.
We need ambition without arrogance.
We need the ambition to restore the atmosphere, to draw down carbon dioxide back to a level that is compatible with a stable climate and healthy oceans.
This will be an enormous undertaking.
You could describe it as a cathedral project.
Those involved at the outset may draft the plans and dig the foundations, but they will not raise the spire to its full height.
That task, that privilege, belongs to our descendants.
None of us will see that day, but we must start in the hope that future generations will be able to finish the job.
So, do you want to change the world?
I don't.
I do not seek the change the world, but rather keep it as it's meant to be.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thanks. I just want to ask you a couple of other questions.
Tell us a bit more about this idea of putting lime in the ocean.
I mean, on the face of it, it's pretty compelling -- anti-ocean acidification -- and it absorbs more CO2.
You talked about, we need to do an experiment on this.
What would a responsible experiment look like?
Tim Kruger: So I think you need to do a series of experiments, but you need to do them just very small stage-by-stage.
In the same way, when you're trialing a new drug, you wouldn't just go into human trials straight off.
You would do a small experiment.
And so the first things to do are experiments entirely on land, in special containers, away from the environment.
And then once you are confident that that can be done safely, you move to the next stage.
If you're not confident, you don't.
But step by step.
CA: And who would fund such experiments?
Because they kind of impact the whole planet at some level.
Is that why nothing is happening on this?
TK: So I think you can do small-scale experiments in national waters, and then it's probably the requirement of national funders to do that.
But ultimately, if you wanted to counter ocean acidification in this way on a global scale, you would need to do it in international waters, and then you would need to have an international community working on it.
CA: Even in national waters, you know, the ocean's all connected.
That lime is going to get out there.
And people feel outraged about doing experiments on the planet, as we've heard.
How do you counter that?
TK: I think you touch on something which is really important.
It's about a social license to operate.
And I think it may be that it is impossible to do, but we need to have the courage to try, to move this forward, to see what we can do, and to engage openly.
And we need to engage with people in a transparent way.
We need to ask them beforehand.
And I think if we ask them, we have to be open to the possibility that the answer will come back, "No, don't do it."
CA: Thanks so much. That was really fascinating.
TK: Thank you. (Applause)
I want to argue to you that in fact, politics and religion, which are the two primary factors -- not the sole, but overwhelmingly, the primary factors -- which are driving towards a war which looks extremely likely -- bordering on the inevitable at this point, whether one is in favor of that or not -- that politics and religion are, in fact, themselves better conceptualized as kinds of technology, and subject to kinds of questions that we regularly consider in the space of conceptual design.
Here's what I mean. Politics and -- let's focus on the political system in particular question here, which is the system of democracy.
Democracy, as a type of politics, is a technology for the control and deployment of power.
You can deploy power in a wide range of ways.
The famous ones -- despotism is a good one; anarchy is a way to not deploy the power in any organized way, to do it in a radically diffused fashion; and democracy is a set of technologies, which have the effect of, in principle, diffusing the power source to a large number of people and then re-concentrating it in a smaller group of people who govern, and who themselves are, in principle, authorized to govern by virtue of what the broader public has done.
Now, consider religion -- in this case Islam, which is the religion that, in some direct sense, can be said to be precipitating what we're about to enter.
Let me say parenthetically why I think that's the case, because I think it's a potentially controversial statement.
I would put it in the following equation: no 9/11, no war.
At the beginning of the Bush administration, when President Bush, now President Bush, was running for president, he made it very clear that he was not interested in intervening broadly in the world.
In fact, the trend was for disengagement with the rest of the world.
That's why we heard about the backing away from the Kyoto protocol, for example.
After 9/11, the tables were turned.
And the president decided, with his advisors, to undertake some kind of an active intervention in the world around us.
That began with Afghanistan, and when Afghanistan went extremely smoothly and quickly, a decision was made through the technology of democracy -- again, notice, not a perfect technology -- but through the technology of democracy that this administration was going to push in the direction of another war -- this time, a war in Iraq.
Now, the reason I begin by saying "no 9/11, no war" is that we have to acknowledge that Islam, as interpreted by a very, very small, extremely radical group of people, was a precipitating cause of the 9/11 attacks -- the precipitating cause of the 9/11 attacks -- and as a consequence, at one degree of remove, the precipitating cause of the coming war that we're about to be engaged in.
And I would add that bin Laden and his followers are consciously devoted to the goal of creating a conflict between democracy, or at least capitalist democracy, on the one hand, and the world of Islam as they see and define it.
Now, how is Islam a technology in this conceptual apparatus?
Well, it's a technology for, first, salvation in its most basic sense.
It's meant to be a mechanism for construing the universe in a way that will bring about the salvation of the individual believer, but it's also meant by the Islamists -- and I use that term to mean people who believe that Islam -- they follow the slogan, Islam is the answer to a wide range of questions, whether they're social, or political, or personal, or spiritual.
Within the sphere of people who have that view, and it's a large number of people in the Muslim world who disagree with bin Laden in his application, but agree that Islam is the answer.
Islam represents a way of engaging the world through which one can achieve certain desirable goals.
And the goals from the perspective of Muslims are, in principle, peace, justice and equality, but on terms that correspond to traditional Muslim teachings.
Now, I don't want to leave a misimpression by identifying either of these propositions -- rather, either of these phenomena, democracy or Islam -- as technologies.
I don't want to suggest that they are a single thing that you can point to.
And I think a good way to prove this is simply to demonstrate to you what my thought process was when deciding what to put on the wall behind me when I spoke.
And I ran immediately into a conceptual problem: you can't show a picture of democracy.
You can show a slogan, or a symbol, or a sign that stands for democracy.
You can show the Capitol -- I had the same problem when I was designing the cover of my forthcoming book, in fact -- what do you put on the cover to show democracy?
And the same problem with respect to Islam.
You can show a mosque, or you can show worshippers, but there's not a straightforward way of depicting Islam.
That's because these are the kinds of concepts that are not susceptible to easy representation.
Now, it follows from that, that they're deeply contestable.
It follows from that that all of the people in the world who say that they are Muslims can, in principle, subscribe to a wide range of different interpretations of what Islam really is, and the same is true of democracy.
In other words, unlike the word hope, which one could look up in a dictionary and derive origins for, and, perhaps, reach some kind of a consensual use analysis, these are essentially contested concepts.
They're ideas about which people disagree in the deepest possible sense.
And as a consequence of this disagreement, it's very, very difficult for anyone to say, "I have the right version of Islam."
You know, post-9/11, we were treated to the amazing phenomenon of George W. Bush saying, "Islam means peace."
Well, so says George W. Bush.
Other people would say it means something else.
Some people would say that Islam means submission.
Other people would say it means an acknowledgement or recognition of God's sovereignty.
There are a wide range of different things that Islam can mean.
And ostensibly, the same is true of democracy.
Some people say that democracy consists basically in elections.
Other people say no, that's not enough, there have to be basic liberal rights: free speech, free press, equality of citizens.
These are contested points, and it's impossible to answer them by saying, "Ah ha, I looked in the right place, and I found out what these concepts mean."
Now, if Islam and democracy are at present in a moment of great confrontation, what does that mean?
Well, you could fit it into a range of different interpretative frameworks.
You could begin with the one that we began with a couple of days ago, which was fear.
Fear is not an implausible reaction with a war just around the corner and with a very, very high likelihood that many, many people are going to die as a consequence of this confrontation -- a confrontation which many, many people in the Muslim world do not want, many, many people in the American democracy do not want, many people elsewhere in the world do not want, but which nonetheless is favored by a large enough number of people -- at least in the relevant space, which is the United States -- to actually go forward. So fear is not a crazy response at all.
And I think that that's, in fact, probably the first appropriate response.
What I want to suggest to you, though, in the next couple of minutes is that there's also a hopeful response to this.
And the hopeful response derives from recognizing that Islam and democracy are technologies.
And by virtue of being technologies, they're manipulable.
And they're manipulable in ways that can produce some extremely positive outcomes.
What do I have in mind?
Well, all over the Muslim world there are people who take Islam deeply seriously, people who care about Islam, for whom it's a source either of faith, or of civilization, or of deep values, or just a source of powerful personal identity, who think and are saying loudly that Islam and democracy are in fact not in conflict, but are in fact deeply compatible.
And these Muslims -- and it's the vast majority of Muslims -- disagree profoundly with bin Laden's approach, profoundly.
And they furthermore think overwhelmingly -- again one can't speak of every person, but overwhelmingly, and one can find this by reading any of the sources that they have produced, and they're all over the Internet and in all sorts of languages -- one can see that they're saying that their concern in their own countries is primarily to free up themselves to have choice in the spheres of personal life, in the sphere of economics, in the sphere of politics, and, yes, in the sphere of religion, which is itself closely regulated in most of the Muslim world.
And many of these Muslims further say that their disagreement with the United States is that it, in the past and still in the present, has sided with autocratic rulers in the Muslim world in order to promote America's short-term interests.
Now, during the Cold War, that may have been a defensible position for the United States to take.
That's an academic question.
It may be that there was a great war to be fought between West and East, and it was necessary on the axis of democracy against communism.
And it was necessary in some way for these to contradict each other, and as a consequence you have to make friends wherever you can get them.
But now that the Cold War is over, there's nearly universal consensus in the Muslim world -- and pretty close to the same here in the United States, if you talk to people and ask them -- that in principle, there's no reason that democracy and Islam cannot co-exist.
And we see this among activist, practical Muslims, like the Muslims who are presently the elected, parliamentary, democratic government of Turkey, who are behaving pragmatically, not ideologically, who are promoting their own religious values, who are elected by their own people because they were perceived as honest and sincere because of their religious values, but who do not think that Islam and a democratic system of governance are fundamentally incompatible.
Now, you may say, but surely, what we've seen on television about Saudi Islam convinces us that it can't possibly be compatible with what we consider the core of democracy -- namely, free political choice, basic liberty and basic equality.
But I'm here to tell you that technologies are more malleable than that.
I'm here to tell you that many, many Muslims believe -- the vast majority, in fact -- in fact I think I would go so far as to say that many Muslims in Saudi Arabia believe that the core values of Islam, namely acknowledgement of God's sovereignty and basic human equality before God, are themselves compatible with liberty, equality and free political choice.
And there are Muslims, many Muslims out there, who are saying precisely this.
And they're making this argument wherever they're permitted to make it.
But their governments, needless to say, are relatively threatened by this.
And for the most part try to stop them from making this argument.
So, for example, a group of young activists in Egypt try to form a party known as the Center Party, which advocated the compatibility of Islam and democracy.
They weren't even allowed to form a party.
They were actually blocked from even forming a party under the political system there. Why?
Because they would have done extraordinarily well.
In the most recent elections in the Muslim world -- which are those in Pakistan, those in Morocco and those in Turkey -- in each case, people who present themselves to the electorate as Islamic democrats were far and away the most successful vote-getters every place they were allowed to run freely.
So in Morocco, for example, they finished third in the political race but they were only allowed to contest half the seats.
So had they contested a larger number of the seats, they would have done even better.
Now what I want to suggest to you is that the reason for hope in this case is that we are on the edge of a real transformation in the Muslim world.
And that's a transformation in which many sincerely believing Muslims -- who care very, very deeply about their traditions, who do not want to compromise those values -- believe, through the malleability of the technology of democracy and the malleability and synthetic capability of the technology of Islam, that these two ideas can work together.
Now what would that look like?
What does it mean to say that there's an Islamic democracy?
Well, one thing is, it's not going to look identical to democracy as we know it in the United States.
That may be a good thing, in light of some of the criticisms we've heard today -- for example, in the regulatory context -- of what democracy produces.
It will also not look exactly the way either the people in this room, or Muslims out in the rest of the world -- I don't mean to imply there aren't Muslims here, there probably are -- conceptualize Islam.
It will be transformative of Islam as well.
And as a result of this convergence, this synthetic attempt to make sense of these two ideas together, there's a real possibility that, instead of a clash of Islamic civilization -- if there is such a thing -- and democratic civilization -- if there is such a thing -- we'll in fact have close compatibility.
Now, I began with the war because it's the elephant in the room, and you can't pretend that there isn't about to be a war if you're talking about these issues.
The war has tremendous risks for the model that I'm describing because it's very possible that as a consequence of a war, many Muslims will conclude that the United States is not the kind of place that they want to emulate with respect to its forms of political government.
On the other hand, there's a further possibility that many Americans, swept up in the fever of a war, will say, and feel, and think that Islam is the enemy somehow -- that Islam ought to be construed as the enemy.
And even though, for political tactical reasons, the president has been very, very good about saying that Islam is not the enemy, nonetheless, there's a natural impulse when one enters war to think of the other side as an enemy.
And one furthermore has the impulse to generalize, as much as possible, in defining who that enemy is.
So the risks are very great.
On the other hand, the capacities for positive results in the aftermath of a war are also not to be underestimated, even by, and I would say especially by, people who are deeply skeptical about whether we should go to war in the first place.
Those who oppose the war ought to realize that if a war happens, it cannot be the right strategy, either pragmatically, or spiritually, or morally, to say after the war, "Well, let's let it all run itself out, and play out however it wants to play out, because we opposed the war in the first place."
That's not the way human circumstances operate.
You face the circumstances you have in front of you and you go forward.
Well, what I'm here to say then is, for people who are skeptical about the war, it's especially important to recognize that in the aftermath of the war there is a possibility for the government of the United States and the Muslim peoples with whom it interacts to create real forms of government that are truly democratic and also truly Islamic.
And it is crucial -- it is crucial in a practical, activist way -- for people who care about these issues to make sure that within the technology of democracy, in this system, they exercise their preferences, their choices and their voices to encourage that outcome.
That's a hopeful message, but it's a message that's hopeful only if you understand it as incurring serious obligation for all of us.
And I think that we are capable of taking on that obligation, but only if we put what we can into it.
And if we do, then I don't think that the hope will be unwarranted altogether.
Thanks.
By 1973, Harvey Milk had already been many things: naval officer, high school teacher, bit-part actor, and wandering hippie.
But as he embarked on yet another life running a camera shop in San Francisco, he already found himself distracted.
From the Watergate hearings on national news, to the teacher who had to rent a projector when her school couldnt afford one, Harvey saw a desperate need for political reform.
Milk strongly believed that tight knit neighborhoods were essential to the fabric of the city, and that government should solve those communitys most practical problems.
From fixing potholes and putting up stop signs, to promoting a friendly culture of cooperation, Milk envisioned a more personal approach to local government.
This philosophy led him to run for the citys Board of Supervisors as the representative for his own district, which included the heart of American gay culture, the Castro.
At this time, police brutality, discrimination and media stereotyping plagued the LGBT community, labeling Harvey and his supporters as political outsiders.
But Milk refused to downplay his sexuality.
He was sure that gay rights could never be won from the closet, and he saw the Castro as one of many minorities without representation in city politics.
Milk was determined to bring these basic government services to all of San Franciscos disenfranchised groups, regardless of race, age, or sexuality.
But despite his flair for public speaking and open-hearted approach, voters couldnt see Milks radical vision.
In 1973, he lost his first bid for the Board of Supervisors.
In 1975, he lost again.
A year later, he ran for the California Assembly and lost.
Yet he tirelessly continued to support his district, befriending bartenders, construction unions, and local Chinese grocers.
This earned him the affectionate title, the "mayor of Castro Street. And when he ran his third campaign for the Board of Supervisors in 1977, Harvey finally won the seat becoming one of the first openly gay public officials in US history.
Elated, Milk arrived in office determined to make lasting change.
He immediately introduced a bill outlawing discrimination on the grounds of sexuality and launched a major clean-up of the city.
But not everyone was happy with this direction.
Anti-gay sentiment was gaining national momentum, especially in the form of Californias Proposition 6.
The proposition, which sought to make it illegal for homosexuals to work in Californian schools, would prove to be the biggest battle of Milks career.
Supporters of Prop 6 attacked the LGBT community, calling them unfit to work with students.
But Milk urged them not to hide in fear: Come out to your relatives.
Come out to your friends, if indeed they are your friends.
Come out to your neighbors, to your fellow workers break down the myths.
Destroy the lies and distortions.
For your sake. For their sake. Alongside other activists, he ran an incandescent campaign against hate.
On November 7, 1978, Prop 6 was defeated in a landslide.
It was proof that Milks message was gaining traction.
But just twenty days after this inspiring victory, he was assassinated at City Hall killed alongside San Francisco Mayor George Moscone.
Both men had been murdered by Dan White, a former fellow supervisor, who had positioned himself against those he called "radicals, social deviates and incorrigibles. He had frequently clashed with Harvey at Board meetings, and resented the spirit of change which Milk personified for many.
The night of Milk's murder, thousands marched by candlelight through the city.
In the wake of this tragedy, yet another injustice arose.
In a highly controversial verdict, White received a sentence of only seven years and eight months a decision that sparked uproar throughout the city in what became known as the White Night Riots.
But even after his death, Milk continued to preach his hopeful cause.
He left his friends and followers a total of three different tapes to be played in the event of his assassination.
They leave us with a call to action, and a reminder that everyone is welcome in the fight against injustice: "I ask for the movement to continue and if a bullet should enter my brain, let that bullet destroy every closet door
A few years ago, I always had this thing happening to me, especially at family gatherings like teas with aunts and uncles or something like this.
When people come up to you, and they ask you, "So, what are you doing?"
And I would have this magical one-word reply, which would make everybody happy: "Medicine.
I'm going to be a doctor."
Very easy, that's it, everybody's happy and pleased.
And it could be so easy, but this effect really only lasts for 30 seconds with me, because that's then the time when one of them would ask, "So, in what area of medicine?
What specialty do you want to go into?"
And then I would have to strip down in all honesty and just say, "OK, so I'm fascinated with the colon.
It all started with the anus, and now it's basically the whole intestinal tract."
(Laughter) And this would be the moment when the enthusiasm trickled, and it would maybe also get, like, awkwardly silent in the room, and I would think this was terribly sad, because I do believe our bowels are quite charming.
(Laughter) And while we're in a time where many people are thinking about what new superfood smoothie to make or if gluten is maybe bad for them, actually, hardly anyone seems to care about the organ where this happens, the concrete anatomy and the mechanisms behind it.
And sometimes it seems to me like we're all trying to figure out this magic trick, but nobody's checking out the magician, just because he has, like, an embarrassing hairstyle or something.
And actually, there are reasons science disliked the gut for a long time; I have to say this.
So, it's complex.
There's a lot of surface area -- about 40 times the area of our skin.
Then, in such a tight pipe, there are so many immune cells that are being trained there.
We have 100 trillion bacteria doing all sorts of things -- producing little molecules.
Then there's about 20 different hormones, so we are on a very different level than our genitals, for example.
And the nervous system of our gut is so complex that when we cut out a piece, it's independent enough that when we poke it, it mumbles back at us, friendly.
(Laughter) But at least those reasons are also the reasons why it's so fascinating and important.
It took me three steps to love the gut.
So today, I invite you to follow me on those three steps.
The very first was just looking at it and asking questions like, "How does it work?"
and "Why does it have to look so weird for that sometimes?"
And it actually wasn't me asking the first kind of these questions, but my roommate.
After one heavy night of partying, he came into our shared-room kitchen, and he said, "Giulia, you study medicine. How does pooping work?"
(Laughter) And I did study medicine but I had no idea, so I had to go up to my room and look it up in different books.
And I found something interesting, I thought, at that time.
So it turns out, we don't only have this outer sphincter, we also have an inner sphincter muscle.
The outer sphincter we all know, we can control it, we know what's going on there; the inner one, we really don't.
So what happens is, when there are leftovers from digestion, they're being delivered to the inner one first.
This inner one will open in a reflex and let through a little bit for testing.
(Laughter) So, there are sensory cells that will analyze what has been delivered: Is it gaseous or is it solid?
And they will then send this information up to our brain, and this is the moment when our brain knows, "Oh, I have to go to the toilet."
(Laughter) The brain will then do what it's designed to do with its amazing consciousness.
It will mediate with our surroundings, and it will say something like, "So, I checked.
We are at this TEDx conference -- " (Laughter) (Applause) Gaseous?
Maybe, if you're sitting on the sides, and you know you can pull it off silently.
(Laughter) But solid -- maybe later.
(Laughter) Since our outer sphincter and the brain is connected with nervous cells, they coordinate, cooperate, and they put it back in a waiting line -- (Laughter) for other times, like, for example, when we're at home sitting on the couch, we have nothing better to do, we are free to go.
(Laughter) Us humans are actually one of the very few animals that do this in such an advanced and clean way.
To be honest, I had some newfound respect for that nice, inner sphincter dude -- not connected to nerves that care too much about the outer world or the time -- just caring about me for once.
I thought that was nice.
And I used to not be a great fan of public restrooms, but now I can go anywhere, because I consider it more when that inner muscle puts a suggestion on my daily agenda.
(Laughter) And also I learned something else, which was: looking closely at something I might have shied away from -- maybe the weirdest part of myself -- left me feeling more fearless, and also appreciating myself more.
And I think this happens a lot of times when you look at the gut, actually.
Like those funny rumbling noises that happen when you're in a group of friends or at the office conference table, going, like, "Merrr, merrr..."
This is not because we're hungry.
This is because our small intestine is actually a huge neat freak, and it takes the time in between digestion to clean everything up, resulting in those eight meters of gut -- really, seven of them -- being very clean and hardly smelling like anything.
It will, to achieve this, create a strong muscular wave that moves everything forward that's been leftover after digestion.
This can sometimes create a sound, but doesn't necessarily have to always.
So what we're embarrassed of is really a sign of something keeping our insides fine and tidy.
Or this weird, crooked shape of our stomach -- a bit Quasimodo-ish.
This actually makes us be able to put pressure on our belly without vomiting, like when we're laughing and when we're doing sports, because the pressure will go up and not so much sideways.
This also creates this air bubble that's usually always very visible in X-rays, for example, and can sometimes, with some people, when it gets too big, create discomfort or even some sensations of pain.
But for most of the people, is just results that it's far easier to burp when you're laying on your left side instead of your right.
And soon I moved a bit further and started to look at the whole picture of our body and health.
This was actually after I had heard that someone I knew a little bit had killed himself.
It happened that I had been sitting next to that person the day before, and I smelled that he had very bad breath.
And when I learned of the suicide the next day, I thought: Could the gut have something to do with it?
And I frantically started searching if there were scientific papers on the connection of gut and brain.
And to my surprise, I found many.
It turns out it's maybe not as simple as we sometimes think.
We tend to think our brain makes these commands and then sends them down to the other organs, and they all have to listen.
But really, it's more that 10 percent of the nerves that connect brain and gut deliver information from the brain to the gut.
We know this, for example, in stressful situations, when there are transmitters from the brain that are being sensed by our gut, so the gut will try to lower all the work, and not be working and taking away blood and energy to save energy for problem-solving.
This can go as far as nervous vomiting or nervous diarrhea to get rid of food that it then doesn't want to digest.
Maybe more interestingly, 90 percent of the nervous fibers that connect gut and brain deliver information from our gut to our brain.
And when you think about it a little bit, it does make sense, because our brain is very isolated.
It's in this bony skull surrounded by a thick skin, and it needs information to put together a feeling of "How am I, as a whole body, doing?"
And the gut, actually, is possibly the most important advisor for the brain because it's our largest sensory organ, collecting information not only on the quality of our nutrients, but really also on how are so many of our immune cells doing, or things like the hormones in our blood that it can sense.
And it can package this information, and send it up to the brain.
It can, there, not reach areas like visual cortex or word formations -- otherwise, when we digest, we would see funny colors or we would make funny noises -- no.
But it can reach areas for things like morality, fear or emotional processing or areas for self-awareness.
So it does make sense that when our body and our brain are putting together this feeling of, "How am I, as a whole body, doing?"
that the gut has something to contribute to this process.
And it also makes sense that people who have conditions like irritable bowel syndrome or inflammatory bowel disease have a higher risk of having anxiety or depression.
I think this is good information to share, because many people will think, "I have this gut thing, and maybe I also have this mental health thing."
And maybe -- because science is not clear on that right now -- it's really just that the brain is feeling sympathy with their gut.
This has yet to grow in evidence until it can come to practice.
But just knowing about these kinds of research that's out there at the moment helps me in my daily life.
And it makes me think differently of my moods and not externalize so much all the time.
I feel oftentimes during the day we are a brain and a screen, and we will tend to look for answers right there and maybe the work is stupid or our neighbor -- but really, moods can also come from within.
And just knowing this helped me, for example, when I sometimes wake up too early, and I start to worry and wander around with my thoughts.
Then I think, "Stop. What did I eat yesterday?
Did I stress myself out too much?
Did I eat too late or something?"
And then maybe get up and make myself a tea, something light to digest.
And as simple as that sounds, I think it's been surprisingly good for me.
Step three took me further away from our body, and to really understanding bacteria differently.
The research we have today is creating a new definition of what real cleanliness is.
And it's not the hygiene hypothesis -- I think many maybe know this.
So it states that when you have too little microbes in your environment because you clean all the time, that's not really a good thing, because people get more allergies or autoimmune diseases then.
So I knew this hypothesis, and I thought I wouldn't learn so much from looking at cleanliness in the gut.
But I was wrong.
It turns out, real cleanliness is not about killing off bacteria right away.
Real cleanliness is a bit different.
When we look at the facts, 95 percent of all bacteria on this planet don't harm us -- they can't, they don't have the genes to do so.
Many, actually, help us a lot, and scientists at the moment are looking into things like: Do some bacteria help us clean the gut?
Do they help us digest?
Do they make us put on weight or have a lean figure although we're eating lots?
Are others making us feel more courageous or even more resilient to stress?
So you see, there are more questions when it comes to cleanliness.
And, actually, the thing is, it's about a healthy balance, I think.
You can't avoid the bad all the time.
This is simply not possible; there's always something bad around.
So what really the whole deal is when you look at a clean gut, it's about having good bacteria, enough of them, and then some bad.
Our immune system needs the bad, too, so it knows what it's looking out for.
So I started having this different perspective on cleanliness and a few weeks later, I held a talk at my university, and I made a mistake by 1,000.
And I went home and I realized in that moment, I was like, "Ah! I made a mistake by 1,000.
Oh God, that's so much, and that's so embarrassing."
And I started to think about this, I was like, "Ugh!"
And after a while I said, "OK, I made this one mistake, but then I also told so many good and right and helpful things, so I think it's OK, you know?
It's a clean thing."
And then I was like, "Oh, wait.
Maybe I took my perspective on cleanliness further."
And it's my theory at the moment that maybe we all do.
Take it a bit further than just cleaning our living room, where maybe we make it to sort like a life hygiene.
Knowing that this is about fostering the good just as much as trying to shelter yourself from the bad had a very calming effect on me.
So in that sense, I hope today I told you mostly good and helpful things, and thank you for your time, for listening to me.
(Applause)
Congratulations.
By being here, listening, alive, a member of a growing species, you are one of history's greatest winners -- the culmination of a success story four billion years in the making.
You are life's one percent.
The losers, the 99 percent of species who have ever lived, are dead -- killed by fire, flood, asteroids, predation, starvation, ice, heat and the cold math of natural selection.
Your ancestors, back to the earliest fishes, overcame all these challenges.
You are here because of golden opportunities made possible by mass extinction.
(Laughter) It's true.
The same is true of your co-winners and relatives.
The 34,000 kinds of fishes.
How did we all get so lucky?
Will we continue to win?
I am a fish paleobiologist who uses big data -- the fossil record -- to study how some species win and others lose.
The living can't tell us; they know nothing but winning.
So, we must speak with the dead.
How do we make dead fishes talk?
Museums contain multitudes of beautiful fish fossils, but their real beauty emerges when combined with the larger number of ugly, broken fossils, and reduced to ones and zeros.
I can trawl a 500-million-year database for evolutionary patterns.
For example, fish forms can be captured by coordinates and transformed to reveal major pathways of change and trends through time.
Here is the story of the winners and losers of just one pivotal event I discovered using fossil data.
Let's travel back 360 million years -- six times as long ago as the last dinosaur -- to the Devonian period; a strange world.
Armored predators with razor-edge jaws dominated alongside huge fishes with arm bones in their fins.
Crab-like fishes scuttled across the sea floor.
The few ray-fin relatives of salmon and tuna cowered at the bottom of the food chain.
The few early sharks lived offshore in fear.
Your few four-legged ancestors, the tetrapods, struggled in tropical river plains.
Ecosystems were crowded.
There was no escape, no opportunity in sight.
Then the world ended.
(Laughter) No, it is a good thing.
96 percent of all fish species died during the Hangenberg event, 359 million years ago: an interval of fire and ice.
A crowded world was disrupted and swept away.
Now, you might think that's the end of the story.
The mighty fell, the meek inherited the earth, and here we are.
But winning is not that simple.
The handful of survivors came from many groups -- all greatly outnumbered by their own dead.
They ranged from top predator to bottom-feeder, big to small, marine to freshwater.
The extinction was a filter.
It merely leveled the playing field.
What really counted was what survivors did over the next several million years in that devastated world.
The former overlords should have had an advantage.
They became even larger, storing energy, investing in their young, spreading across the globe, feasting on fishes, keeping what had always worked, and biding their time.
Yet they merely persisted for a while, declining without innovating, becoming living fossils.
They were too stuck in their ways and are now largely forgotten.
A few of the long-suffering ray-fins, sharks and four-legged tetrapods went the opposite direction.
They became smaller -- living fast, dying young, eating little and reproducing rapidly.
They tried new foods, different homes, strange heads and weird bodies.
(Laughter) And they found opportunity, proliferated, and won the future for their 60,000 living species, including you.
That's why they look familiar.
You know their names.
Winning is not about random events or an arms race.
Rather, survivors went down alternative, evolutionary pathways.
Some found incredible success, while others became dead fish walking.
(Laughter) A real scientific term.
(Laughter) I am now investigating how these pathways to victory and defeat repeat across time.
My lab has already compiled thousands upon thousands of dead fishes, but many more remain.
However, it is already clear that your ancestors' survival through mass extinction, and their responses in the aftermath made you who you are today.
What does this tell us for the future?
As long as a handful of species survive, life will recover.
The versatile and the lucky will not just replace what was lost, but win in new forms.
It just might take several million years.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Your timing made you and your partner the most infamous bank robbers in the west.
Now, youll need to use that timing to help you break out of jail.
At the appointed time, youll be walking in the yard near the electric fence.
Your partner will flash you the signal, and exactly 45 seconds later, short out the fence circuit.
Itll automatically restart after a second or two, but as long as you move fast, youll be home free.
And then you notice, to your horror, that your watch is broken, and theres no time to fix it.
The signal is coming, and if you make even a small mistake in counting off 45 seconds, youll get fried.
Searching your pockets, you find something that might help: a lighter and two fuses you made earlier in the prison work program.
Each fuse is a length of flammable twine, built to be lit on either end and burn for precisely one minute.
The problem is that even though the fuses look uniform, they dont burn evenly, so if you cut one in half, for example, one side might burn longer than the other.
Your partner is going to give the signal any minute, and youll have to make your move.
How can you use the fuses and lighter to time exactly 45 seconds?
Pause the video to figure it out yourself.
Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1 The length of the fuse may not tell you anything, but you do know the fuses take exactly 60 seconds to burn from end to end.
Heres the key insight: If you start a fuse on one side and it burns for 30 seconds, therell still be 30 seconds of fuse left.
If you had started it from the other end, it wouldve reached the exact same spot in thirty seconds.
That means that if you lit it from both ends simultaneously, it would burn out in precisely 30 seconds.
But how will you time the last fifteen?
Thatll have to come from the second fuse.
If it were a 30 second fuse, youd be able to use that same trick again to double the burning speed and make it last exactly 15 seconds.
And, you realize, you can shorten the second fuse by lighting one end of it at the same time as you light the first.
At the moment the first burns out, youll be left with 30 seconds on the second fuse.
Just when youve got this all figured out, you see the signal from your partner, and spring into action.
You gather the four ends of the two fuses and light three of them.
The moment the first burns out, you light the other end of the second fuse.
When it flickers and dies, you know that exactly 45 seconds have passed, and the electric fence is dead.
By the time it hiccups back to life, youre over the fence and home free.
Aside from keeping the rain out and producing some usable space, architecture is nothing but a special-effects machine that delights and disturbs the senses.
Our work is across media. The work comes in all shapes and sizes.
It's small and large. This is an ashtray, a water glass.
From urban planning and master planning to theater and all sorts of stuff.
The thing that all the work has in common is that it challenges the assumptions about conventions of space.
And these are everyday conventions, conventions that are so obvious that we are blinded by their familiarity.
And I've assembled a sampling of work that all share a kind of productive nihilism that's used in the service of creating a particular special effect.
And that is something like nothing, or something next to nothing.
It's done through a form of subtraction or obstruction or interference in a world that we naturally sleepwalk through.
This is an image that won us a competition for an exhibition pavilion for the Swiss Expo 2002 on Lake Neuchatel, near Geneva.
And we wanted to use the water not only as a context, but as a primary building material.
We wanted to make an architecture of atmosphere.
So, no walls, no roof, no purpose -- just a mass of atomized water, a big cloud.
And this proposal was a reaction to the over-saturation of emergent technologies in recent national and world expositions, which feeds, or has been feeding, our insatiable appetite for visual stimulation with an ever greater digital virtuosity.
High definition, in our opinion, has become the new orthodoxy.
And we ask the question, can we use technology, high technology, to make an expo pavilion that's decidedly low definition, that also challenges the conventions of space and skin, and rethinks our dependence on vision?
So this is how we sought to do it.
Water's pumped from the lake and is filtered and shot as a fine mist through an array of high-pressure fog nozzles, 35,000 of them. And a weather station is on the structure.
It reads the shifting conditions of temperature, humidity, wind direction, wind speed, dew point, and it processes this data in a central computer that calibrates the degree of water pressure and distribution of water throughout.
And it's a responsive system that's trained on actual weather.
So, this is just in construction, and there's a tensegrity structure.
It's about 300 feet wide, the size of a football field, and it sits on just four very delicate columns.
These are the fog nozzles, the interface, and basically the system is kind of reading the real weather, and producing kind of semi-artificial and real weather.
So, we're very interested in creating weather. I don't know why.
Now, here we go, one side, the outside and then from the inside of the space you can see what the quality of the space was.
Unlike entering any normal space, entering Blur is like stepping into a habitable medium.
It's formless, featureless, depthless, scaleless, massless, purposeless and dimensionless.
All references are erased, leaving only an optical whiteout and white noise of the pulsing nozzles.
So, this is an exhibition pavilion where there is absolutely nothing to see and nothing to do.
And we pride ourselves -- it's a spectacular anti-spectacle in which all the conventions of spectacle are turned on their head.
So, the audience is dispersed, focused attention and dramatic build-up and climax are all replaced by a kind of attenuated attention that's sustained by a sense of apprehension caused by the fog.
And this is very much like how the Victorian novel used fog in this way.
So here the world is put out of focus, while our visual dependence is put into focus.
The public, you know, once disoriented can actually ascend to the angel deck above and then just come down under those lips into the water bar.
So, all the waters of the world are served there, so we thought that, you know, after being at the water and moving through the water and breathing the water, you could also drink this building.
And so it is sort of a theme, but it goes a little bit, you know, deeper than that.
We really wanted to bring out our absolute dependence on this master sense, and maybe share our kind of sensibility with our other senses.
You know, when we did this project it was a kind of tough sell, because the Swiss said, "Well, why are we going to spend, you know, 10 million dollars producing an effect that we already have in natural abundance that we hate?"
And, you know, we thought -- well, we tried to convince them.
And in the end, you know, they adapted this as a national icon that came to represent Swiss doubt, which we -- you know, it was kind of a meaning machine that everybody kind of laid on their own meanings off of.
Anyway, it's a temporary structure that was ultimately destroyed, and so it's now a memory of an apparition, actually, but it continues to live in edible form.
And this is the highest honor to be bestowed upon an architect in Switzerland -- to have a chocolate bar.
Anyway, moving along.
So in the '80s and '90s, we were mostly known for independent work, such as installation artist, architect, commissioned projects by museums and non-for-profit organizations.
And we did a lot of media work, also a lot of experimental theater projects.
In 2003, the Whitney mounted a retrospective of our work that featured a lot of this work from the '80s and '90s.
However, the work itself resisted the very nature of a retrospective, and this is just some of the stuff that was in the show.
This was a piece on tourism in the United States.
This is "Soft Sell" for 42nd Street.
This was something done at the Cartier Foundation.
"Master/Slave" at the MOMA, the project series, a piece called "Parasite."
And so there were many, many of these kinds of projects.
Anyway, they gave us the whole fourth floor, and, you know, the problem of the retrospective was something we were very uncomfortable with.
It's a kind of invention of the museum that's supposed to bring a kind of cohesive understanding to the public of a body of work.
And our work doesn't really resolve itself into a body in any way at all.
And one of the recurring themes, by the way, that in the work was a kind of hostility toward the museum itself, and asking about the conventions of the museum, like the wall, the white wall.
So, what you see here is basically a plan of many installations that were put there.
And we actually had to install white walls to separate these pieces, which didn't belong together.
But these white walls became a kind of target and weapon at the same time.
We used the wall to partition the 13 installations of the project and produce a kind of acoustic and visual separation.
And what you see is -- actually, the red dotted line shows the track of this performing element, which was a new piece that created -- that we created for the -- which was a robotic drill, basically, that went all the way around, cruised the museum, went all around the walls and did a lot of damage.
So, the drill was mounted on this robotic arm.
We worked with, by the way, Honeybee Robotics. This is the brain.
Honeybee Robotics designed the Mars Driller, and it was really very much fun to work with them.
They weren't doing their primary work, which was for the government, while they were helping us with this.
In any case, the way it works is that an intelligent navigator basically maps the entire surface of these walls.
So, unfolded it's about 300 linear feet.
And it randomly generates points within a three-dimensional matrix.
It selects a point, it guides the drill to that point, it pierces the dry wall, leaving a half-inch hole before traveling to the next location.
Initially these holes were lone blemishes, and as the exhibition continued the walls became increasingly perforated.
So eventually holes on both sides of the wall aligned, opening views from gallery to gallery.
Clusters of holes randomly opened up sections of wall.
And so this was a three-month performance piece in which the wall was made into kind of an increasingly unstable element.
And also the acoustic separation was destroyed.
Also the visual separation.
And there was also this constant background groan, which was very annoying.
And this is one of the blackout spaces where there's a video piece that became totally not useful.
So rather than securing a neutral background for the artworks on display, the wall now actively competed for attention.
And this acoustical nuisance and visual nuisance basically exposed the discomfort of the work to this encompassing nature of the retrospective.
It was really great when it started to break up all of the curatorial text.
Moving along to a project that we finished about a year ago.
It's the ICA -- the Institute of Contemporary Art -- in Boston, which is on the waterfront.
And there's not enough time to really introduce the building, but I'll simply say that the building negotiates between this outwardly focused nature of the site -- you know, it's a really great waterfront site in Boston -- and this contradictory other desire to have an inwardly focused museum.
So, the nature of the building is that it looks at looking -- I mean that's its primary objective, both its program and its architectural conceit.
The building incorporates the site, but it dispenses it in very small doses in the way that the museum is choreographed.
So, you come in and you're basically squeezed by the theater, by the belly of the theater, into this very compressed space where the view is turned off.
Then you come up in this glass elevator right near the curtain wall.
This elevator's about the size of a New York City studio apartment.
And then, this is a view going up, and then you could come into the theater, which can actually deny the view or open it up and become a backdrop.
And many musicians choose to use the theater glass walls totally open.
The view is denied in the galleries where we receive just natural light, and then exposed again in the north gallery with a panoramic view.
The original intention of this space, which was unfortunately never realized, was to use lenticular glass which allowed only a kind of perpendicular view out.
In this very narrow space that connects east and west galleries the intention was really to not get a climax, but to have the view stalk you, so the view would open up as you walked from one end to the other.
This was eliminated because the view was too good, and the mayor said, "No, we just want this open."
The architect lost here.
But culminating -- and that's where this hooks into the theme of my little talk -- is this Mediatheque, which is suspended from the cantilevered portion of the building.
So this is an 80-foot cantilever -- it's quite substantial.
So, it's already sticking out into space enough, and then from that is this, is this small area called the Mediatheque.
The Mediatheque has something like 16 stations where the public can get onto the server and look at digital artworks or also curated artworks off the web.
And this was really a kind of very important part of this building, and here is a point where architecture -- this is like technology-free -- architecture is only a framing device, it only edits the harbor view, the industrial harbor just through its walls, its floors and its ceiling, to only expose the water itself, the texture of water, much like a hypnotic effect created by electronic snow or a lava lamp or something like that.
And here is where we really felt that there was a great convergence of the technological and the natural in the project.
But there is just no information, it's just -- it's just hypnosis.
Moving along to Lincoln Center.
These are the guys that did the project in the first place, 50 years ago.
We're taking over now, doing work that ranges in scale from small-scale repairs to major renovations and major facility expansions.
But we're doing it with a lot less testosterone.
This is the extent of the work that's to be completed by 2010.
And for the purposes of this talk, I wanted to isolate just a part of a project that's even a part of a project that touches a little bit on this theme of architectural special effects, and it happens to be our current obsession, and it plays a little bit with the purging and adding of distraction.
It's Alice Tully Hall, and it's tucked under the Juilliard Building and descends several levels under the street.
So, this is the entrance to Tully Hall as it used to be, before the renovation, which we just started.
And we asked ourselves, why couldn't it be exhibitionistic, like the Met, or like some of the other buildings at Lincoln Center?
And one of the things that we were asked to do was give it a street identity, expand the lobbies and make it visually accessible.
And this building, which is just naturally hermetic, we stripped.
We basically did a striptease, architectural striptease, where we're framing with this kind of canopy -- the underside of three levels of expansion of Juilliard, about 45,000 square feet -- cutting it to the angle of Broadway, and then exposing, using that canopy to frame Tully Hall.
Before and after shot. (Applause) Wait a minute, it's just in that state, we have a long way to go.
But what I wanted to do was take a couple of seconds that I have left to just talk about the hall itself, which is kind of where we're really doing a massive amount of work.
So, the hall is a multi-purpose hall.
The clients have asked us to produce a great chamber music hall.
Now, that's really tough to do with a hall that has 1,100 seats.
Chamber and the notion of chamber has to do with salons and small-scale performances. They asked us to bring an intimacy.
How do you bring an intimacy into a hall?
Intimacy for us means a lot of different things.
It means acoustic intimacy and it means visual intimacy.
One thing is that the subway is running and rumbling right under the hall.
Another thing that could be fixed is the shape of the hall.
It's like a coffin, it basically sends all the sound, like a gutter-ball effect, down the aisles.
The walls are made of absorptive surface, half absorptive, half reflective, which is not very good for concert sound.
This is Avery Fisher Hall, but the notion of junk -- visual junk -- was very, very important to us, to get rid of visual noise.
Because we can't eliminate a single seat, the architecture is restricted to 18 inches.
So it's a very, very thin architecture.
First we do a kind of partial box and box separation, to take away the distraction of the subway noise.
Next we wrap the entire hall -- almost like this Olivetti keyboard -- with a material, with a wood material that basically covers all the surfaces: wall, ceiling, floor, stage, steps, everything, boxes.
But it's acoustically engineered to focus the sound into the house and back to the stage. And here's an acoustic shelf.
Looking up the hall. Just a section of the stage.
Just everything is lined, it incorporates -- every single thing that you could possibly imagine is tucked into this high-performance skin.
But one more added feature.
So now that we've stripped the hall of all visual distraction, everything that prevents this intimacy which is supposed to connect the house, the audience, with the performers, we add one little detail, one piece of architectural excess, a special effect: lighting.
We very strongly believe that the theatrics of a concert hall is as much in the space of intermission and the space of arrival as it is when the concert starts.
So what we wanted to do was produce this effect, this lighting effect, which made us have to bioengineer the wood walls.
And what it entails is the use of resin, of this very thick resin with a veneer of the same kind of wood that's used throughout the hall, in a kind of seamless continuity that wraps the hall in light, like a belt of light: rather than separating, like a proscenium would separate the audience from performers, it connects audience with players.
And this is a mockup that is in Salt Lake City that gives you a sense of what this is going to look like in full-scale.
And this is a guy from Salt Lake City, this is what they look like out there.
(Laughter) And for us, I mean it's really kind of a very strange thing, but the moments in the hall that the buzz kind of dies down when the audience is waiting for the performance to begin, very similar to the parting of curtains or the raising of a chandelier, the walls will just exude this glow, temporarily stealing attention from the stage.
And this is Tully in construction now.
I have no ending to say, except that I'm a couple of minutes over.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
With me here today I brought something beautiful.
This is a feather from one of the most beautiful birds we have in Kenya, the crested guinea fowl.
But this feather is more than just that.
If you've taken time when you are outdoors to look at the feathers around you, you'll have noticed that there is this huge variety of different sizes, shapes and even colors.
The feather is one of the most astonishing pieces of technology invented by the natural world, and for centuries, this feather has helped birds to keep dry, to keep warm and even power flight.
Only one section of the tree of life can actually make a feather.
Among all the world's animals, birds are the only ones who can make something like what I'm holding today.
I personally have given them a nickname, and I like to call them the feathermakers.
It is the major difference between birds and any other animals we have on earth, and if you can't make a feather, you cannot call yourself a bird.
(Laughter) For us humans, who are earthbound, birds represent freedom.
This feather has enabled birds to conquer gravity and take to the air in an extraordinary way.
Don't you sometimes wish you could fly like a bird?
Birds are my passion, and I want to change the way each one of you thinks about them.
The easiest reason I love them so much is because they are beautiful.
There are 10,000 species in the world, and each one of them is uniquely beautiful.
Birds are amazing, and this talk is dedicated to all the birds of the world.
(Laughter) (Applause) Indeed, these birds have been part of our lives and cultures all over the world for centuries, and every society has a story about birds.
You probably have heard childhood stories of different birds and how they relate with man.
I personally recently learned that our human ancestors would follow flocks of vultures and then they would help them to identify where carcasses have been dropped by large carnivores, and these humans will scavenge and eat part of that meat.
Birds have been used as brands and labels all over the world.
You know the bald eagle?
It was chosen as the national emblem for the US because of its majestic strength, beautiful looks and even a long lifespan.
And just like us humans who have managed to live in virtually all habitats of this earth, birds have also conquered the world.
From birds such as these beautiful penguins that live in the cold ice caps to even others like the larks, who live in the hottest deserts you can imagine.
Indeed, these species have conquered this world.
Birds also build houses like us.
The real pros in housebuilding are a group of birds we call the weaverbirds, and this name they were given because of the way in which they weave their nests.
An interesting one: birds also love and date just like us humans.
In fact, you'll be surprised to know that males dress to impress the women, and I'll show you how.
So here we have a long-tailed widowbird, and this is how they would normally look.
But when it comes to the breeding season, everything changes, and this is how he looks.
(Audience murmurs) Yeah?
Birds also, multiple species of them, do love to touch and cuddle just like humans.
And I know you're wondering about this one.
Yes, they kiss too, sometimes very deeply.
(Applause) Some have even learned to cheat on their spouses.
(Laughter) For example, the African jacana: the females will mate with multiple males and then she takes off to find other males to mate with and she leaves the male behind to take care of the chicks.
(Laughter) (Applause) And birds help us so much, and they play very crucial roles in our ecosystems each day.
Vultures clean up our environment by literally digesting disease-causing pathogens, and they finish carcasses that would otherwise cost us lots of money to clear from the environment.
A sizable flock of vultures is capable of bringing down a carcass the size of a zebra straight to the bone within just about 30 minutes.
Owls help to rid the environments of rodents and this helps us a lot because it saves us money -- we don't lose our crops -- and secondly, we don't have to buy harmful chemicals to handle these rodents.
The beautiful sunbirds we see in our environments are part of nature's pollination crew, and they help our plants to form fruits.
Together with other pollinators like insects, they have actually helped us to get most of the food crops that we depend on for many years.
Unfortunately, the story of birds is by far not perfect.
They are faced by numerous challenges every day wherever they live.
Top on the threats facing birds is habitat loss and reduced food availability.
Birds are also hunted, especially migratory species and ducks that congregate in water bodies.
Poisoning is happening to flocks that like to stick together, especially in places like rice schemes.
Moreover, power lines are electrocuting birds and wind farms are slicing birds when they fly through the blades.
Recently, we've heard the talk of climate change making a lot of headlines, and it's also affecting birds, because birds are being forced to migrate to better breeding and feeding grounds because unfortunately where they used to live is no longer habitable.
My own perspective towards birds was changed when I was a small boy in high school, and there was this boy who struck, injuring the wing and the leg of a bird we called the augur buzzard.
I was standing there, just a mere 14-year-old, and I imagined a human being in a similar situation, because this bird could not help itself.
So even if I was hardly any biologist by then, I gathered with three of my friends and we decided to house the bird until it had regained strength and then let it free.
Interestingly, it accepted to feed on beef from our school kitchen, and we hunted termites around the compound for its dinner every day.
After a few days, it had regained strength and we released it.
We were so happy to see it flap its wings and fly off gracefully.
And that experience changed the way we looked at birds.
We went on to actually make a magazine, and we called it the Hawk Magazine, and this was in honor of this bird that we had helped within our own high school.
Those experiences in high school made me the conservationist I am today.
And a passion for birds should especially matter for Africa and all Africans, because among all other continents, Africa hosts some of the most amazing bird species you can find anywhere in the world.
Imagine having a name like "shoebill."
That's the name of that bird.
And there are countries like DR Congo, Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya who are leading the continent in highest numbers of diversity when it comes to the species.
These birds continue to provide the continent with very crucial ecosystem services that Africa needs.
Moreover, there is huge potential for Africa to lead the world in avian tourism.
The economy will definitely benefit.
Imagine how many communities will benefit from groups of tourists visiting their villages just to see the endemic birds that can only be found in those villages.
How can we help birds together?
There is now a chance for all of you to turn your passion for birds into contributing to their continued survival, and you can do that by becoming a citizen scientist.
Citizen science is a growing trend around the world, and we are having scenarios where people are sharing information with the rest of the community about traffic updates, security alerts and so on.
That is exactly what we realized as bird-watchers, and we thought, because birds are found everywhere, if we've got all of you and everyone else in Africa to tell us the birds they find where they live, where they school, or even where they work, then we can be able to come up with a map of every single species, and from there scientists will be able to actually prioritize conservation efforts to those habitats that matter the most.
Take for example these two projects, the Africa Raptor DataBank, which is mapping all birds of prey in the continent of Africa, and the Kenya Bird Map, which is mapping about 1,100 species that occur in my country, Kenya.
These two projects now have online databases that are allowing people to submit data, and this is converted into very interactive websites that the public can consume and make decisions from.
But when we started, there was a big challenge.
We received many complaints from bird-watchers, and they will say, "I'm in a village, and I cannot access a computer.
How do I tell you what birds live in my home, or where I school, or where I work?"
So we were forced to renovate our strategy and come up with a sustainable solution.
It was easy: we immediately realized that mobile phones were becoming increasingly common in Africa and most of the regions could get access to one.
So we came up with mobile phone applications that you can use on your iPhone and on your Android phone, and we made them freely available for every bird-watching enthusiast out there.
So we came up with BirdLasser, which is used by the Kenya Bird Map, and also we have the African Raptor Observations, which is now used by the African Raptor DataBank.
This was a huge breakthrough in our work and it made us get enormous amounts of data from every birder out there in the regions.
With this, we realized that citizen science is indeed very powerful, the reason being, citizen science is adaptive.
And we were able to actually convert many bird-watchers to start sharing new information with us.
When we were starting, we didn't know that birds could be a huge gateway to approaching conservation of other forms of animals.
Interestingly, now in the Virtual Museum for Africa, we have maps for dragonflies and damselflies, butterflies and moths, reptiles, frogs, orchids, spiders, scorpions, and yes, we are even mapping mushrooms.
Who could have imagined mapping mushrooms?
So this showed us that indeed we've created a community of people who care about nature in Africa.
I hereby call upon all of you to join me in promoting the value of birds within your communities.
Please just tell your friends about birds, for we are always inclined to love and care for that which we know.
Please spend a few minutes in your free time when you are at work, at school, or maybe at home, to at least look around you and see which beautiful birds are there.
Come join us in citizen science and tell us the birds you're finding in the places where you visit.
Even simpler, you could buy your child or your sibling a pair of binoculars or a bird book and let them just appreciate how beautiful these birds are.
Because maybe one day they will want to care for that one which they know and love.
The children indeed are our future.
Let us please teach them to love our feathermakers, because the love of birds can be a huge gateway to appreciating all forms of nature.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
I'm the product of a bold leadership decision.
After 1956, when Tunisia became independent, our first president, Habib Bourguiba, decided to invest 20 percent of the country's national budget in education.
Yes, 20 percent, on the high end of the spectrum even by today's standards.
Some people protested.
What about infrastructure?
What about electricity, roads and running water?
Are these not important?
I would argue that the most important infrastructure we have are minds, educated minds.
President Bourguiba helped establish free, high-quality education for every boy and every girl.
And together with millions of other Tunisians, I'm deeply indebted to that historic decision.
And that's what brought me here today, because today, we are facing a global learning crisis.
I call it learning crisis and not education crisis, because on top of the quarter of a billion children who are out of school today, even more, 330 million children, are in school but failing to learn.
And if we do nothing, if nothing changes, by 2030, just 13 years from now, half of the world's children and youth, half of 1.6 billion children and youth, will be either out of school or failing to learn.
So two years ago, I joined the Education Commission.
It's a commission brought together by former UK Prime Minister and UN Special Envoy for Global Education Gordon Brown.
Our first task was to find out: How big is the learning crisis?
What's actually the scope of the problem?
Today we know: half of the world's children by 2030 will be failing to learn.
And that's how actually we discovered that we need to change the world's focus from schooling to learning, from just counting how many bodies are in classrooms to actually how many are learning.
And the second big task was, can we do anything about this?
Can we do anything about this big, vast, silent, maybe most-neglected international crisis?
And what we found out is, we can.
It's actually amazing.
We can, for the first time, have every child in school and learning within just one generation.
And we don't even have to really invent the wheel to do so.
We just need to learn from the best in class, but not any best in class -- the best in your own class.
What we did is actually we looked at countries by income level: low-income, mid-income, high-income.
We looked at what the 25 percent fastest improvers in education do, and what we found out is that if every country moves at the same rate as the fastest improvers within their own income level, then within just one generation we can have every child in school and learning.
Let me give you an example.
Let's take Tunisia for example.
We're not telling Tunisia, "You should move as fast as Finland."
No disrespect, Finland.
We're telling Tunisia, "Look at Vietnam."
They spend similar amounts for primary and secondary pupils as percentage of GDP per capita, but achieves today higher results.
Vietnam introduced a standardized assessment for literacy and numeracy, teachers in Vietnam are better monitored than in other developing countries, and students' achievements are made public.
And it shows in the results.
In the 2015 PISA -- Program for International Student Assessment -- Vietnam outperformed many wealthy economies, including the United States.
Now, if you're not an education expert, you may ask, "What's new and different?
Don't all countries track student progress and make those achievements public?"
No. The sad answer is no.
We are very far from it.
Only half of the developing countries have systematic learning assessment at primary school, and even less so at lower secondary school.
So if we don't know if children are learning, how are teachers supposed to focus their attention on delivering results, and how are countries supposed to prioritize education spending actually to delivering results, if they don't know if children are learning?
That's why the first big transformation before investing is to make the education system deliver results.
Because pouring more money into broken systems may only fund more inefficiencies.
And what deeply worries me -- if children go to school and don't learn, it devalues education, and it devalues spending on education, so that governments and political parties can say, "Oh, we are spending so much money on education, but children are not learning.
They don't have the right skills.
Maybe we should spend less."
Now, improving current education systems to deliver results is important, but won't be enough.
What about countries where we won't have enough qualified teachers?
Take Somalia, for example.
If every student in Somalia became a teacher -- every person who finishes tertiary education became a teacher -- we won't have enough teachers.
And what about children in refugee camps, or in very remote rural areas?
Take Filipe, for example.
Filipe lives in one of the thousands of communities alongside the Amazonas rivers.
His village of 78 people has 20 families.
Filipe and a fellow student were the only two attending grade 11 in 2015.
Now, the Amazonas is a state in the northwest of Brazil.
It's four and a half times the size of Germany, and it's fully covered in jungle and rivers.
A decade ago, Filipe and his fellow student would have had just two alternatives: moving to Manaus, the capital, or stopping studying altogether, which most of them did.
In 2009, however, Brazil passed a new law that made secondary education a guarantee for every Brazilian and an obligation for every state to implement this by 2016.
But giving access to high-quality education, you know, in the Amazonas state, is huge and expensive.
How are you going to get, you know, math and science and history teachers all over those communities?
And even if you find them, many of them would not want to move there.
So faced with this impossible task, civil servants and state officials developed amazing creativity and entrepreneurship.
They developed the media center solution.
It works this way.
You have specialized, trained content teachers in Manaus delivering classroom via livestream to over a thousand classrooms in those scattered communities.
Those classrooms have five to 25 students, and they're supported by a more generalist tutoring teacher for their learning and development.
The 60 content teachers in Manaus work with over 2,200 tutoring teachers in those communities to customize lesson plans to the context and time.
Now, why is this division between content teacher and tutoring teacher important?
First of all, as I told you, because in many countries, we just don't have enough qualified teachers.
But secondly also because teachers do too many things they're either not trained for or not supposed to do.
Let's look at Chile, for example.
In Chile, for every doctor, you have four and a half people, four and a half staff supporting them, and Chile is on the low end of the spectrum here, because in developing countries, on average, every doctor has 10 people supporting them.
A teacher in Chile, however, has less than half a person, 0.3 persons, supporting them.
Imagine a hospital ward with 20, 40, 70 patients and you have a doctor doing it all by themselves: no nurses, no medical assistants, no one else.
You will say this is absurd and impossible, but this is what teachers are doing all over the world every day with classrooms of 20, 40, or 70 students.
So this division between content and tutoring teachers is amazing because it is changing the paradigm of the teacher, so that each does what they can do best and so that children are not just in school but in school and learning.
And some of these content teachers, they became celebrity teachers.
You know, some of them run for office, and they helped raise the status of the profession so that more students wanted to become teachers.
And what I love about this example is beyond changing the paradigm of the teacher.
It teaches us how we can harness technology for learning.
The live-streaming is bidirectional, so students like Filipe and others can present information back.
And we know technology is not always perfect.
You know, state officials expect between five to 15 percent of the classrooms every day to be off live-stream because of flood, broken antennas or internet not working.
And yet, Filipe is one of over 300,000 students that benefited from the media center solution and got access to postprimary education.
This is a living example how technology is not just an add-on but can be central to learning and can help us bring school to children if we cannot bring children to school.
Now, I hear you.
You're going to say, "How are we going to implement this all over the world?"
I've been in government myself and have seen how difficult it is even to implement the best ideas.
So as a commission, we started two initiatives to make the "Learning Generation" a reality.
The first one is called the Pioneer Country Initiative.
Over 20 countries from Africa and Asia have committed to make education their priority and to transform their education systems to deliver results.
We've trained country leaders in a methodology called the delivery approach.
What this does is basically two things.
In the planning phase, we take everyone into a room -- teachers, teacher unions, parent associations, government officials, NGOs, everyone -- so that the reform and the solution we come up with are shared by everyone and supported by everyone.
And in the second phase, it does something special.
It's kind of a ruthless focus on follow-up.
So week by week you check, has that been done, what was supposed to be done, and even sometimes sending a person physically to the district or school to check that versus just hoping that it happened.
It may sound for many common sense, but it's not common practice, and that's why actually many reforms fail.
It has been piloted in Tanzania, and there the pass rate for students in secondary education was increased by 50 percent in just over two years.
Now, the next initiative to make the Learning Generation a reality is financing. Who's going to pay for this?
So we believe and argue that domestic financing has to be the backbone of education investment.
Do you remember when I told you about Vietnam earlier outperforming the United States in PISA?
That's due to a better education system, but also to Vietnam increasing their investment from seven to 20 percent of their national budget in two decades.
But what happens if countries want to borrow money for education?
If you wanted to borrow money to build a bridge or a road, it's quite easy and straightforward, but not for education.
It's easier to make a shiny picture of a bridge and show it to everyone than one of an educated mind.
That's kind of a longer term commitment.
So we came up with a solution to help countries escape the middle income trap, countries that are not poor enough or not poor, thankfully, anymore, that cannot profit from grants or interest-free loans, and they're not rich enough to be able to have attractive interests on their loans.
So we're pooling donor money in a finance facility for education, which will provide more finance for education.
We will subsidize, or even eliminate completely, interest payments on the loans so that countries that commit to reforms can borrow money, reform their education system, and pay this money over time while benefiting from a better-educated population.
This solution has been recognized in the last G20 meeting in Germany, and so finally today education is on the international agenda.
But let me bring this back to the personal level, because this is where the impact lands.
Without that decision to invest a young country's budget, 20 percent of a young country's budget in education, I would have never been able to go to school, let alone in 2014 becoming a minister in the government that successfully ended the transition phase.
Tunisia's Nobel Peace Prize in 2015 as the only democracy that emerged from the Arab Spring is a legacy to that bold leadership decision.
Education is the civil rights struggle, it's the human rights struggle of our generation.
Quality education for all: that's the freedom fight that we've got to win.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So when people voice fears of artificial intelligence, very often, they invoke images of humanoid robots run amok.
You know? Terminator?
You know, that might be something to consider, but that's a distant threat.
Or, we fret about digital surveillance with metaphors from the past.
"1984," George Orwell's "1984," it's hitting the bestseller lists again.
It's a great book, but it's not the correct dystopia for the 21st century.
What we need to fear most is not what artificial intelligence will do to us on its own, but how the people in power will use artificial intelligence to control us and to manipulate us in novel, sometimes hidden, subtle and unexpected ways.
Much of the technology that threatens our freedom and our dignity in the near-term future is being developed by companies in the business of capturing and selling our data and our attention to advertisers and others: Facebook, Google, Amazon, Alibaba, Tencent.
Now, artificial intelligence has started bolstering their business as well.
And it may seem like artificial intelligence is just the next thing after online ads.
It's not.
It's a jump in category.
It's a whole different world, and it has great potential.
It could accelerate our understanding of many areas of study and research.
But to paraphrase a famous Hollywood philosopher, "With prodigious potential comes prodigious risk."
Now let's look at a basic fact of our digital lives, online ads.
Right? We kind of dismiss them.
They seem crude, ineffective.
We've all had the experience of being followed on the web by an ad based on something we searched or read.
You know, you look up a pair of boots and for a week, those boots are following you around everywhere you go.
Even after you succumb and buy them, they're still following you around.
We're kind of inured to that kind of basic, cheap manipulation.
We roll our eyes and we think, "You know what? These things don't work."
Except, online, the digital technologies are not just ads.
Now, to understand that, let's think of a physical world example.
You know how, at the checkout counters at supermarkets, near the cashier, there's candy and gum at the eye level of kids?
That's designed to make them whine at their parents just as the parents are about to sort of check out.
Now, that's a persuasion architecture.
It's not nice, but it kind of works.
That's why you see it in every supermarket.
Now, in the physical world, such persuasion architectures are kind of limited, because you can only put so many things by the cashier. Right?
And the candy and gum, it's the same for everyone, even though it mostly works only for people who have whiny little humans beside them.
In the physical world, we live with those limitations.
In the digital world, though, persuasion architectures can be built at the scale of billions and they can target, infer, understand and be deployed at individuals one by one by figuring out your weaknesses, and they can be sent to everyone's phone private screen, so it's not visible to us.
And that's different.
And that's just one of the basic things that artificial intelligence can do.
Now, let's take an example.
Let's say you want to sell plane tickets to Vegas. Right?
So in the old world, you could think of some demographics to target based on experience and what you can guess.
You might try to advertise to, oh, men between the ages of 25 and 35, or people who have a high limit on their credit card, or retired couples. Right?
That's what you would do in the past.
With big data and machine learning, that's not how it works anymore.
So to imagine that, think of all the data that Facebook has on you: every status update you ever typed, every Messenger conversation, every place you logged in from, all your photographs that you uploaded there.
If you start typing something and change your mind and delete it, Facebook keeps those and analyzes them, too.
Increasingly, it tries to match you with your offline data.
It also purchases a lot of data from data brokers.
It could be everything from your financial records to a good chunk of your browsing history.
Right? In the US, such data is routinely collected, collated and sold.
In Europe, they have tougher rules.
So what happens then is, by churning through all that data, these machine-learning algorithms -- that's why they're called learning algorithms -- they learn to understand the characteristics of people who purchased tickets to Vegas before.
When they learn this from existing data, they also learn how to apply this to new people.
So if they're presented with a new person, they can classify whether that person is likely to buy a ticket to Vegas or not.
Fine. You're thinking, an offer to buy tickets to Vegas.
I can ignore that.
But the problem isn't that.
The problem is, we no longer really understand how these complex algorithms work.
We don't understand how they're doing this categorization.
It's giant matrices, thousands of rows and columns, maybe millions of rows and columns, and not the programmers and not anybody who looks at it, even if you have all the data, understands anymore how exactly it's operating any more than you'd know what I was thinking right now if you were shown a cross section of my brain.
It's like we're not programming anymore, we're growing intelligence that we don't truly understand.
And these things only work if there's an enormous amount of data, so they also encourage deep surveillance on all of us so that the machine learning algorithms can work.
That's why Facebook wants to collect all the data it can about you.
The algorithms work better.
So let's push that Vegas example a bit.
What if the system that we do not understand was picking up that it's easier to sell Vegas tickets to people who are bipolar and about to enter the manic phase.
Such people tend to become overspenders, compulsive gamblers.
They could do this, and you'd have no clue that's what they were picking up on.
I gave this example to a bunch of computer scientists once and afterwards, one of them came up to me.
He was troubled and he said, "That's why I couldn't publish it."
I was like, "Couldn't publish what?"
He had tried to see whether you can indeed figure out the onset of mania from social media posts before clinical symptoms, and it had worked, and it had worked very well, and he had no idea how it worked or what it was picking up on.
Now, the problem isn't solved if he doesn't publish it, because there are already companies that are developing this kind of technology, and a lot of the stuff is just off the shelf.
This is not very difficult anymore.
Do you ever go on YouTube meaning to watch one video and an hour later you've watched 27?
You know how YouTube has this column on the right that says, "Up next" and it autoplays something?
It's an algorithm picking what it thinks that you might be interested in and maybe not find on your own.
It's not a human editor.
It's what algorithms do.
It picks up on what you have watched and what people like you have watched, and infers that that must be what you're interested in, what you want more of, and just shows you more.
It sounds like a benign and useful feature, except when it isn't.
So in 2016, I attended rallies of then-candidate Donald Trump to study as a scholar the movement supporting him.
I study social movements, so I was studying it, too.
And then I wanted to write something about one of his rallies, so I watched it a few times on YouTube.
YouTube started recommending to me and autoplaying to me white supremacist videos in increasing order of extremism.
If I watched one, it served up one even more extreme and autoplayed that one, too.
If you watch Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders content, YouTube recommends and autoplays conspiracy left, and it goes downhill from there.
Well, you might be thinking, this is politics, but it's not.
This isn't about politics.
This is just the algorithm figuring out human behavior.
I once watched a video about vegetarianism on YouTube and YouTube recommended and autoplayed a video about being vegan.
It's like you're never hardcore enough for YouTube.
(Laughter) So what's going on?
Now, YouTube's algorithm is proprietary, but here's what I think is going on.
The algorithm has figured out that if you can entice people into thinking that you can show them something more hardcore, they're more likely to stay on the site watching video after video going down that rabbit hole while Google serves them ads.
Now, with nobody minding the ethics of the store, these sites can profile people who are Jew haters, who think that Jews are parasites and who have such explicit anti-Semitic content, and let you target them with ads.
They can also mobilize algorithms to find for you look-alike audiences, people who do not have such explicit anti-Semitic content on their profile but who the algorithm detects may be susceptible to such messages, and lets you target them with ads, too.
Now, this may sound like an implausible example, but this is real.
ProPublica investigated this and found that you can indeed do this on Facebook, and Facebook helpfully offered up suggestions on how to broaden that audience.
BuzzFeed tried it for Google, and very quickly they found, yep, you can do it on Google, too.
And it wasn't even expensive.
The ProPublica reporter spent about 30 dollars to target this category.
So last year, Donald Trump's social media manager disclosed that they were using Facebook dark posts to demobilize people, not to persuade them, but to convince them not to vote at all.
And to do that, they targeted specifically, for example, African-American men in key cities like Philadelphia, and I'm going to read exactly what he said.
I'm quoting.
They were using "nonpublic posts whose viewership the campaign controls so that only the people we want to see it see it.
We modeled this.
It will dramatically affect her ability to turn these people out."
What's in those dark posts?
We have no idea.
Facebook won't tell us.
So Facebook also algorithmically arranges the posts that your friends put on Facebook, or the pages you follow.
It doesn't show you everything chronologically.
It puts the order in the way that the algorithm thinks will entice you to stay on the site longer.
Now, so this has a lot of consequences.
You may be thinking somebody is snubbing you on Facebook.
The algorithm may never be showing your post to them.
The algorithm is prioritizing some of them and burying the others.
Experiments show that what the algorithm picks to show you can affect your emotions.
But that's not all.
It also affects political behavior.
So in 2010, in the midterm elections, Facebook did an experiment on 61 million people in the US that was disclosed after the fact.
So some people were shown, "Today is election day," the simpler one, and some people were shown the one with that tiny tweak with those little thumbnails of your friends who clicked on "I voted."
This simple tweak.
OK? So the pictures were the only change, and that post shown just once turned out an additional 340,000 voters in that election, according to this research as confirmed by the voter rolls.
A fluke? No.
Because in 2012, they repeated the same experiment.
And that time, that civic message shown just once turned out an additional 270,000 voters.
For reference, the 2016 US presidential election was decided by about 100,000 votes.
Now, Facebook can also very easily infer what your politics are, even if you've never disclosed them on the site.
Right? These algorithms can do that quite easily.
What if a platform with that kind of power decides to turn out supporters of one candidate over the other?
How would we even know about it?
Now, we started from someplace seemingly innocuous -- online adds following us around -- and we've landed someplace else.
As a public and as citizens, we no longer know if we're seeing the same information or what anybody else is seeing, and without a common basis of information, little by little, public debate is becoming impossible, and we're just at the beginning stages of this.
These algorithms can quite easily infer things like your people's ethnicity, religious and political views, personality traits, intelligence, happiness, use of addictive substances, parental separation, age and genders, just from Facebook likes.
These algorithms can identify protesters even if their faces are partially concealed.
These algorithms may be able to detect people's sexual orientation just from their dating profile pictures.
Now, these are probabilistic guesses, so they're not going to be 100 percent right, but I don't see the powerful resisting the temptation to use these technologies just because there are some false positives, which will of course create a whole other layer of problems.
Imagine what a state can do with the immense amount of data it has on its citizens.
China is already using face detection technology to identify and arrest people.
And here's the tragedy: we're building this infrastructure of surveillance authoritarianism merely to get people to click on ads.
And this won't be Orwell's authoritarianism.
This isn't "1984."
Now, if authoritarianism is using overt fear to terrorize us, we'll all be scared, but we'll know it, we'll hate it and we'll resist it.
But if the people in power are using these algorithms to quietly watch us, to judge us and to nudge us, to predict and identify the troublemakers and the rebels, to deploy persuasion architectures at scale and to manipulate individuals one by one using their personal, individual weaknesses and vulnerabilities, and if they're doing it at scale through our private screens so that we don't even know what our fellow citizens and neighbors are seeing, that authoritarianism will envelop us like a spider's web and we may not even know we're in it.
So Facebook's market capitalization is approaching half a trillion dollars.
It's because it works great as a persuasion architecture.
But the structure of that architecture is the same whether you're selling shoes or whether you're selling politics.
The algorithms do not know the difference.
The same algorithms set loose upon us to make us more pliable for ads are also organizing our political, personal and social information flows, and that's what's got to change.
Now, don't get me wrong, we use digital platforms because they provide us with great value.
I use Facebook to keep in touch with friends and family around the world.
I've written about how crucial social media is for social movements.
I have studied how these technologies can be used to circumvent censorship around the world.
But it's not that the people who run, you know, Facebook or Google are maliciously and deliberately trying to make the country or the world more polarized and encourage extremism.
I read the many well-intentioned statements that these people put out.
But it's not the intent or the statements people in technology make that matter, it's the structures and business models they're building.
And that's the core of the problem.
Either Facebook is a giant con of half a trillion dollars and ads don't work on the site, it doesn't work as a persuasion architecture, or its power of influence is of great concern.
It's either one or the other.
It's similar for Google, too.
So what can we do?
This needs to change.
Now, I can't offer a simple recipe, because we need to restructure the whole way our digital technology operates.
Everything from the way technology is developed to the way the incentives, economic and otherwise, are built into the system.
We have to face and try to deal with the lack of transparency created by the proprietary algorithms, the structural challenge of machine learning's opacity, all this indiscriminate data that's being collected about us.
We have a big task in front of us.
We have to mobilize our technology, our creativity and yes, our politics so that we can build artificial intelligence that supports us in our human goals but that is also constrained by our human values.
And I understand this won't be easy.
We might not even easily agree on what those terms mean.
But if we take seriously how these systems that we depend on for so much operate, I don't see how we can postpone this conversation anymore.
These structures are organizing how we function and they're controlling what we can and we cannot do.
And many of these ad-financed platforms, they boast that they're free.
In this context, it means that we are the product that's being sold.
We need a digital economy where our data and our attention is not for sale to the highest-bidding authoritarian or demagogue.
(Applause) So to go back to that Hollywood paraphrase, we do want the prodigious potential of artificial intelligence and digital technology to blossom, but for that, we must face this prodigious menace, open-eyed and now.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What if an African girl from a traditional family in a part of future Africa is accepted into the finest university in the galaxy, planets away?
What if she decides to go?
This is an excerpt from my "Binti" novella trilogy: I powered up the transporter and said a silent prayer.
I had no idea what I was going to do if it didn't work.
My transporter was cheap, so even a droplet of moisture or, more likely, a grain of sand, would cause it to short.
It was faulty, and most of the time I had to restart it over and over before it worked.
"Please not now, please not now," I thought.
The transporter shivered in the sand and I held my breath.
Tiny, flat and black as a prayer stone, it buzzed softly and then slowly rose from the sand.
Finally, it produced the baggage-lifting force.
I grinned.
Now I could make it to the shuttle on time.
I swiped otjize from my forehead with my index finger and knelt down, then I touched the finger to the sand, grounding the sweet-smelling red clay into it.
"Thank you," I whispered.
It was a half-mile walk along the dark desert road.
With the transporter working I would make it there on time.
Straightening up, I paused and shut my eyes.
Now, the weight of my entire life was pressing on my shoulders.
I was defying the most traditional part of myself for the first time in my entire life.
I was leaving in the dead of night, and they had no clue.
My nine siblings, all older than me except for my younger sister and brother, would never see this coming.
My parents would never imagine I'd do such a thing in a million years.
By the time they all realized what I'd done and where I was going, I'd have left the planet.
In my absence, my parents would growl to each other that I was never to set foot in their home again.
My four aunties and two uncles who lived down the road would shout and gossip amongst themselves about how I had scandalized the entire bloodline.
I was going to be a pariah.
"Go," I softly whispered to the transporter, stamping my foot.
The thin metal rings I wore around each ankle jingled noisily, but I stamped my foot again.
Once on, the transporter worked best when I didn't touch it.
"Go," I said again, sweat forming on my brow.
When nothing moved, I chanced giving the two large suitcases sitting atop the force field a shove.
They moved smoothly, and I breathed another sigh of relief.
At least some luck was on my side.
So, in a distant future part of Africa, Binti is a mathematical genius of the Himba ethnic group.
She's been accepted into a university on another planet, and she's decided to go.
Carrying the blood of her people in her veins, adorned with the teachings, ways, even the land on her very skin, Binti leaves the earth.
As the story progresses, she becomes not other, but more.
This idea of leaving but bringing and then becoming more is at one of the hearts of Afrofuturism, or you can simply call it a different type of science fiction.
I can best explain the difference between classic science fiction and Afrofuturism if I used the octopus analogy.
Like humans, octopuses are some of the most intelligent creatures on earth.
However, octopus intelligence evolved from a different evolutionary line, separate from that of human beings, so the foundation is different.
The same can be said about the foundations of various forms of science fiction.
So much of science fiction speculates about technologies, societies, social issues, what's beyond our planet, what's within our planet.
Science fiction is one of the greatest and most effective forms of political writing.
It's all about the question, "What if?"
Still, not all science fiction has the same ancestral bloodline, that line being Western-rooted science fiction, which is mostly white and male.
We're talking Isaac Asimov, Jules Verne, H.G. Wells, George Orwell, Robert Heinlein, etc.
So what if a Nigerian-American wrote science fiction?
Growing up, I didn't read much science fiction.
I couldn't relate to these stories preoccupied with xenophobia, colonization and seeing aliens as others.
And I saw no reflection of anyone who looked like me in those narratives.
In the "Binti" novella trilogy, Binti leaves the planet to seek education from extraterrestrials.
She goes out as she is, looking the way she looks, carrying her cultures, being who she is.
I was inspired to write this story not because I was following a line of classic space opera narratives, but because of blood that runs deep, family, cultural conflict and the need to see an African girl leave the planet on her own terms.
My science fiction had different ancestors, African ones.
So I'm Nigerian-American.
I was born to two Nigerian immigrant parents and raised in the United States, one of the birthplaces of classic science fiction.
However, it was my Nigerian heritage that led me to write science fiction.
Specifically I cite those family trips to Nigeria in the late '90s.
I'd been taking trips back to Nigeria with my family since I was very young.
These early trips inspired me.
Hence the first story that I ever even wrote took place in Nigeria.
I wrote mainly magical realism and fantasy inspired by my love of Igbo and other West African traditional cosmologies and spiritualities.
However, in the late '90s, I started noticing the role of technology in Nigeria: cable TV and cell phones in the village, 419 scammers occupying the cybercafes, the small generator connected to my cousin's desktop computer because the power was always going on and off.
And my Americanness othered me enough to be intrigued by these things that most Nigerians saw as normal.
My intrigue eventually gave birth to stories.
I started opening strange doors.
What if aliens came to Lagos, Nigeria?
This is an excerpt from my novel, "Lagoon."
Everybody saw it, all over the world.
That was a real introduction to the great mess happening in Lagos, Nigeria, West Africa, Africa, here.
Because so many people in Lagos had portable, chargeable, glowing, vibrating, chirping, tweeting, communicating, connected devices, practically everything was recorded and posted online in some way, somehow, quickly.
The modern human world is connected like a spider's web.
The world was watching.
It watched in fascinated horror for information, but mostly for entertainment.
Footage of what was happening dominated every international news source, video-sharing website, social network, circle, pyramid and trapezoid.
But the story goes deeper.
It is in the mud, the dirt, the earth, in the fond memory of the soily cosmos.
It is in the always mingling past, present and future.
It is in the water.
It is in the powerful spirits and ancestors who dwelled in Lagos.
It is in the hearts and minds of the people of Lagos.
Change begets change.
The alien Ayodele knew it.
All her people know it.
So, this is a voice of Udide, the supreme spider artist, who is older than dirt and lives in the dirt beneath the city of Lagos, listening and commenting and weaving the story of extraterrestrials coming to Lagos.
In the end, the great spider who was the size of a house and responsible for weaving the past, present and future decides to come forth and be a part of the story.
Like Udide, the spider artist, African science fiction's blood runs deep and it's old, and it's ready to come forth, and when it does, imagine the new technologies, ideas and sociopolitical changes it'll inspire.
For Africans, homegrown science fiction can be a will to power.
What if?
It's a powerful question.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Let me show you some images of what I consider to be the cities of tomorrow.
So, that's Kibera, the largest squatter community in Nairobi.
This is the squatter community in Sanjay Gandhi National Park in Bombay, India, what's called Mumbai these days.
This is Hosinia, the largest and most urbanized favela in Rio de Janeiro.
And this is Sultanbelyi, which is one of the largest squatter communities in Istanbul.
They are what I consider to be the cities of tomorrow, the new urban world.
Now, why do I say that?
To tell you about that I have to talk about this fellow here, his name is Julius.
And I met Julius the last week that I was living in Kibera.
So, I had been there almost three months, and I was touring around the city going to different squatter areas and Julius was tagging along, and he was bug eyed and at certain points we were walking around, he grabbed my hand for support, which is something most Kenyans would never consider doing.
They're very polite and they don't get so forward so quickly.
And I found out later that it was Julius' first day in Nairobi, and he's one of many.
So, close to 200,000 people a day migrate from the rural to the urban areas.
That's, and I'm going to be fair to the statisticians who talked this morning, not almost 1.5 million people a week, but almost 1.4 million people a week but I'm a journalist, and we exaggerate, so almost 1.5 million people a week, close to 70 million people a year.
And if you do the math, that's 130 people every minute.
So, that'll be -- in the 18 minutes that I'm given to talk here, between two and three thousand people will have journeyed to the cities.
And here are the statistics.
Today -- a billion squatters, one in six people on the planet.
2030 -- two billion squatters, one in four people on the planet.
And the estimate is that in 2050, there'll be three billion squatters, better than one in three people on earth.
So, these are the cities of the future, and we have to engage them.
And I was thinking this morning of the good life, and before I show you the rest of my presentation, I'm going to violate TED rules here, and I'm going to read you something from my book as quickly as I can.
Because I think it says something about reversing our perception of what we think the good life is.
So -- "The hut was made of corrugated metal, set on a concrete pad.
It was a 10 by 10 cell.
Armstrong O'Brian, Jr. shared it with three other men.
Armstrong and his friends had no water -- they bought it from a nearby tap owner -- no toilet -- the families in this compound shared a single pit-latrine -- and no sewers or sanitation.
They did have electricity, but it was illegal service tapped from someone else's wires, and could only power one feeble bulb.
This was Southland, a small shanty community on the western side of Nairobi, Kenya.
But it could've been anywhere in the city, because more than half the city of Nairobi lives like this.
1.5 million people stuffed into mud or metal huts with no services, no toilets, no rights.
"Armstrong explained the brutal reality of their situation: they paid 1,500 shillings in rent, about 20 bucks a month, a relatively high price for a Kenyan shantytown, and they could not afford to be late with the money.
'In case you owe one month, the landlord will come with his henchmen and bundle you out. He will confiscate your things,' Armstrong said.
'Not one month, one day,' his roommate Hilary Kibagendi Onsomu, who was cooking ugali, the spongy white cornmeal concoction that is the staple food in the country, cut into the conversation.
They called their landlord a Wabenzi, meaning that he is a person who has enough money to drive a Mercedes-Benz.
Hilary served the ugali with a fry of meat and tomatoes; the sun slammed down on the thin steel roof; and we perspired as we ate.
"After we finished, Armstrong straightened his tie, put on a wool sports jacket, and we headed out into the glare.
Outside a mound of garbage formed the border between Southland and the adjacent legal neighborhood of Langata.
It was perhaps eight feet tall, 40 feet long, and 10 feet wide.
And it was set in a wider watery ooze.
As we passed, two boys were climbing the mount Kenya of trash.
They couldn't have been more than five or six years old.
They were barefoot, and with each step their toes sank into the muck sending hundreds of flies scattering from the rancid pile.
I thought they might be playing King of the Hill, but I was wrong.
Once atop the pile, one of the boys lowered his shorts, squatted, and defecated.
The flies buzzed hungrily around his legs.
When 20 families -- 100 people or so -- share a single latrine, a boy pooping on a garbage pile is perhaps no big thing.
But it stood in jarring contrast to something Armstrong had said as we were eating -- that he treasured the quality of life in his neighborhood.
"For Armstrong, Southland wasn't constrained by its material conditions.
Instead, the human spirit radiated out from the metal walls and garbage heaps to offer something no legal neighborhood could: freedom.
'This place is very addictive,' he had said.
'It's a simple life, but nobody is restricting you.
Nobody is controlling what you do.
Once you have stayed here, you cannot go back.' He meant back beyond that mountain of trash, back in the legal city, of legal buildings, with legal leases and legal rights.
'Once you have stayed here,' he said, 'you can stay for the rest of your life.'" So, he has hope, and this is where these communities start.
This is perhaps the most primitive shanty that you can find in Kibera, little more than a stick-and-mud hut next to a garbage heap.
This is getting ready for the monsoon in Bombay, India.
This is home improvement: putting plastic tarps on your roof.
This is in Rio de Janeiro, and it's getting a bit better, right?
We're seeing scavenged terra cotta tile and little pieces of signs, and plaster over the brick, some color, and this is Sulay Montakaya's house in Sultanbelyi, and it's getting even better.
He's got a fence; he scavenged a door; he's got new tile on the roof.
And then you get Rocinha and you can see that it's getting even better.
The buildings here are multi-story.
They develop -- you can see on the far right one where it seems to just stack on top of each other, room, after room, after room.
And what people do is they develop their home on one or two stories, and they sell their loggia or roof rights, and someone else builds on top of their building, and then that person sells the roof rights, and someone else builds on top of their building.
All of these buildings are made out of reinforced concrete and brick.
And then you get Sultanbelyi, in Turkey, where it's even built to a higher level of design.
The crud in the front is mattress stuffing, and you see that all over Turkey.
People dry out or air out their mattress stuffing on their roofs.
But the green building, on behind, you can see that the top floor is not occupied, so people are building with the possibility of expansion.
And it's built to a pretty high standard of design.
And then you finally get squatter homes like this, which is built on the suburban model.
Hey, that's a single family home in the squatter community.
That's also in Istanbul, Turkey.
They're quite vital places, these communities.
This is the main drag of Rocinha, the Estrada da Gavea, and there's a bus route that runs through it, lots of people out on the street.
These communities in these cities are actually more vital than the illegal communities.
They have more things going on in them.
This is a typical pathway in Rocinha called a "beco" -- these are how you get around the community.
It's on very steep ground.
They're built on the hills, inland from the beaches in Rio, and you can see that the houses are just cantilevered over the natural obstructions.
So, that's just a rock in the hillside.
And these becos are normally very crowded, and people hump furniture up them, or refrigerators up them, all sorts of things.
Beer is all carried in on your shoulders.
Beer is a very important thing in Brazil.
This is commerce in Kenya, right along the train tracks, so close to the train tracks that the merchants sometimes have to pull the merchandise out of the way.
This is a marketplace, also in Kenya, Toi Market, lots of dealers, in almost everything you want to buy.
Those green things in the foreground are mangoes.
This is a shopping street in Kibera, and you can see that there's a soda dealer, a health clinic, two beauty salons, a bar, two grocery stores, and a church, and more.
It's a typical downtown street; it just happens to be self-built.
This here, on the right-hand side, is what's called a -- if you look at the fine print under the awning -- it's a hotel.
And what hotel means, in Kenya and India, is an eating-place.
So, that's a restaurant.
People steal electrical power -- this is Rio.
People tap in and they have thieves who are called "grillos" or "crickets," and they steal the electrical power and wire the neighborhood.
People burn trash to get rid of the garbage, and they dig their own sewer channels.
Talk about more plastic bags than plankton.
And sometimes they have natural trash-disposal.
And when they have more money they cement their streets, and they put in sewers and good water pipes, and stuff like that.
This is water going to Rio. People run their water pipes all over the place, and that little hut right there has a pump in it, and that's what people do: they steal electricity; they install a pump and they tap into the water main, and pump water up to their houses.
So, the question is how do you go from the mud-hut village, to the more developed city, to the even highly developed Sultanbelyi?
I say there are two things.
One is people need a guarantee they won't be evicted.
That does not necessarily mean property rights, and I would disagree with Hernando de Soto on that question, because property rights create a lot of complications.
They're most often sold to people, and people then wind up in debt and have to pay back the debt, and sometimes have to sell their property in order to pay back the debt.
There's a whole variety of other reasons why property rights sometimes don't work in these cases, but they do need security of tenure.
And they need access to politics, and that can mean two things.
That can mean community organizing from below, but it can also mean possibilities from above.
And I say that because the system in Turkey is notable.
Turkey has two great laws that protect squatters.
One is that -- it's called "gecekondu" in Turkish, which means "built overnight," and if you build your house overnight in Turkey, you can't be evicted without due process of law, if they don't catch you during the night.
And the second aspect is that once you have 2,000 people in the community, you can petition the government to be recognized as a legal sub-municipality.
And when you're a legal sub-municipality, you suddenly have politics.
You're allowed to have an elected government, collect taxes, provide municipal services, and that's exactly what they do.
So, these are the civic leaders of the future.
The woman in the center is Geeta Jiwa.
She lives in one of those tents on the highway median in Mumbai.
That's Sureka Gundi; she also lives with her family on the tent along the same highway median.
They're very outspoken. They're very active.
They can be community leaders.
This woman is Nine, which means "grandma" in Turkish.
And there were three old ladies who lived in -- that's her self-built house behind her -- and they've lived there for 30 or 40 years, and they are the backbone of the community there.
This is Richard Muthama Peter, and he is an itinerant street photographer in Kibera.
He makes money taking pictures of the neighborhood, and the people in the neighborhood, and is a great resource in the community.
And finally my choice to run for mayor of Rio is Cezinio, the fruit merchant with his two kids here, and a more honest and giving and caring man I don't know.
The future of these communities is in the people and in our ability to work with those people.
So, I think the message I take, from what I read from the book, from what Armstrong said, and from all these people, is that these are neighborhoods.
The issue is not urban poverty.
The issue is not the larger, over-arching thing.
The issue is for us to recognize that these are neighborhoods -- this is a legitimate form of urban development -- and that cities have to engage these residents, because they are building the cities of the future.
Thank you very much.
I was a student in the '60s, a time of social upheaval and questioning, and -- on a personal level -- an awakening sense of idealism.
The war in Vietnam was raging, the Civil Rights movement was under way and pictures had a powerful influence on me.
Our political and military leaders were telling us one thing and photographers were telling us another.
I believed the photographers and so did millions of other Americans.
Their images fuelled resistance to the war and to racism.
They not only recorded history -- they helped change the course of history.
Their pictures became part of our collective consciousness and, as consciousness evolved into a shared sense of conscience, change became not only possible, but inevitable.
It puts a human face on issues which, from afar, can appear abstract or ideological or monumental in their global impact.
What happens at ground level, far from the halls of power, happens to ordinary citizens one by one.
And I understood that documentary photography has the ability to interpret events from their point of view.
It gives a voice to those who otherwise would not have a voice.
My TED wish. Theres a vital story that needs to be told and I wish for TED to help me gain access to it and then to help me come up with innovative and exciting ways to use news photography in the digital era.
Thank you very much.
[ 10.3.08 -- The story breaks. ] [ "I have been a witness, and these pictures are my testimony." ] [ South Africa ] [ This is happening now. ] [ Cambodia ] [ Swaziland ] [ One person dies every 20 seconds. ] [ Thailand ] [ An ancient disease is taking on a deadly new form. ] [ Siberia ] [ Lesotho ] [ Tuberculosis: the next pandemic? ] [ India ] [ TB is preventable and curable, ] [ but it is mutating due to inadequate treatment. ] [ XDR-TB: ] [ extreme drug resistant tuberculosis. ] [ There is no reliable cure. ] [ Patients often die within weeks of diagnosis. ] [ 49 countries have reported XDR-TB. ] [ XDR-TB is a critical threat to global health. ] [ Extreme outbreak, suffering, affliction ] [ Extreme loss, pain, pandemic ] [ Extremely preventable. ] [ XDR-TB. ] [ We can stop this now. ] [ Spread the story. Stop the disease. ] [ Go to XDRTB.org now. ] [ XDRTB.org: we are the treatment. ] [ We are the treatment. ] [ Made possible through the kind support of BD. ]
About two years ago, I got a phone call that changed my life.
"Hey, this is your cousin Hassen."
I froze.
You see, I have well over 30 first cousins, but I didn't know anybody named Hassen.
It turned out that Hassen was actually my mom's cousin and had just arrived in Montreal as a refugee.
And over the next few months, I would have three more relatives coming to Canada to apply for asylum with little more than the clothes on their back.
And in the two years since that phone call, my life has completely changed.
I left academia and now lead a diverse team of technologists, researchers and refugees that is developing customized self-help resources for newcomers.
We want to help them overcome language, cultural and other barriers that make them feel like they've lost control over their own lives.
And we feel that AI can help restore the rights and the dignity that many people lose when seeking help.
My family's refugee experience is not unique.
According to the UNHCR, every minute, 20 people are newly displaced by climate change, economic crisis and social and political instability.
And it was while volunteering at a local YMCA shelter that my cousin Hassen and other relatives were sent to that we saw and learned to appreciate how much effort and coordination resettlement requires.
When you first arrive, you need to find a lawyer and fill out legal documents within two weeks.
You also need to schedule a medical exam with a pre-authorized physician, just so that you can apply for a work permit.
And you need to start looking for a place to live before you receive any sort of social assistance.
With thousands fleeing the United States to seek asylum in Canada over the past few years, we quickly saw what it looks like when there are more people who need help than there are resources to help them.
Social services doesn't scale quickly, and even if communities do their best to help more people with limited resources, newcomers end up spending more time waiting in limbo, not knowing where to turn.
In Montreal, for example, despite millions of dollars being spent to support resettlement efforts, nearly 50 percent of newcomers still don't know that there are free resources that exist to help them with everything from filling out paperwork to finding a job.
The challenge is not that this information doesn't exist.
On the contrary, those in need are often bombarded with so much information that it's difficult to make sense of it all.
"Don't give me more information, just tell me what to do," was a sentiment we heard over and over again.
And it reflects how insanely difficult it could be to get your bearings when you first arrive in a new country.
Hell, I struggled with the same issues when I got to Montreal, and I have a PhD.
(Laughter) As another member of our team, himself also a refugee, put it: "In Canada, a SIM card is more important than food, because we will not die from hunger."
But getting access to the right resources and information can be the difference between life and death.
Let me say that again: getting access to the right resources and information can be the difference between life and death.
In order to address these issues, we built Atar, the first-ever AI-powered virtual advocate that guides you step-by-step through your first week of arriving in a new city.
Just tell Atar what you need help with.
Atar will then ask you some basic questions to understand your unique circumstances and determine your eligibility for resources.
For example: Do you have a place to stay tonight?
If not, would you prefer an all-women's shelter?
Do you have children?
Atar will then generate a custom, step-by-step to-do list that tells you everything that you need to know, from where to go, how to get there, what to bring with you and what to expect.
You can ask a question at any time, and if Atar doesn't have an answer, you'll be connected with a real person who does.
But what's most exciting is that we help humanitarian and service organizations collect the data and the analytics that's necessary to understand the changing needs of newcomers in real time.
That's a game changer.
We've already partnered with the UNHCR to provide this technology in Canada, and in our work have conducted campaigns in Arabic, English, French, Creole and Spanish.
When we talk about the issue of refugees, we often focus on the official statistic of 65.8 million forcibly displaced worldwide.
But the reality is much greater than that.
By 2050, there will be an additional 140 million people who are at risk of being displaced due to environmental degradation.
And today -- that is today -- there are nearly one billion people who already live in illegal settlements and slums.
Resettlement and integration is one of the greatest challenges of our time.
and our hope is that Atar can provide every single newcomer an advocate.
Our hope is that Atar can amplify existing efforts and alleviate pressure on a social safety net that's already stretched beyond imagination.
But what's most important to us is that our work helps restore the rights and the dignity that refugees lose throughout resettlement and integration by giving them the resources that they need in order to help themselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I grew up in Northern Ireland, right up in the very, very north end of it there, where it's absolutely freezing cold.
This was me running around in the back garden mid-summer.
(Laughter) I couldn't pick a career.
In Ireland the obvious choice is the military, but to be honest it actually kind of sucks.
(Laughter) My mother wanted me to be a dentist.
But the problem was that people kept blowing everything up.
So I actually went to school in Belfast, which was where all the action happened.
And this was a pretty common sight.
The school I went to was pretty boring.
They forced us to learn things like Latin.
The school teachers weren't having much fun, the sports were very dirty or very painful.
So I cleverly chose rowing, which I got very good at.
And I was actually rowing for my school here until this fateful day, and I flipped over right in front of the entire school.
And that was the finishing post right there.
(Laughter) So this was extremely embarrassing.
But our school at that time got a grant from the government, and they got an incredible computer -- the research machine 3DZ -- and they left the programming manuals lying around.
And so students like myself with nothing to do, we would learn how to program it.
Also around this time, at home, this was the computer that people were buying.
It was called the Sinclair ZX80. This was a 1K computer, and you'd buy your programs on cassette tape.
Actually I'm just going to pause for one second, because I heard that there's a prerequisite to speak here at TED -- you had to have a picture of yourself from the old days with big hair.
So I brought a picture with big hair.
(Laughter).
I just want to get that out of the way.
So after the Sinclair ZX80 came along the very cleverly named Sinclair ZX81.
(Laughter) And -- you see the picture at the bottom?
There's a picture of a guy doing homework with his son.
That's what they thought they had built it for.
The reality is we got the programming manual and we started making games for it.
We were programming in BASIC, which is a pretty awful language for games, so we ended up learning Assembly language so we could really take control of the hardware.
This is the guy that invented it, Sir Clive Sinclair, and he's showing his machine.
You had this same thing in America, it was called the Timex Sinclair1000.
To play a game in those days you had to have an imagination to believe that you were really playing "Battlestar Galactica."
The graphics were just horrible.
You had to have an even better imagination to play this game, "Death Rider."
But of course the scientists couldn't help themselves.
They started making their own video games.
This is one of my favorite ones here, where they have rabbit breeding, so males choose the lucky rabbit.
It was around this time we went from 1K to 16K, which was quite the leap.
And if you're wondering how much 16K is, this eBay logo here is 16K.
And in that amount of memory someone programmed a full flight simulation program.
And that's what it looked like.
I spent ages flying this flight simulator, and I honestly believed I could fly airplanes by the end of it.
Here's Clive Sinclair now launching his color computer.
He's recognized as being the father of video games in Europe.
He's a multi-millionaire, and I think that's why he's smiling in this photograph.
So I went on for the next 20 years or so making a lot of different games.
Some of the highlights were things like "The Terminator," "Aladdin," the "Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles."
Because I was from the United Kingdom, they thought the word ninja was a little too mean for children, so they decided to call it hero instead.
I personally preferred the Spanish version, which was "Tortugas Ninja."
That was much better.
(Laughter) Then the last game I did was based on trying to get the video game industry and Hollywood to actually work together on something -- instead of licensing from each other, to actually work.
Now, Chris did ask me to bring some statistics with me, so I've done that.
The video game industry in 2005 became a 29 billion dollar business.
It grows every year.
Last year was the biggest year.
By 2008, we're going to kick the butt of the music industry.
By 2010, we're going to hit 42 billion.
43 percent of gamers are female.
So there's a lot more female gamers than people are really aware.
The average age of gamers?
Well, obviously it's for children, right?
Well, no, actually it's 30 years old.
And interestingly, the people who buy the most games are 37.
So 37 is our target audience.
All video games are violent.
Of course the newspapers love to beat on this.
But 83 percent of games don't have any mature content whatsoever, so it's just not true.
Online gaming statistics.
I brought some stuff on "World of Warcraft." It's 5.5 million players.
It makes about 80 million bucks a month in subscriptions.
It costs 50 bucks just to install it on your computer, making the publisher about another 275 million.
The game costs about 80 million dollars to make, so basically it pays for itself in about a month.
A player in a game called "Project Entropia" actually bought his own island for 26,500 dollars.
You have to remember that this is not a real island.
He didn't actually buy anything, just some data.
But he got great terms on it.
This purchase included mining and hunting rights, ownership of all land on the island, and a castle with no furniture included.
(Laughter) This market is now estimated at over 800 million dollars annually.
And what's interesting about it is the market was actually created by the gamers themselves.
They found clever ways to trade items and to sell their accounts to each other so that they could make money while they were playing their games.
I dove onto eBay a couple of days ago just to see what was gong on, typed in World of Warcraft, got 6,000 items.
I liked this one the best: a level 60 Warlock with lots of epics for 174,000 dollars.
It's like that guy obviously had some pain while making it.
So as far as popularity of games, what do you think these people are doing here?
It turns out they're actually in Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles listening to the L.A. Philharmonic playing video game music.
That's what the show looks like.
You would expect it to be cheesy, but it's not.
It's very, very epic and a very beautiful concert.
And the people that went there absolutely loved it.
What do you think these people are doing?
They're actually bringing their computers so they can play games against each other.
And this is happening in every city around the world.
This is happening in your local cities too, you're probably just not aware of it.
Now, Chris told me that you had a timeline video a few years ago here just to show how video game graphics have been improving.
I wanted to update that video and give you a new look at it.
But what I want you to do is to try to understand it.
We're on this curve, and the graphics are getting so ridiculously better.
And I'm going to show you up to maybe 2007.
But I want you to try and think about what games could look like 10 years from now.
So we're going to start that video.
Video: Throughout human history people have played games.
As man's intellect and technology have evolved so too have the games he plays.
(Music) (Applause) David Perry: The thing again I want you to think about is, don't look at these graphics and think of that's the way it is.
Think about that's where we are right now, and the curve that we're on means that this is going to continue to get better.
This is an example of the kind of graphics you need to be able to draw if you wanted to get a job in the video game industry today.
You need to be really an incredible artist.
And once we get enough of those guys, we're going to want more fantasy artists that can create places we've never been to before, or characters that we've just never seen before.
So the obvious thing for me to talk about today is graphics and audio.
But if you were to go to a game developers conference, what they're all talking about is emotion, purpose, meaning, understanding and feeling.
You'll hear about talks like, can a video game make you cry?
And these are the kind of topics we really actually care about.
I came across a student who's absolutely excellent at expressing himself, and this student agreed that he would not show his video to anybody until you here at TED had seen it.
So I'd like to play this video.
So this is a student's opinion on what his experience of games are.
Video: I, like many of you, live somewhere between reality and video games.
Some part of me -- a true living, breathing person -- has become programmed, electronic and virtual.
The boundary of my brain that divides real from fantasy has finally begun to crumble.
I'm a video game addict and this is my story.
(Music) In the year of my birth the Nintendo Entertainment System also went into development.
I played in the backyard, learned to read, and even ate some of my vegetables.
Most of my childhood was spent playing with Legos.
But as was the case for most of my generation, I spent a lot of time in front of the TV.
Mr. Rogers, Walt Disney, Nick Junior, and roughly half a million commercials have undoubtedly left their mark on me.
When my parents bought my sister and I our first Nintendo, whatever inherent addictive quality this early interactive electronic entertainment possessed quickly took hold of me.
At some point something clicked.
(Music) With the combination of simple, interactive stories and the warmth of the TV set, my simple 16-bit Nintendo became more than just an escape.
It became an alternate existence, my virtual reality.
(Music) I'm a video game addict, and it's not because of a certain number of hours I have spent playing, or nights I have gone without sleep to finish the next level.
It is because I have had life-altering experiences in virtual space, and video games had begun to erode my own understanding of what is real and what is not.
I'm addicted, because even though I know I'm losing my grip on reality, I still crave more.
(Music) From an early age I learned to invest myself emotionally in what unfolded before me on screen.
Today, after 20 years of watching TV geared to make me emotional, even a decent insurance commercial can bring tears to my eyes.
I am just one of a new generation that is growing up.
A generation who may experience much more meaning through video games than they will through the real world.
Video games are nearing an evolutionary leap, a point where game worlds will look and feel just as real as the films we see in theatres, or the news we watch on TV.
And while my sense of free will in these virtual worlds may still be limited, what I do learn applies to my real life.
Play enough video games and eventually you will really believe you can snowboard, fly a plane, drive a nine-second quarter mile, or kill a man.
I know I can.
Unlike any pop culture phenomenon before it, video games actually allow us to become part of the machine.
They allow us to sublimate into the culture of interactive, downloaded, streaming, HD reality.
We are interacting with our entertainment.
I have come to expect this level of interaction.
Without it, the problems faced in the real world -- poverty, war, disease and genocide -- lack the levity they should.
Their importance blends into the sensationalized drama of prime time TV.
But the beauty of video games today lies not in the lifelike graphics, the vibrating joysticks or virtual surround sound.
It lies in that these games are beginning to make me emotional.
I have fought in wars, feared for my own survival, watched my cohorts die on beaches and woods that look and feel more real than any textbook or any news story.
The people who create these games are smart.
They know what makes me scared, excited, panicked, proud or sad.
Then they use these emotions to dimensionalize the worlds they create.
A well-designed video game will seamlessly weave the user into the fabric of the virtual experience.
As one becomes more experienced the awareness of physical control melts away.
I know what I want and I do it.
No buttons to push, no triggers to pull, just me and the game.
My fate and the fate of the world around me lie inside my hands.
I know violent video games make my mother worry.
What troubles me is not that video game violence is becoming more and more like real life violence, but that real life violence is starting to look more and more like a video game.
(Music) These are all troubles outside of myself.
I, however, have a problem very close to home.
Something has happened to my brain.
(Music) Perhaps there is a single part of our brain that holds all of our gut instincts, the things we know to do before we even think.
While some of these instincts may be innate, most are learned, and all of them are hardwired into our brains.
These instincts are essential for survival in both real and virtual worlds.
Only in recent years has the technology behind video games allowed for a true overlap in stimuli.
As gamers we are now living by the same laws of physics in the same cities and doing many of the same things we once did in real life, only virtually.
Consider this -- my real life car has about 25,000 miles on it.
In all my driving games, I've driven a total of 31,459 miles.
To some degree I've learned how to drive from the game.
The sensory cues are very similar.
It's a funny feeling when you have spent more time doing something on the TV than you have in real life.
When I am driving down a road at sunset all I can think is, this is almost as beautiful as my games are.
For my virtual worlds are perfect.
More beautiful and rich than the real world around us.
I'm not sure what the implications of my experience are, but the potential for using realistic video game stimuli in repetition on a vast number of loyal participants is frightening to me.
Today I believe Big Brother would find much more success brainwashing the masses with video games rather than just simply TVs.
Video games are fun, engaging, and leave your brain completely vulnerable to re-programming.
But maybe brainwashing isn't always bad.
Imagine a game that teaches us to respect each other, or helps us to understand the problems we're all facing in the real world.
There is a potential to do good as well.
It is critical, as these virtual worlds continue to mirror the real world we live in, that game developers realize that they have tremendous responsibilities before them.
I'm not sure what the future of video games holds for our civilization.
But as virtual and real world experiences increasingly overlap there is a greater and greater potential for other people to feel the same way I do.
What I have only recently come to realize is that beyond the graphics, sound, game play and emotion it is the power to break down reality that is so fascinating and addictive to me.
I know that I am losing my grip.
Part of me is just waiting to let go.
I know though, that no matter how amazing video games may become, or how flat the real world may seem to us, that we must stay aware of what our games are teaching us and how they leave us feeling when we finally do unplug.
(Applause) DP: Wow.
(Applause) I found that video very, very thought provoking, and that's why I wanted to bring it here for you guys to see.
And what was interesting about it is the obvious choice for me to talk about was graphics and audio.
But as you heard, Michael talked about all these other elements as well.
Video games give an awful lot of other things too, and that's why people get so addicted.
The most important one being fun.
The name of this track is "The Magic To Come."
Who is that going to come from?
Is it going to come from the best directors in the world as we thought it probably would?
I don't think so.
I think it's going to come from the children who are growing up now that aren't stuck with all of the stuff that we remember from the past.
They're going to do it their way, using the tools that we've created.
The same with students or highly creative people, writers and people like that.
As far as colleges go, there's about 350 colleges around the world teaching video game courses.
That means there's literally thousands of new ideas.
Some of the ideas are really dreadful and some of them are great.
There's nothing worse than having to listen to someone try and pitch you a really bad video game idea.
(Laughter) Chris Anderson: You're off, you're off. That's it.
He's out of time.
DP: I've just got a little tiny bit more if you'll indulge me.
CA: Go ahead. I'm going to stay right here though.
(Laughter) DP: This is just a cool shot, because this is students coming to school after class.
The school is closed; they're coming back at midnight because they want to pitch their video game ideas.
I'm sitting at the front of the class, and they're actually pitching their ideas.
So it's hard to get students to come back to class, but it is possible.
This is my daughter, her name's Emma, she's 17 months old.
And I've been asking myself, what is Emma going to experience in the video game world?
And as I've shown here, we have the audience.
She's never going to know a world where you can't press a button and have millions of people ready to play.
You know, we have the technology.
She's never going to know a world where the graphics just aren't stunning and really immersive.
And as the student video showed, we can impact and move.
She's never going to know a world where video games aren't incredibly emotional and will probably make her cry.
I just hope she likes video games.
(Laughter) So, my closing thought.
Games on the surface seem simple entertainment, but for those that like to look a little deeper, the new paradigm of video games could open entirely new frontiers to creative minds that like to think big.
Where better to challenge those minds than here at TED?
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: David Perry. That was awesome.
Hi, I'm Jack, and I'm transgender.
Let me take a guess at some of thoughts that might be running through your head right now.
"Transgender?
Wait, does that mean that they're actually a man or actually a woman?"
"I wonder if he's had the surgery yet ...
Oh, now I'm looking at his crotch.
Look to the right, that's a safe place to look."
"Yes, I knew it! No real man has hips like those."
"My friend's daughter is transgender -- I wonder if they know each other."
"Oh my gosh, he is so brave.
I would totally support his right to use the men's bathroom.
Wait, but how does he use the bathroom?
How does he have sex?"
OK, OK, let's stop those hypothetical questions before we get too close for my comfort.
I mean, don't get me wrong, I did come here today to share my personal experiences being transgender, but I did not wake up this morning wanting to tell an entire audience about my sex life.
Of course, that's the problem with being trans, right?
People are pretty much always wondering how we have sex and what kind of equipment we're working with below the belt.
Being trans is awkward.
And not just because the gender I was assigned at birth mismatches the one I really am.
Being trans is awkward because everyone else gets awkward when they're around me.
People who support me and all other trans people wholeheartedly are often so scared to say to wrong thing, so embarrassed to not know what they think they should, that they never ask.
Part of what was so nerve-racking about coming out as transgender was knowing that people wouldn't know what I meant.
And when someone comes out as gay, people know what that means, but when you come out as trans, you have to face the misconceptions that will color other people's impressions of you even after you've educated them ...
And you will have to educate them.
When I came out, I wrote at 10-page encyclopedic document with a zip-file attachment of music and videos that I sent to every single person I came out to.
(Laughter) And I kept it in my email signature for months afterwards, because you also don't ever stop coming out.
I came out to the accountant helping me with my taxes and the TSA agents who didn't know which one of them should pat me down, the man or the woman.
I mean, I just came out to everyone watching this.
When I came out to my dad, to my great relief, he was totally cool with me being trans, but as soon as I started talking about physically transitioning, he freaked.
And I quickly realized it was because he, like so many other people, think that physical transition means just one thing: the surgery.
Now, listen, if there were one magical surgery that could turn me into a tall, muscular, societally perfect image of a man overnight, I'd sign up in a heartbeat.
Unfortunately, it isn't that simple.
There are dozens of different gender-affirming surgeries from chest surgeries to bottom surgeries to facial feminization and man-sculpting.
Many trans people will only ever undergo one procedure in their lifetime, if that.
Maybe because they don't personally feel the need but also because they're expensive, and health insurance is only beginning to cover them.
Instead, the first step for a trans person seeking physical transition is usually hormone replacement therapy.
Hormones are why I have a deeper voice and some sparse whiskers on my neck and a giant pimple on my chin.
Basically, they put you through a second puberty ...
it's a blast.
(Laughter) Now, because our transitions are slower and steadier than historic misconceptions can lead people to believe, there can be some confusion about when to call someone by their new name and pronouns.
There's no distinct point in physical transition at which a trans person becomes their true gender.
As soon as they tell you their new name and pronouns, that's when you start using them.
It can be difficult to make the change.
You might slip up here and there; I've slipped up myself with other trans people.
But I always think to myself, if we can change from calling Puff Daddy to P. Diddy, and if we apologize profusely when we've used the wrong gender pronoun for someone's pet cat -- I mean, I think we can make the same effort for the real humans in our lives.
Now, there is no topic that makes other people more awkward about trans people than public bathrooms.
Ah, the bathrooms -- the latest political flash point for LGBT opponents.
Here's a fun fact about bathrooms: more US congressmen have been convicted of assaulting someone in a public bathroom than trans people have been.
(Laughter) The truth is we trans people are so much more scared of you than you are of us.
It's a huge point of discussion in trans communities about which bathroom to start using and when, so we don't attract attention that could lead to violence against us.
I personally started using the men's room when I started getting confused and frightened looks in the women's room, even though I was petrified to start going into the men's room.
And often we opt to just not go to the bathroom at all.
A 2015 national survey of trans people found that eight percent of us had had a urinary tract infection in the past year as a result of avoiding restrooms.
These bathroom bills aren't protecting anyone.
All they're doing is ensuring that when trans people are assaulted in bathrooms, the law will no longer be on our side when we report it.
Being trans means a daily onslaught of these misconceptions.
And I have it pretty easy.
I am a white, able-bodied guy sitting nearly at the peak of privilege mountain.
For non-binary people, for trans women, for trans people of color, it is so much harder.
So I've given you a starter pack of trans knowledge that I hope will lead to more learning on your own.
Talk to trans people.
Listen to us.
Amplify our voices.
Take the heat off of us and educate those around you so we don't have to every time.
Maybe someday, when I say, "Hi, I'm Jack, and I'm transgender," the only response I'll get is, "Hi, nice to meet you."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I've been doing some thinking.
I'm going to kill my dad.
I called my sister.
"Listen, I've been doing some thinking.
I'm going to kill Dad.
I'm going to take him to Oregon, find some heroin, and give it to him."
My dad has frontotemporal lobe dementia, or FTD.
It's a confusing disease that hits people in their 50s or 60s.
It can completely change someone's personality, making them paranoid and even violent.
My dad's been sick for a decade, but three years ago he got really sick, and we had to move him out of his house -- the house that I grew up in, the house that he built with his own hands.
My strapping, cool dad with the falsetto singing voice had to move into a facility for round-the-clock care when he was just 65.
At first my mom and sisters and I made the mistake of putting him in a regular nursing home.
It was really pretty; it had plush carpet and afternoon art classes and a dog named Diane.
But then I got a phone call.
"Ms. Malone, we've arrested your father."
"What?"
"Well, he threatened everybody with cutlery.
And then he yanked the curtains off the wall, and then he tried to throw plants out the window.
And then, well, he pulled all the old ladies out of their wheelchairs."
"All the old ladies?"
(Laughter) "What a cowboy."
(Laughter) After he got kicked out of there, we bounced him between a bunch of state-run facilities before finding a treatment center specifically for people with dementia.
At first, he kind of liked it, but over time his health declined, and one day I walked in and found him sitting hunched over on the ground wearing a onesie -- those kinds of outfits that zip in the back.
I watched him for about an hour as he yanked at it, trying to find a way out of this thing.
And it's supposed to be practical, but to me it looked like a straightjacket.
And so I ran out.
I left him there.
I sat in my truck -- his old truck -- hunched over, this really deep guttural cry coming out of the pit of my belly.
I just couldn't believe that my father, the Adonis of my youth, my really dear friend, would think that this kind of life was worth living anymore.
We're programmed to prioritize productivity.
So when a person -- an Adonis in this case -- is no longer productive in the way we expect him to be, the way that he expects himself to be, what value does that life have left?
That day in the truck, all I could imagine was that my dad was being tortured and his body was the vessel of that torture.
I've got to get him out of that body.
I've got to get him out of that body; I'm going to kill Dad.
I call my sister.
"Beth," she said.
"You don't want to live the rest of your life knowing that you killed your father.
And you'd be arrested I think, because he can't condone it.
And you don't even know how to buy heroin."
(Laughter) It's true, I don't.
(Laughter) The truth is we talk about his death a lot.
When will it happen? What will it be like?
But I wish that we would have talked about death when we were all healthy.
What does my best death look like?
What does your best death look like?
But my family didn't know to do that.
And my sister was right.
I shouldn't murder Dad with heroin, but I've got to get him out of that body.
So I went to a psychic.
And then a priest, and then a support group, and they all said the same thing: sometimes people hang on when they're worried about loved ones.
Just tell them you're safe, and it's OK to go when you're ready.
So I went to see Dad.
I found him hunched over on the ground in the onesie.
He was staring past me and just kind of looking at the ground.
I gave him a ginger ale and just started talking about nothing in particular, but as I was talking, he sneezed from the ginger ale.
And the sneeze -- it jerked his body upright, sparking him back to life a little bit.
And he just kept drinking and sneezing and sparking, over and over and over again until it stopped.
And I heard, "Heheheheheh, heheheheheh ...
this is so fabulous.
This is so fabulous."
His eyes were open and he was looking at me, and I said, "Hi, Dad!"
and he said, "Hiya, Beth."
And I opened my mouth to tell him, right?
"Dad, if you want to die, you can die.
We're all OK."
But as I opened my mouth to tell him, all I could say was, "Dad!
I miss you."
And then he said, "Well, I miss you, too."
And then I just fell over because I'm just a mess.
So I fell over and I sat there with him because for the first time in a long time he seemed kind of OK.
And I memorized his hands, feeling so grateful that his spirit was still attached to his body.
And in that moment I realized I'm not responsible for this person.
I'm not his doctor, I'm not his mother, I'm certainly not his God, and maybe the best way to help him and me is to resume our roles as father and daughter.
And so we just sat there, calm and quiet like we've always done.
Nobody was productive.
Both of us are still strong.
"OK, Dad. I'm going to go, but I'll see you tomorrow."
"OK," he said.
"Hey, this is a pretty nice hacienda."
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I'd like to tell you a story about climate and change, but it's really a story about people and not polar bears.
So this is our house that we lived in in the mid-2000s.
I was the chief operating officer for the Navy's weather and ocean service.
It happened to be down at a place called Stennis Space Center right on the Gulf Coast, so we lived in a little town called Waveland, Mississippi, nice modest house, and as you can see, it's up against a storm surge.
Now, if you ever wonder what a 30-foot or nine-meter storm surge does coming up your street, let me show you.
Same house.
That's me, kind of wondering what's next.
But when we say we lost our house -- this is, like, right after Katrina -- so the house is either all the way up there in the railway tracks, or it's somewhere down there in the Gulf of Mexico, and to this day, we really, we lost our house.
We don't know where it is.
(Laughter) You know, it's gone.
So I don't show this for pity, because in many ways, we were the luckiest people on the Gulf Coast.
One of the things is, we had insurance, and that idea of insurance is probably pretty important there.
But does this scale up, you know, what happened here?
And I think it kind of does, because as you've heard, as the sea levels come up, it takes weaker and weaker storms to do something like this.
So let's just step back for a second and kind of look at this.
And, you know, climate's really complicated, a lot of moving parts in this, but I kind of put it about it's all about the water.
See, see those three blue dots there down on the lower part?
The one you can easily see, that's all the water in the world.
Those two smaller dots, those are the fresh water.
And it turns out that as the climate changes, the distribution of that water is changing very fundamentally.
So now we have too much, too little, wrong place, wrong time.
It's salty where it should be fresh; it's liquid where it should be frozen; it's wet where it should be dry; and in fact, the very chemistry of the ocean itself is changing.
And what that does from a security or a military part is it does three things: it changes the very operating environment that we're working in, it threatens our bases, and then it has geostrategic risks, which sounds kind of fancy and I'll explain what I mean by that in a second.
So let's go to just a couple examples here.
And we'll start off with what we all know is of course a political and humanitarian catastrophe that is Syria.
And it turns out that climate was one of the causes in a long chain of events.
It actually started back in the 1970s.
When Assad took control over Syria, he decided he wanted to be self-sufficient in things like wheat and barley.
Now, you would like to think that there was somebody in Assad's office that said, "Hey boss, you know, we're in the eastern Mediterranean, kind of dry here, maybe not the best idea."
But I think what happened was, "Boss, you are a smart, powerful and handsome man. We'll get right on it."
And they did.
So by the '90s, believe it or not, they were actually self-sufficient in food, but they did it at a great cost.
They did it at a cost of their aquifers, they did it at a cost of their surface water.
And of course, there are many nonclimate issues that also contributed to Syria.
There was the Iraq War, and as you can see by that lower blue line there, over a million refugees come into the cities.
And then about a decade ago, there's this tremendous heat wave and drought -- fingerprints all over that show, yes, this is in fact related to the changing climate -- has put another three quarters of a million farmers into those same cities.
Why? Because they had nothing.
They had dust. They had dirt. They had nothing.
So now they're in the cities, the Iraqis are in the cities, it's Assad, it's not like he's taking care of his people, and all of a sudden we have just this huge issue here of massive instability and a breeding ground for extremism.
And this is why in the security community we call climate change a risk to instability.
It accelerates instability here.
In plain English, it makes bad places worse.
So let's go to another place here.
Now we're going to go 2,000 kilometers, or about 1,200 miles, north of Oslo, only 600 miles from the Pole, and this is arguably the most strategic island you've never heard of.
It's a place called Svalbard.
It sits astride the sea lanes that the Russian Northern Fleet needs to get out and go into warmer waters.
It is also, by virtue of its geography, a place where you can control every single polar orbiting satellite on every orbit.
It is the strategic high ground of space.
Climate change has greatly reduced the sea ice around here, greatly increasing human activity, and it's becoming a flashpoint, and in fact the NATO Parliamentary Assembly is going to meet here on Svalbard next month.
The Russians are very, very unhappy about that.
So if you want to find a flashpoint in the Arctic, look at Svalbard there.
Now, in the military, we have known for decades, if not centuries, that the time to prepare, whether it's for a hurricane, a typhoon or strategic changes, is before they hit you, and Admiral Nimitz was right there.
That is the time to prepare.
Fortunately, our Secretary of Defense, Secretary Mattis, he understands that as well, and what he understands is that climate is a risk.
He has said so in his written responses to Congress, and he says, "As Secretary of Defense, it's my job to manage such risks."
It's not only the US military that understands this.
Many of our friends and allies in other navies and other militaries have very clear-eyed views about the climate risk.
And in fact, in 2014, I was honored to speak for a half-a-day seminar at the International Seapower Symposium to 70 heads of navies about this issue.
So Winston Churchill is alleged to have said, I'm not sure if he said anything, but he's alleged to have said that Americans can always be counted upon to do the right thing after exhausting every other possibility.
(Laughter) So I would argue we're still in the process of exhausting every other possibility, but I do think we will prevail.
But I need your help.
This is my ask.
I ask not that you take your recycling out on Wednesday, but that you engage with every business leader, every technology leader, every government leader, and ask them, "Ma'am, sir, what are you doing to stabilize the climate?"
It's just that simple.
Because when enough people care enough, the politicians, most of whom won't lead on this issue -- but they will be led -- that will change this.
Because I can tell you, the ice doesn't care.
The ice doesn't care who's in the White House.
It doesn't care which party controls your congress.
It doesn't care which party controls your parliament.
It just melts.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When I was four years old, my dad taught me the Taos Pueblo Hoop Dance, a traditional dance born hundreds of years ago in Southwestern USA.
A series of hoops are created out of willow wood, and they're threaded together to create formations of the natural world, showing the many beauties of life.
In this dance, you're circling in a constant spin, mimicking the movement of the Sun and the passage of time.
Watching this dance was magic to me.
Like with a time capsule, I was taking a look through a cultural window to the past.
I felt a deeper connection to how my ancestors used to look at the world around them.
Since then, I've always been obsessed with time capsules.
They take on many forms, but the common thread is that they're uncontrollably fascinating to us as human beings, because they're portals to a memory, and they hold the important power of keeping stories alive.
As a filmmaker and composer, it's been my journey to find my voice, reclaim the stories of my heritage and the past and infuse them into music and film time capsules to share.
To tell you a bit about how I found my voice, I'd like to share a bit about how I grew up.
In Southern California, I grew up in a multigenerational home, meaning I lived under the same roof as my parents, aunts, uncles and grandparents.
My mother is Dutch-Indonesian and Chinese with immigrant parents, and my father is Ojibwe and an enrolled tribal member of the Prairie Band's Potawatomi Tribe in Northeastern Kansas.
So one weekend I'd be learning how to fold dumplings, and the next, I'd be traditional-style dancing at a powwow, immersed in the powerful sounds of drums and singers.
Being surrounded by many cultures was the norm, but also a very confusing experience.
It was really hard for me to find my voice, because I never felt I was enough -- never Chinese, Dutch-Indonesian or Native enough.
Because I never felt I was a part of any community, I sought to learn the stories of my heritage and connect them together to rediscover my own.
The first medium I felt gave me a voice was music.
With layers of sounds and multiple instruments, I could create soundscapes and worlds that were much bigger than my own.
Through music, I'm inviting you into a sonic portal of my memories and emotions, and I'm holding up a mirror to yours.
One of my favorite instruments to play is the guzheng zither, a Chinese harp-like instrument.
While the hoop dance is hundreds of years old, the guzheng has more than 2,000 years of history.
I'm playing the styles that greatly influence me today, like electronic music, with an instrument that was used to play traditional folk music long ago.
And I noticed an interesting connection: the zither is tuned to the pentatonic scale, a scale that is universally known in so many parts of music around the world, including Native American folk songs.
In both Chinese and Native folk, I sense this inherent sound of longing and holding onto the past, an emotion that greatly drives the music I create today.
At the time, I wondered if I could make this feeling of immersion even more powerful, by layering visuals and music -- visuals and images on top of the music.
So I turned to internet tutorials to learn editing software, went to community college to save money and created films.
After a few years experimenting, I was 17 and had something I wanted to tell and preserve.
It started with a question: What happens when a story is forgotten?
I lead with this in my latest documentary film, "Smoke That Travels," which immerses people into the world of music, song, color and dance, as I explore my fear that a part of my identity, my Native heritage, will be forgotten in time.
Many indigenous languages are dying due to historically forced assimilation.
From the late 1800s to the early 1970s, Natives were forced into boarding schools, where they were violently punished if they practiced traditional ways or spoke their native language, most of which were orally passed down.
As of now, there are 567 federally recognized tribes in the United States, when there used to be countless more.
In my father's words, "Being Native is not about wearing long hair in braids.
It's not about feathers or beadwork.
It's about the way we all center ourselves in the world as human beings."
After traveling with this film for over a year, I met indigenous people from around the world, from the Ainu of Japan, Sami of Scandinavia, the Maori and many more.
And they were all dealing with the exact same struggle to preserve their language and culture.
At this moment, I not only realize the power storytelling has to connect all of us as human beings but the responsibility that comes with this power.
It can become incredibly dangerous when our stories are rewritten or ignored, because when we are denied identity, we become invisible.
We're all storytellers.
Reclaiming our narratives and just listening to each other's can create a portal that can transcend time itself.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I come from a family of five brothers, all scientists and engineers.
A few years ago, I sent them the following email: "Dear brothers, I hope this message finds you well.
I am emailing to let you know that I'm dropping out of my master's program in engineering to pursue a career as a full-time musician.
All that I ask from you is not to worry about me."
Brother number one replied.
He was encouraging but a bit skeptical.
He said, "I wish you the best of luck.
You're going to need it."
(Laughter) Brother number two was a little bit more skeptical.
He said, "Don't do it!
This will be the worst mistake of your life.
Find a real career."
(Laughter) Well, the rest of my brothers were so enthusiastic about my decision, they didn't even respond.
(Laughter) I know that the skepticism coming from my brothers is out of care and concern for me.
They were worried.
They thought it would be difficult to make it as an artist, that it will be a challenge.
And you know what? They were right.
It is such a challenge to be a full-time artist.
I have so many friends who need to have a second job as a plan B in order to pay for the bills, except that plan B sometimes becomes their plan A.
And it's not just my friends and I who experience this.
The US Census Bureau states that only 10 percent of art school graduates end up working as full-time artists.
The other 90 percent, they change careers, they work in marketing, sales, education and other fields.
But this is not news, right?
We almost expect the artist to be a struggling artist.
But why should we expect that?
I read an article in the "Huffington Post" saying that four years ago, the European Union began the world's largest ever arts funding initiative.
Creative Europe will give 2.4 billion dollars to over 300,000 artists.
In contrast, the US budget for our National Endowment for the Arts, the largest single funder for the arts across the United States, is merely 146 million dollars.
To put things into perspective, the US budget for the military marching bands alone is almost twice as much as the entire NEA.
Another striking image comes from Brendan McMahon for the "Huffington Post," saying that out of the one trillion dollar budget for military and defense-related spending, if only 0.05 percent were allocated to the arts, we would be able to pay for 20 full-time symphony orchestras at 20 million dollars apiece, and give over 80,000 artists an annual salary of 50,000 dollars each.
If that's only 0.05 percent, imagine what a full one percent could do.
Now, I know we live in a capitalist society, and profits matter a lot.
So let's look at it from a financial angle, shall we?
The US nonprofit arts industry generates more than 166 billion dollars in economic activity, it employs 5.7 million people and it returns 12.6 billion dollars in tax revenue.
But this is only a financial angle, right?
We all know that the arts is way more than just an economic value.
The arts brings meaning to life.
It's the spirit of our culture.
It brings people together and it supports creativity and social cohesion.
But if the arts contributes this much to our economy, why then do we still invest so little in arts and artists?
Why do more than 80 percent of our schools nationwide still experience budget cuts in arts education programs?
What is it about the value of arts and artists that we still don't understand?
I believe the system is flawed and far from being fair, and I want to help change that.
I want to live in a society where artists are more valued and have more cultural and financial support so they can focus on creating arts instead of being forced to drive Ubers or take corporate jobs they'd rather not have.
There are other sources of income for artists, however.
There are private foundations, grants and patrons who give money, except a vast majority of artists don't know about these opportunities.
On one side you have institutions and people with money.
On the other side you have artists seeking funding, but the artists don't know about the people with the money, and the people with the money don't necessarily know about the artists out there.
This is why I am very excited to share "Grantpa," an online platform that uses technology to match artists with grants and funding opportunities in a way that is easy, fast and less intimidating.
Grantpa is only one step towards solving an existing problem of funding inequality, but we need to work collectively on multiple fronts to reevaluate how we view the artists in our society.
Do we think of arts as a luxury or a necessity?
Do we understand what goes on in the day-to-day life of an artist, or do we still believe that artists, no matter how struggling they are, are happy simply because they're following their passion?
In a few years, I plan to send my brothers the following email: "Dear brothers, I hope this message finds you well.
I am emailing to let you know that I am doing great and so are hundreds of thousands of artists who are being valued more culturally and financially and getting enough funding to focus on their crafts and create more art.
I appreciate all of your support.
Couldn't have done it without you."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to take you back basically to my hometown, and to a picture of my hometown of the week that "Emergence" came out.
And it's a picture we've seen several times.
Basically, "Emergence" was published on 9/11.
I live right there in the West Village, so the plume was luckily blowing west, away from us.
We had a two-and-a-half-day-old baby in the house that was ours -- we hadn't taken it from somebody else.
(Laughter) And one of the thoughts that I had dealing with these two separate emergences of a book and a baby, and having this event happen so close -- that my first thought, when I was still kind of in the apartment looking out at it all or walking out on the street and looking out on it just in front of our building, was that I'd made a terrible miscalculation in the book that I'd just written.
Because so much of that book was a celebration of the power and creative potential of density, of largely urban density, of connecting people and putting them together in one place, and putting them on sidewalks together and having them share ideas and share physical space together.
And it seemed to me looking at that -- that tower burning and then falling, those towers burning and falling -- that in fact, one of the lessons here was that density kills.
And that of all the technologies that were exploited to make that carnage come into being, probably the single group of technologies that cost the most lives were those that enable 50,000 people to live in two buildings 110 stories above the ground.
If they hadn't been crowded -- you compare the loss of life at the Pentagon to the Twin Towers, and you can see that very powerfully.
And so I started to think, well, you know, density, density -- I'm not sure if, you know, this was the right call.
And I kind of ruminated on that for a couple of days.
And then about two days later, the wind started to change a little bit, and you could sense that the air was not healthy.
And so even though there were no cars still in the West Village where we lived, my wife sent me out to buy a, you know, a large air filter at the Bed Bath and Beyond, which was located about 20 blocks away, north.
And so I went out.
And obviously I'm physically a very strong person, as you can tell -- (Laughter) -- so I wasn't worried about carrying this thing 20 blocks.
And I walked out, and this really miraculous thing happened to me as I was walking north to buy this air filter, which was that the streets were completely alive with people.
There was an incredible -- it was, you know, a beautiful day, as it was for about a week after, and the West Village had never seemed more lively.
I walked up along Hudson Street -- where Jane Jacobs had lived and written her great book that so influenced what I was writing in "Emergence" -- past the White Horse Tavern, that great old bar where Dylan Thomas drank himself to death, and the Bleecker Street playground was filled with kids.
And all the people who lived in the neighborhood, who owned restaurants and bars in the neighborhood, were all out there -- had them all open.
People were out.
There were no cars, so it seemed even better, in some ways.
And it was a beautiful urban day, and the incredible thing about it was that the city was working.
The city was there.
All the things that make a great city successful and all the things that make a great city stimulating -- they were all on display there on those streets.
And I thought, well, this is the power of a city.
I mean, the power of the city -- we talked about cities as being centralized in space, but what makes them so strong most of the time is they're decentralized in function.
They don't have a center executive branch that you can take out and cause the whole thing to fail.
If they did, it probably was right there at Ground Zero.
I mean, you know, the emergency bunker was right there, was destroyed by the attacks, and obviously the damage done to the building and the lives.
But nonetheless, just 20 blocks north, two days later, the city had never looked more alive.
If you'd gone into the minds of the people, well, you would have seen a lot of trauma, and you would have seen a lot of heartache, and you would have seen a lot of things that would take a long time to recover.
But the system itself of this city was thriving.
So I took heart in seeing that.
So I wanted to talk a little bit about the reasons why that works so well, and how some of those reasons kind of map on to where the Web is going right now.
The question that I found myself asking to people when I was talking about the book afterwards is -- when you've talked about emergent behavior, when you've talked about collective intelligence, the best way to get people to kind of wrap their heads around that is to ask, who builds a neighborhood?
Who decides that Soho should have this personality and that the Latin Quarter should have this personality?
Well, there are some kind of executive decisions, but mostly the answer is -- everybody and nobody.
Everybody contributes a little bit.
No single person is really the ultimate actor behind the personality of a neighborhood.
Same thing to the question of, who was keeping the streets alive post-9/11 in my neighborhood?
Well, it was the whole city.
The whole system kind of working on it, and everybody contributing a small little part.
And this is increasingly what we're starting to see on the Web in a bunch of interesting ways -- most of which weren't around, actually, except in very experimental things, when I was writing "Emergence" and when the book came out.
So it's been a very optimistic time, I think, and I want to just talk about a few of those things.
I think that there is effectively a new kind of model of interactivity that's starting to emerge online right now.
And the old one looked like this.
This is not the future King of England, although it looks like it.
It's some guy, it's a GeoCities homepage of some guy that I found online who's interested, if you look at the bottom, in soccer and Jesus and Garth Brooks and Clint Beckham and "my hometown" -- those are his links.
But nothing really says this model of interactivity -- which was so exciting and captures the real, the Web Zeitgeist of 1995 -- than "Click here for a picture of my dog."
That is -- you know, there's no sentence that kind of conjures up that period better than that, I think, which is that you suddenly have the power to put up a picture of your dog and link to it, and somebody reading the page has the power to click on that link or not click on that link.
And, you know, I don't want to belittle that. That, in a sense -- to reference what Jeff was talking about yesterday -- that was, in a sense, the kind of interface electricity that powered a lot of the explosion of interest in the Web: that you could put up a link, and somebody could click on it, and it could take you anywhere you wanted to go.
But it's still a very one-to-one kind of relationship.
There's one person putting up the link, and there's another person on the other end trying to decide whether to click on it or not.
The new model is much more like this, and we've already seen a couple of references to this.
This is what happens when you search "Steven Johnson" on Google.
About two months ago, I had the great breakthrough -- one of my great, kind of shining achievements -- which is that my website finally became a top result for "Steven Johnson."
There's some theoretical physicist at MIT named Steven Johnson who has dropped two spots, I'm happy to say.
(Laughter) And, you know, I mean, I'll look at a couple of things like this, but Google is obviously the greatest technology ever invented for navel gazing.
It's just that there are so many other people in your navel when you gaze.
Because effectively, what's happening here, what's creating this page, obviously -- and we all know this, but it's worth just thinking about it -- is not some person deciding that I am the number one answer for Steven Johnson, but rather somehow the entire web of people putting up pages and deciding to link to my page or not link to it, and Google just sitting there and running the numbers.
So there's this collective decision-making that's going on.
This page is effectively, collectively authored by the Web, and Google is just helping us kind of to put the authorship in one kind of coherent place.
Now, they're more innovative -- well, Google's pretty innovative -- but there are some new twists on this.
There's this incredibly interesting new site -- Technorati -- that's filled with lots of little widgets that are expanding on these.
And these are looking in the blog world and the world of weblogs.
He's analyzed basically all the weblogs out there that he's tracking.
And he's tracking how many other weblogs linked to those weblogs, and so you have kind of an authority -- a weblog that has a lot of links to it is more authoritative than a weblog that has few links to it.
And so at any given time, on any given page on the Web, actually, you can say, what does the weblog community think about this page?
And you can get a list.
This is what they think about my site; it's ranked by blog authority.
You can also rank it by the latest posts.
So when I was talking in "Emergence," I talked about the limitations of the one-way linking architecture that, basically, you could link to somebody else but they wouldn't necessarily know that you were pointing to them.
And that was one of the reasons why the web wasn't quite as emergent as it could be because you needed two-way linking, you needed that kind of feedback mechanism to be able to really do interesting things.
Well, something like Technorati is supplying that.
Now what's interesting here is that this is a quote from Dave Weinberger, where he talks about everything being purposive in the Web -- there's nothing artificial.
He has this line where he says, you know, you're going to put up a link there, if you see a link, somebody decided to put it there.
And he says, the link to one site didn't just grow on the other page "like a tree fungus."
And in fact, I think that's not entirely true anymore.
I could put up a feed of all those links generated by Technorati on the right-hand side of my page, and they would change as the overall ecology of the Web changes.
That little list there would change.
I wouldn't really be directly in control of it.
So it's much closer, in a way, to a data fungus, in a sense, wrapped around that page, than it is to a deliberate link that I've placed there.
Now, what you're having here is basically a global brain that you're able to do lots of kind of experiments on to see what it's thinking.
And there are all these interesting tools.
Google does the Google Zeitgeist, which looks at search requests to test what's going on, what people are interested in, and they publish it with lots of fun graphs.
And I'm saying a lot of nice things about Google, so I'll be I'll be saying one little critical thing.
There's a problem with the Google Zeitgeist, which is it often comes back with news that a lot of people are searching for Britney Spears pictures, which is not necessarily news.
The Columbia blows up, suddenly there are a lot of searches on Columbia.
Well, you know, we should expect to see that.
That's not necessarily something we didn't know already.
So the key thing in terms of these new tools that are kind of plumbing the depths of the global brain, that are sending kind of trace dyes through that whole bloodstream -- the question is, are you finding out something new?
And one of the things that I experimented with is this thing called Google Share which is basically, you take an abstract term, and you search Google for that term, and then you search the results that you get back for somebody's name.
So basically, the number of pages that mention this term, that also mention this page, the percentage of those pages is that person's Google Share of that term.
So you can do kind of interesting contests.
Like for instance, this is a Google Share of the TED Conference.
So Richard Saul Wurman has about a 15 percent Google Share of the TED conference.
Our good friend Chris has about a six percent -- but with a bullet, I might add.
(Laughter) But the interesting thing is, you can broaden the search a little bit.
And it turns out, actually, that 42 percent is the Mola mola fish.
I had no idea.
No, that's not true.
(Laughter) I made that up because I just wanted to put up a slide of the Mola mola fish.
(Laughter) I also did -- and I don't want to start a little fight in the next panel -- but I did a Google Share analysis of evolution and natural selection.
So right here -- now this is a big category, you have smaller percentages, so this is 0.7 percent -- Dan Dennett, who'll be speaking shortly.
Right below him, 0.5 percent, Steven Pinker.
So Dennett's in the lead a little bit there.
But what's interesting is you can then broaden the search and actually see interesting things and get a sense of what else is out there.
So Gary Bauer is not too far behind -- has slightly different theories about evolution and natural selection.
And right behind him is L. Ron Hubbard. So -- (Laughter) you can see we're in the ascot, which is always good.
And by the way, Chris, that would've been a really good panel, I think, right there.
(Laughter) Hubbard apparently started to reach, but besides that, I think it would be good next year.
Another quick thing -- this is a slightly different thing, but this analysis some of you may have seen.
It just came out. This is bursty words, looking at the historical record of State of the Union Addresses.
So these are words that suddenly start to appear out of nowhere, so they're kind of, you know, memes that start taking off, that didn't have a lot of historical precedent before.
So the first one is -- these are the bursty words around 1860s -- slaves, emancipation, slavery, rebellion, Kansas.
That's Britney Spears. I mean, you know, OK, interesting.
They're talking about slavery in 1860.
1935 -- relief, depression, recovery banks.
And OK, I didn't learn anything new there as well -- that's pretty obvious.
1985, right at the center of the Reagan years -- that's, we're, there's, we've, it's.
(Laughter) Now, there's one way to interpret this, which is to say that "emancipation" and "depression" and "recovery" all have a lot of syllables.
So you know, you can actually download -- it's hard to remember those.
But seriously, actually, what you can see there, in a way that would be very hard to detect otherwise, is Reagan reinventing the political language of the country and shifting to a much more intimate, much more folksy, much more telegenic -- contracting all those verbs.
You know, 20 years before it was still, "Ask not what you can do," but with Reagan, it's, "that's where, there's Nancy and I," that kind of language.
And so something we kind of knew, but you didn't actually notice syntactically what he was doing.
I'll go very quickly.
The question now -- and this is the really interesting question -- is, what kind of higher-level shape is emerging right now in the overall Web ecosystem -- and particularly in the ecosystem of the blogs because they are really kind of at the cutting edge.
And I think what happens there will also happen in the wider system.
Now there was a very interesting article by Clay Shirky that got a lot of attention about a month ago, and this is basically the distribution of links on the web to all these various different blogs.
It follows a power law, so that there are a few extremely well-linked to, popular blogs, and a long tail of blogs with very few links.
So 20 percent of the blogs get 80 percent of the links.
Now this is a very interesting thing.
It's caused a lot of controversy because people thought that this was the ultimate kind of one man, one modem democracy, where anybody can get out there and get their voice heard.
And so the question is, "Why is this happening?"
It's not being imposed by fiat from above.
It's an emergent property of the blogosphere right now.
Now, what's great about it is that people are working on -- within seconds of Clay publishing this piece, people started working on changing the underlying rules of the system so that a different shape would start appearing.
And basically, the shape appears largely because of a kind of a first-mover advantage.
if you're the first site there, everybody links to you.
If you're the second site there, most people link to you.
And so very quickly you can accumulate a bunch of links, and it makes it more likely for newcomers to link to you in the future, and then you get this kind of shape.
And so what Dave Sifry at Technorati started working on, literally as Shirky started -- after he published his piece -- was something that basically just gave a new kind of priority to newcomers.
And he started looking at interesting newcomers that don't have a lot of links, that suddenly get a bunch of links in the last 24 hours.
So in a sense, bursty weblogs coming from new voices.
So he's working on a tool right there that can actually change the overall system.
And it creates a kind of planned emergence.
You're not totally in control, but you're changing the underlying rules in interesting ways because you have an end result which is maybe a more democratic spread of voices.
So the most amazing thing about this -- and I'll end on this note -- is, most emergent systems, most self-organizing systems are not made up of component parts that are capable of looking at the overall pattern and changing their behavior based on whether they like the pattern or not.
So the most wonderful thing, I think, about this whole debate about power laws and software that could change it is the fact that we're having the conversation.
I hope it continues here.
Thanks a lot.
What do you think would happen if you invited an individual who had been living on the street for many years, had mental health issues and was an alcoholic to move directly from the street into housing?
We had heard this was being done in New York City, and it was called the Housing First model.
We wondered if it would work in Utah.
So to make that determination, we decided to create a pilot, and Keta was one of the 17 chronically homeless individuals we included in this pilot.
She had been on the street for 20-plus years, had mental health issues and was a severe alcoholic.
The first night in her apartment, she put her belongings on the bed and slept on the floor.
The next three nights, she slept out by the dumpster near the apartment building.
With the aid of her case manager, she moved back into her apartment but continued to sleep on the floor for several nights.
It took over two weeks for her to develop enough trust and confidence that this apartment was hers and would not be taken away from her before she would start sleeping in the bed.
Homelessness is a continuing challenge for many cities throughout our country.
Our homeless population falls into three major categories: those that are temporarily homeless, about 75 percent; those that are episodically homeless, about 10 percent; and those that are chronically homeless, about 15 percent.
Chronic homelessness is defined as an unaccompanied adult who has been continuously homeless for a year or more or more than four times homeless in three years that totals 365 days.
This small 15 percent of the homeless population can consume 50 to 60 percent of the homeless resources available in a community.
In addition, they can cost the community 20,000 to 45,000 dollars a year per person in emergency services costs, such as EMT runs, emergency room visits, as many of you will be aware, addictions, interactions with the police, jail time.
Simply put, this small population costs a lot.
Based on this reality, the US government began an initiative in 2003 inviting states and cities and counties to develop a plan to end chronic homelessness in a 10-year period.
The state of Utah accepted this invitation, and I was asked to lead this effort.
In 2005, we approved a 10-year plan, and 10 years later, in 2015, we reported a reduction in our chronic homeless population of 91 percent statewide.
(Applause) That's amazing.
When I began this process, and we began this process, I realized that I had a limited understanding of homelessness and the factors that impacted it, and that I needed a fairly major change in my belief, in my thinking, because I had been raised with the theory of rugged individualism and "pull yourself up by the bootstraps."
That philosophy came from being raised on our family's cattle ranch in a small town in the western desert of Utah.
On the ranch, you learned that nothing takes priority over caring for the cattle, something always needs fixing and most importantly, hard work makes the world right.
It was through that lens that I would see homeless people.
When I was a teenager, our family would go into Salt Lake City, and I would see these homeless people -- "hobos" we called them then -- sitting around on the street, and I would think, "You lazy bums, get a job. Pull yourself up by the bootstraps."
After high school, I left the ranch, graduated from college, went to work for Ford Motor Company for several years, then got a job at the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and moved back to Salt Lake City.
During that employment, I had the opportunity to be loaned out to the state's largest homeless shelter to assist them in developing and improving their financial and management capabilities.
While there, I became aware of a new approach to dealing with homeless individuals and drug addicts.
It was called the harm reduction model, and it consisted of passing out clean needles and condoms.
And I thought, "Now that is one stupid idea."
(Laughter) "That's just going to encourage them to continue that behavior.
Just tell them to stop."
Several years later, I read some of the early 10-year plans to end chronic homelessness promoted by the federal government.
As I read through those plans, and I thought, "Pfft! This is unrealistic.
You can't end homelessness.
There's too many personal choices and factors beyond our control."
My perspective changed, however, when I attended a conference in 2003, where I learned the reason behind the 10-year plan.
First was this small population of the homeless group that was 15 percent and were very expensive.
That made sense for a conservative state like Utah.
The second insight was learning about this Housing First, or low-barrier housing.
There had been an agency in New York City that had been inviting mentally ill homeless individuals to move directly from the street into housing.
And they were also allowed to continue to use drugs and to drink, just like we can in our homes.
They were, in addition, offered services -- not required to use them -- by on-site case managers to assist them to adjust to their new living arrangements and to stabilize their lives.
They were using the harm reduction model.
And despite my initial low expectations about hearing about this model, they were having an astonishing success rate: 85 percent were still housed after 12 months.
The third insight was the importance of developing a trusting relationship.
Because of the abuse these individuals have had throughout most of their lives, they hardly trust anybody, and the clean needles and condoms and low-barrier housing was a means to begin to develop a relationship of trust.
Vital.
So as I flew home from this conference, sitting in the plane looking out the window, I realized that my understanding and perspective about homelessness was shifting.
And as I stared out that window, this very strong feeling and thought came to me that if there's any state in the union that could end chronic homelessness, it was the state of Utah, because there's an underlying feeling and desire and willingness to collaborate to serve our neighbors, including those who are homeless.
A new vision was becoming clear to me how this could be done.
Now, those of us that attended the conference said, "Yeah, these models will work in Utah."
But when we got back home, there were many who said, "Nah, those aren't going to work. They won't succeed here."
But there was, however, an affordable housing organization who was willing to build our first 100 units.
But they had concerns about having 100 chronically homeless people in one location.
To address that concern, we decided to create a pilot to test that idea while we built the first 100 units.
We would use existing units scattered throughout Salt Lake City.
Then we debated: Should we select fairly high-functioning homeless persons or the most challenging ones we could find?
And this is where my background on the ranch came into play.
Back then, my mother cooked our meals and heated the water for our weekly bath on a wood-burning and coal-burning stove.
And after chopping wood for that stove all those years, I'd learned to chop the big end of the log first, when I had the most energy.
We decided to use the "big end of the log first" approach and selected 17 of the most challenging, difficult, chronically homeless people we could find, because we knew we would learn the most from them.
Twenty-two months later, all 17 were still housed, including Keta, who today, 11 years later, is sleeping in her own bed and is sober.
At the end of this pilot, one of the young case managers said, "We used to debate up at our university classes which theory of case management was the most effective.
Now our theory of case management is: anything necessary to keep them housed."
We became believers, and built hundreds of units over those next 10 years, leading to the reduction of our statewide chronic homeless population of 91 percent.
Now, who are homeless people?
Many people just want them to go away, to disappear, not disrupt our lives.
Through this 10-year, 11-year process, I gained many insights of why people become homeless.
One of those insights came to me a few years ago when I was visiting with our medical outreach team.
These are our frontline workers that go out and visit the street homeless and the prostitutes to check on their medical health.
One of the team members mentioned that eight of the prostitutes had given birth to 31 children that had become wards of the state.
They also shared that some of the pimps were their husbands, and worse yet, their parents.
These prostitutes, in their late teens, 20s, early 30s, were expected to earn enough money a day to support a hundred-dollar-a-day heroin addiction, their living expenses and their pimp.
And with unprotected sex, they were paid more, and predictably, this would lead to a pregnancy.
Children born under these circumstances many times end up becoming homeless.
And it's not helpful to look at those born under those circumstances, or a parent that makes their child a drug addict at age seven, or a generation of babies born through drug addiction, and not feel some despair.
For me, I believe every person is of value, no matter who you are.
And it's not helpful to look at somebody with this start in life and blame them for where they are.
(Applause) No one grows up saying, "My goal in life is to become homeless."
And that's the beauty of the harm reduction and Housing First model.
It recognizes the complexities of the different factors that can shape a human life.
These models meet people where they are, not where we are or where we think they should be.
The pilot we did with our 17 taught us many lessons.
When people have been living on the street for many years, moving back into housing requires lots of things to learn.
And Donald taught us some of these transition lessons.
His case manager asked him why he had not turned up the heat in his cold apartment.
Donald said, "How do you do that?"
He was shown how to use a thermostat.
The case manager also observed that he was heating the beans in the can on the stove, like he had done over the campfires for many years.
He was shown how to use pots and pans.
We also learned that he had a sister that he had not seen in 25 years, who thought he was dead.
She was happy to learn otherwise, and they were soon reconnected.
Hundreds of people like Keta and Donald are now housed and reconnecting with their families.
Also, many of our communities are incurring fewer emergency services costs.
I have learned over and over again that when you listen to somebody's story with an open heart, walk in their shoes with them, you can't help but love and care for them and want to serve them.
This is why I'm committed to continuing to bring hope and support to our homeless citizens, who I consider to be my brothers and sisters.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A sky blue canvas ripped open by an enormous skull.
Teeth bared through visceral slashes of oil and spray-paint.
In 2017, this untitled artwork was auctioned off for over 110 million dollars.
But its not the work of some old master.
These strokes of genius belong to 21 year old black Brooklynite Jean-Michel Basquiat  one of Americas most charismatic painters, and currently, its highest sold.
Born in 1960 to a Haitian father and a Puerto Rican mother, Basquiat spent his childhood making art and mischief in Boerum Hill.
While he never attended art school, he learned by wandering through New York galleries, and listening to the music his father played at home.
He drew inspiration from unexpected places, scribbling his own versions of cartoons, comic books and biblical scenes on scrap paper from his fathers office.
But it was a medical encyclopedia that arguably exerted the most powerful influence on Basquiat.
When young Jean-Michael was hit by a car, his mother brought a copy of "Greys Anatomy" to his hospital bed.
It ignited a lifelong fascination with anatomy that manifested in the skulls, sinew and guts of his later work  which frequently explores both the power and vulnerability of marginalized bodies.
By 17, he launched his first foray into the art world with his friend Al Diaz.
They spray painted cryptic statements and symbols all over Lower Manhattan, signed with the mysterious moniker SAMO.
These humorous, profound, and rebellious declarations were strategically scattered throughout Sohos art scene.
And after revealing himself as the artist, Basquiat leveraged SAMOs success to enter the scene himself; selling postcards, playing clubs with his avant-garde band, and boldly seeking out his heroes.
By 21, hed turned to painting full time.
His process was a sort of calculated improvisation.
Like Beat writers who composed their work by shredding and reassembling scraps of writing, Basquiat used similar cut-up techniques to remix his materials.
When he couldn't afford canvases, he fashioned them out of discarded wood he found on the street.
He used oil stick, crayons, spray paint and pencil and pulled quotes from the menus, comic books and textbooks he kept open on the studio floor.
He kept these sources open on his studio floor, often working on multiple projects at once.
Pulling in splintered anatomy, reimagined historical scenes, and skulls transplanted from classical still-lives, Basquiat repurposed both present day experiences and art history into an inventive visual language.
He worked as if inserting himself into the legacy of artists he borrowed from, producing collages that were just as much in conversation with art history as they were with each other.
For instance, "Toussaint LOverture versus Savonarola" and "Undiscovered Genius of the Mississippi Delta" offer two distinct visions of Basquiats historical and contemporary concerns.
But they echo each other in the details, such as the reappearing head that also resurfaces in "PPCD."
All these pieces form a network that offers physical evidence of Basquiats restless and prolific mind.
These chaotic canvases won rapid acclaim and attention.
But despite his increasingly mainstream audience, Basquiat insisted on depicting challenging themes of identity and oppression.
Marginalized figures take center stage, such as prisoners, cooks and janitors.
His obsession with bodies, history, and representation can be found in works evoking the Atlantic slave trade and African history, as well as pieces focusing on contemporary race relations.
In less than a decade, Basquiat made thousands of paintings and drawings- along with sculpture, fragments of poetry and music.
His output accelerated alongside his meteoric rise to fame, but his life and work were cut tragically short when he died from a drug overdose at the age of 27.
After his death, Basquiats work only increased in value- but the energy and flair of his pieces have impacted much more than their financial worth.
Today, his influence swirls around us in music, poetry, fashion and film- and his art retains the power to shock, inspire, and get under our skin.
This syringe contains a radioactive form of glucose known as FDG.
The doctor will soon inject its contents into her patients arm, whom shes testing for cancer using a PET scanner.
The FDG will quickly circulate through his body.
If he has a tumor, cancer cells within it will take up a significant portion of the FDG, which will act as a beacon for the scanner.
PET tracers such as FDG are among the most remarkable tools in medical diagnostics, and their life begins in a particle accelerator, just hours earlier.
The particle accelerator in question is called a cyclotron, and its often housed in a bunker within hospitals.
It uses electromagnetic fields to propel charged particles like protons faster and faster along a spiraling path.
When the protons reach their maximum speed, they shoot out onto a target that contains a few milliliters of a type of water with a heavy form of oxygen called oxygen-18.
When a proton slams into one of these heavier oxygen atoms, it kicks out another subatomic particle called a neutron.
This impact turns oxygen-18 into fluorine-18, a radioactive isotope that can be detected on a PET scan.
In a little under two hours, about half the fluorine will be gone due to radioactive decay, so the clock is ticking to get the scan done.
So how can fluorine-18 be used to detect diseases?
Radiochemists at the hospital can use a series of chemical reactions to attach the radioactive fluorine to different molecules, creating radiotracers.
The identity of the tracer depends on what doctors want to observe.
FDG is a common one because the rate at which cells consume glucose can signal the presence of cancer; the location of an infection; or the slowing brain function of dementia.
The FDG is now ready for the patients scan.
When a radiolabeled tracer enters the body, it travels through the circulatory system and gets taken up by its target whether that's a protein in the brain, cancer cells, or otherwise.
Within a few minutes, a significant amount of the tracer has found its way to the target area and the rest has cleared from circulation.
Now the doctors can see their target using a PET, or positron emission tomography, scanner.
The radiation that the tracer emits is what makes this possible.
The isotopes used in PET decay by positron emission.
Positrons are essentially electrons with positive charge.
When emitted, a positron collides with an electron from another molecule in its surroundings.
This causes a tiny nuclear reaction in which the mass of the two particles is converted into two high-energy photons, similar to X-rays, that shoot out in opposite directions.
These photons will then impact an array of paired radiation detectors in the scanner walls.
The software in the scanner uses those detectors to estimate where inside the body the collision occurred and create a 3D map of the tracers distribution.
PET scans can detect the spread of cancer before it can be spotted with other types of imaging.
Theyre also revolutionizing the diagnosis of Alzheimers disease by allowing doctors to see amyloid, the telltale protein buildup that otherwise couldnt be confirmed without an autopsy.
Meanwhile, researchers are actively working to develop new tracers and expand the possibilities of what PET scans can be used for.
But with all this talk of radiation and nuclear reactions inside the body, are these scans safe?
Even though no amount of ionizing radiation is completely safe, the amount of radiation the body receives during a PET scan is actually quite low.
One scan is comparable to what youre exposed to over two or three years from natural radioactive sources, like radon gas; or the amount a pilot would rack up from cosmic radiation after 20 to 30 transatlantic flights.
Most patients feel that those risks are acceptable for the chance to diagnose and treat their illnesses.
In the 13th Century, Genghis Khan embarked on a mission to take over Eurasia, swiftly conquering countries and drawing them into his expanding Mongol Empire.
With his vast armies he became almost unstoppable.
But, legend has it that there was one obstacle that even the impressive Khan couldnt overcome: A towering wall of ice, grown by locals across a mountain pass to stop the Khans armies from invading their territory.
No one knows how historically accurate that particular story is, but remarkably, it draws on fact: For centuries, in the Karakoram and Himalayan mountain ranges, people have been growing glaciers and using these homemade bodies of ice as sources of drinking water and irrigation for their crops.
But before we get to that fascinating phenomenon, its important to understand the difference between glaciers that grow in the wild, and those that humans create.
In the wild, glaciers require three conditions to grow: Snowfall, cold temperatures, and time.
First, a great deal of snow falls and accumulates.
Cold temperatures then ensure that the stacked up snow persists throughout the winter, spring, summer, and fall.
Over the following years, decades, and centuries, the pressure of the accumulated snow transforms layers into highly compacted glacial ice.
Artificially growing a glacier, however, is completely different.
At the confluence of three great mountain ranges, the Himalayas, Karakoram, and Hindu Kush, some local cultures have believed for centuries that glaciers are alive.
And whats more, that certain glaciers can have different genders including male and female.
Local Glacier Growers breed new glaciers by grafting togetheror marrying fragments of ice from male and female glaciers, then covering them with charcoal, wheat husks, cloths, or willow branches so they can reproduce.
Under their protective coverings, these glacierets transform into fully active glaciers that grow each year with additional snowfall.
Those then serve as lasting reserves of water that farmers can use to irrigate their crops.
These practices have spread to other cultures, where people are creating their own versions of glaciers and applying them to solve serious modern challenges around water supplies.
Take Ladakh, a high-altitude desert region in northern India.
It sits in the rain shadow of the Himalayas and receives on average fewer than ten centimeters of rain per year.
As local glaciers shrink because of climate change, regional water scarcity is increasing.
And so, local people have started growing their own glaciers as insurance against this uncertainty.
These glaciers come in two types: horizontal, and vertical.
Horizontal glaciers are formed when farmers redirect glacier meltwater into channels and pipes, then carefully siphon it off into a series of basins made from stones and earth.
Villagers minutely control the release of water into these reservoirs, waiting for each new layer to freeze before filling the basin with another wave.
In early spring, these frozen pools begin to melt, supplying villagers with irrigation for their fields.
Local people make vertical glaciers using the meltwater from already-existing glaciers high above their villages.
The meltwater enters channels that run downhill, flowing until it reaches a crop site where it bursts forth from a pipe pointing straight into the air.
When winter temperatures dip, this water freezes as it arcs out of the pipe, ultimately forming a 50 meter ice sculpture called a stupa, shaped like an upside-down ice cream cone.
This inverted form minimizes the amount of surface area it exposes to the sun in the spring and summer.
That ensures that the mini-glacier melts slowly and provides a reliable supply of water to feed the farmers crops.
These methods may be ancient, but theyre becoming more relevant as climate change takes its toll on our planet.
In fact, people are now growing their own glaciers in many regions beyond Ladakh.
Swiss people, utilizing modern glacier growing technology, created their first stupa in 2016 in the Swiss Alps.
There are plans for over 100 more in villages in Pakistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan.
Perhaps one day well be able to harness our homegrown glaciers well enough to build whole walls of ice this time not for keeping people out, but to enable life in some of the planets harshest landscapes.
I don't come to you today as an expert.
I come to you as someone who has been really interested in how I get better at what I do and how we all do.
I think it's not just how good you are now, I think it's how good you're going to be that really matters.
I was visiting this birth center in the north of India.
I was watching the birth attendants, and I realized I was witnessing in them an extreme form of this very struggle, which is how people improve in the face of complexity -- or don't.
The women here are delivering in a region where the typical birth center has a one-in-20 death rate for the babies, and the moms are dying at a rate ten times higher than they do elsewhere.
Now, we've known the critical practices that stop the big killers in birth for decades, and the thing about it is that even in this place -- in this place especially, the simplest things are not simple.
We know for example you should wash hands and put on clean gloves, but here, the tap is in another room, and they don't have clean gloves.
To reuse their gloves, they wash them in this basin of dilute bleach, but you can see there's still blood on the gloves from the last delivery.
Ten percent of babies are born with difficulty breathing everywhere.
We know what to do.
You dry the baby with a clean cloth to stimulate them to breathe.
If they don't start to breathe, you suction out their airways.
And if that doesn't work, you give them breaths with the baby mask.
But these are skills that they've learned mostly from textbooks, and that baby mask is broken.
In this one disturbing image for me is a picture that brings home just how dire the situation is.
This is a baby 10 minutes after birth, and he's alive, but only just.
No clean cloth, has not been dried, not warming skin to skin, an unsterile clamp across the cord.
He's an infection waiting to happen, and he's losing his temperature by the minute.
Successful child delivery requires a successful team of people.
A whole team has to be skilled and coordinated; the nurses who do the deliveries in a place like this, the doctor who backs them up, the supply clerk who's responsible for 22 critical drugs and supplies being in stock and at the bedside, the medical officer in charge, responsible for the quality of the whole facility.
The thing is they are all experienced professionals.
I didn't meet anybody who hadn't been part of thousands of deliveries.
But against the complexities that they face, they seem to be at their limits.
They were not getting better anymore.
It's how good you're going to be that really matters.
It presses on a fundamental question.
How do professionals get better at what they do?
How do they get great?
And there are two views about this.
One is the traditional pedagogical view.
That is that you go to school, you study, you practice, you learn, you graduate, and then you go out into the world and you make your way on your own.
A professional is someone who is capable of managing their own improvement.
That is the approach that virtually all professionals have learned by.
That's how doctors learn, that's how lawyers do, scientists ...
musicians.
And the thing is, it works.
Consider for example legendary Juilliard violin instructor Dorothy DeLay.
She trained an amazing roster of violin virtuosos: Midori, Sarah Chang, Itzhak Perlman.
Each of them came to her as young talents, and they worked with her over years.
What she worked on most, she said, was inculcating in them habits of thinking and of learning so that they could make their way in the world without her when they were done.
Now, the contrasting view comes out of sports.
And they say "You are never done, everybody needs a coach."
Everyone.
The greatest in the world needs a coach.
So I tried to think about this as a surgeon.
Pay someone to come into my operating room, observe me and critique me.
That seems absurd.
Expertise means not needing to be coached.
So then which view is right?
I learned that coaching came into sports as a very American idea.
In 1875, Harvard and Yale played one of the very first American-rules football games.
Yale hired a head coach; Harvard did not.
The results?
Over the next three decades, Harvard won just four times.
Harvard hired a coach.
(Laughter) And it became the way that sports works.
But is it necessary then?
Does it transfer into other fields?
I decided to ask, of all people, Itzhak Perlman.
He had trained the Dorothy DeLay way and became arguably the greatest violinist of his generation.
One of the beautiful things about getting to write for "The New Yorker" is I call people up, and they return my phone calls.
(Laughter) And Perlman returned my phone call.
So we ended up having an almost two-hour conversation about how he got to where he got in his career.
And I asked him, I said, "Why don't violinists have coaches?"
And he said, "I don't know, but I always had a coach."
"You always had a coach?"
"Oh yeah, my wife, Toby."
They had graduated together from Juilliard, and she had given up her job as a concert violinist to be his coach, sitting in the audience, observing him and giving him feedback.
"Itzhak, in that middle section, you know you sounded a little bit mechanical.
What can you differently next time?"
It was crucial to everything he became, he said.
Turns out there are numerous problems in making it on your own.
You don't recognize the issues that are standing in your way or if you do, you don't necessarily know how to fix them.
And the result is that somewhere along the way, you stop improving.
And I thought about that, and I realized that was exactly what had happened to me as a surgeon.
I'd entered practice in 2003, and for the first several years, it was just this steady, upward improvement in my learning curve.
I watched my complication rates drop from one year to the next.
And after about five years, they leveled out.
And a few more years after that, I realized I wasn't getting any better anymore.
And I thought: "Is this as good as I'm going to get?"
So I thought a little more and I said ...
"OK, I'll try a coach."
So I asked a former professor of mine who had retired, his name is Bob Osteen, and he agreed to come to my operating room and observe me.
The case -- I remember that first case.
It went beautifully.
I didn't think there would be anything much he'd have to say when we were done.
Instead, he had a whole page dense with notes.
(Laughter) "Just small things," he said.
(Laughter) But it's the small things that matter.
"Did you notice that the light had swung out of the wound during the case?
You spent about half an hour just operating off the light from reflected surfaces."
"Another thing I noticed," he said, "Your elbow goes up in the air every once in a while.
That means you're not in full control.
A surgeon's elbows should be down at their sides resting comfortably.
So that means if you feel your elbow going in the air, you should get a different instrument, or just move your feet."
It was a whole other level of awareness.
And I had to think, you know, there was something fundamentally profound about this.
He was describing what great coaches do, and what they do is they are your external eyes and ears, providing a more accurate picture of your reality.
They're recognizing the fundamentals.
They're breaking your actions down and then helping you build them back up again.
After two months of coaching, I felt myself getting better again.
And after a year, I saw my complications drop down even further.
It was painful.
I didn't like being observed, and at times I didn't want to have to work on things.
I also felt there were periods where I would get worse before I got better.
But it made me realize that the coaches were onto something profoundly important.
In my other work, I lead a health systems innovation center called Ariadne Labs, where we work on problems in the delivery of health care, including global childbirth.
As part of it, we had worked with the World Health Organization to devise a safe childbirth checklist.
It lays out the fundamentals.
It breaks down the fundamentals -- the critical actions a team needs to go through when a woman comes in in labor, when she's ready to push, when the baby is out, and then when the mom and baby are ready to go home.
And we knew that just handing out a checklist wasn't going to change very much, and even just teaching it in the classroom wasn't necessarily going to be enough to get people to make the changes that you needed to bring it alive.
And I thought on my experience and said, "What if we tried coaching?
What if we tried coaching at a massive scale?"
We found some incredible partners, including the government of India, and we ran a trial there in 120 birth centers.
In Uttar Pradesh, in India's largest state.
Half of the centers basically we just observed, but the other half got visits from coaches.
We trained an army of doctors and nurses like this one who learned to observe the care and also the managers and then help them build on their strengths and address their weaknesses.
One of the skills for example they had to work on with people -- turned out to be fundamentally important -- was communication.
Getting the nurses to practice speaking up when the baby mask is broken or the gloves are not in stock or someone's not washing their hands.
And then getting others, including the managers, to practice listening.
This small army of coaches ended up coaching 400 nurses and other birth attendants, and 100 physicians and managers.
We tracked the results across 160,000 births.
The results ...
in the control group you had -- and these are the ones who did not get coaching -- they delivered on only one-third of 18 basic practices that we were measuring.
And most important was over the course of the years of study, we saw no improvement over time.
The other folks got four months of coaching and then it tapered off over eight months, and we saw them increase to greater than two-thirds of the practices being delivered.
It works.
We could see the improvement in quality, and you could see it happen across a whole range of centers that suggested that coaching could be a whole line of way that we bring value to what we do.
You can imagine the whole job category that could reach out in the world and that millions of people could fulfill.
We were clearly at the beginning of it, though, because there was still a distance to go.
You have to put all of the checklist together to achieve the substantial reductions in mortality.
But we began seeing the first places that were getting there, and this center was one of them because coaching helped them learn to execute on the fundamentals.
And you could see it here.
This is a 23-year-old woman who had come in by ambulance, in labor with her third child.
She broke her water in the triage area, so they brought her directly to the labor and delivery room, and then they ran through their checks.
I put the time stamp on here so you could see how quickly all of this happens and how much more complicated that makes things.
Within four minutes, they had taken the blood pressure, measured her pulse and also measured the heart rate of the baby.
That meant that the blood pressure cuff and the fetal Doppler monitor, they were all there, and the nurse knew how to use them.
The team was skilled and coordinated.
The mom was doing great, the baby's heart rate was 143, which is normal.
Eight minutes later, the intensity of the contractions picked up, so the nurse washed her hands, put on clean gloves, examined her and found that her cervix was fully dilated.
The baby was ready to come.
She then went straight over to do her next set of checks.
All of the equipment, she worked her way through and made sure she had everything she needed at the bedside.
The baby mask was there, the sterile towel, the sterile equipment that you needed.
And then three minutes later, one push and that baby was out.
(Applause) I was watching this delivery, and suddenly I realized that the mood in that room had changed.
The nurse was looking at the community health worker who had come in with the woman because that baby did not seem to be alive.
She was blue and floppy and not breathing.
She would be one of that one-in-20.
But the nurse kept going with her checkpoints.
She dried that baby with a clean towel.
And after a minute, when that didn't stimulate that baby, she ran to get the baby mask and the other one went to get the suction.
She didn't have a mechanical suction because you could count on electricity, so she used a mouth suction, and within 20 seconds, she was clearing out that little girl's airways.
And she got back a green, thick liquid, and within a minute of being able to do that and suctioning out over and over, that baby started to breathe.
(Applause) Another minute and that baby was crying.
And five minutes after that, she was pink and warming on her mother's chest, and that mother reached out to grab that nurse's hand, and they could all breathe.
I saw a team transformed because of coaching.
And I saw at least one life saved because of it.
We followed up with that mother a few months later.
Mom and baby were doing great.
The baby's name is Anshika.
It means "beautiful."
And she is what's possible when we really understand how people get better at what they do.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Cyndi Stivers: So, future of storytelling.
Before we do the future, let's talk about what is never going to change about storytelling.
Shonda Rhimes: What's never going to change.
Obviously, I think good stories are never going to change, the need for people to gather together and exchange their stories and to talk about the things that feel universal, the idea that we all feel a compelling need to watch stories, to tell stories, to share stories -- sort of the gathering around the campfire to discuss the things that tell each one of us that we are not alone in the world.
Those things to me are never going to change.
That essence of storytelling is never going to change.
CS: OK. In preparation for this conversation, I checked in with Susan Lyne, who was running ABC Entertainment when you were working on "Grey's Anatomy" -- SR: Yes.
CS: And she said that there was this indelible memory she had of your casting process, where without discussing it with any of the executives, you got people coming in to read for your scripts, and every one of them was the full range of humanity, you did not type anyone in any way, and that it was completely surprising.
So she said, in addition to retraining the studio executives, you also, she feels, and I think this is -- I agree, retrained the expectations of the American TV audience.
So what else does the audience not yet realize that it needs?
SR: What else does it not yet realize?
Well, I mean, I don't think we're anywhere near there yet.
I mean, we're still in a place in which we're far, far behind what looks like the real world in actuality.
I wasn't bringing in a bunch of actors who looked very different from one another simply because I was trying to make a point, and I wasn't trying to do anything special.
It never occurred to me that that was new, different or weird.
I just brought in actors because I thought they were interesting and to me, the idea that it was completely surprising to everybody -- I didn't know that for a while.
I just thought: these are the actors I want to see play these parts.
I want to see what they look like if they read.
We'll see what happens.
So I think the interesting thing that happens is that when you look at the world through another lens, when you're not the person normally in charge of things, it just comes out a different way.
CS: So you now have this big machine that you run, as a titan -- as you know, last year when she gave her talk -- she's a titan.
So what do you think is going to happen as we go on?
There's a huge amount of money involved in producing these shows.
While the tools of making stories have gone and gotten greatly democratized, there's still this large distribution: people who rent networks, who rent the audience to advertisers and make it all pay.
How do you see the business model changing now that anyone can be a storyteller?
SR: I think it's changing every day.
I mean, the rapid, rapid change that's happening is amazing.
And I feel -- the panic is palpable, and I don't mean that in a bad way.
I think it's kind of exciting.
The idea that there's sort of an equalizer happening, that sort of means that anybody can make something, is wonderful.
I think there's some scary in the idea that you can't find the good work now.
There's so much work out there.
I think there's something like 417 dramas on television right now at any given time in any given place, but you can't find them.
You can't find the good ones.
So there's a lot of bad stuff out there because everybody can make something.
It's like if everybody painted a painting.
You know, there's not that many good painters.
But finding the good stories, the good shows, is harder and harder and harder.
Because if you have one tiny show over here on AMC and one tiny show over here over there, finding where they are becomes much harder.
So I think that ferreting out the gems and finding out who made the great webisode and who made this, it's -- I mean, think about the poor critics who now are spending 24 hours a day trapped in their homes watching everything.
It's not an easy job right now.
So the distribution engines are getting more and more vast, but finding the good programming for everybody in the audience is getting harder.
And unlike the news, where everything's getting winnowed down to just who you are, television seems to be getting -- and by television I mean anything you can watch, television shows on -- seems to be getting wider and wider and wider.
And so anybody's making stories, and the geniuses are sometimes hidden.
But it's going to be harder to find, and at some point that will collapse.
People keep talking about peak TV.
I don't know when that's going to happen.
I think at some point it'll collapse a little bit and we'll, sort of, come back together.
I don't know if it will be network television.
I don't know if that model is sustainable.
CS: What about the model that Amazon and Netflix are throwing a lot of money around right now.
SR: That is true.
I think it's an interesting model.
I think there's something exciting about it.
For content creators, I think there's something exciting about it.
For the world, I think there's something exciting about it.
The idea that there are programs now that can be in multiple languages with characters from all over the world that are appealing and come out for everybody at the same time is exciting.
I mean, I think the international sense that television can now take on makes sense to me, that programming can now take on.
Television so much is made for, like -- here's our American audience.
We make these shows, and then they shove them out into the world and hope for the best, as opposed to really thinking about the fact that America is not it.
I mean, we love ourselves and everything, but it's not i.
And we should be taking into account the fact that there are all of these other places in the world that we should be interested in while we're telling stories.
It makes the world smaller.
I don't know.
I think it pushes forward the idea that the world is a universal place, and our stories become universal things.
We stop being other.
CS: You've pioneered, as far as I can see, interesting ways to launch new shows, too.
I mean, when you launched "Scandal" in 2012, there was this amazing groundswell of support on Twitter the likes of which nobody had seen before.
Do you have any other tricks up your sleeve when you launch your next one?
What do you think will happen in that regard?
SR: We do have some interesting ideas.
We have a show called "Still Star-Crossed" coming out this summer.
We have some interesting ideas for that.
I'm not sure if we're going to be able to do them in time.
I thought they were fun.
But the idea that we would live-tweet our show was really just us thinking that would be fun.
We didn't realize that the critics would start to live-tweet along with us.
But the fans -- getting people to be a part of it, making it more of a campfire -- you know, when you're all on Twitter together and you're all talking together, it is more of a shared experience, and finding other ways to make that possible and finding other ways to make people feel engaged is important.
CS: So when you have all those different people making stories and only some of them are going to break through and get that audience somehow, how do you think storytellers will get paid?
SR: I actually have been struggling with this concept as well.
Is it going to be a subscriber model?
Are people going to say, like, I'm going to watch this particular person's shows, and that's how we're going to do it?
CS: I think we should buy a passport to Shondaland. Right?
SR: I don't know about that, but yeah. That's a lot more work for me.
I do think that there are going to be different ways, but I don't know necessarily.
I mean, I'll be honest and say a lot of content creators are not necessarily interested in being distributors, mainly because what I dream of doing is creating content.
I really love to create content.
I want to get paid for it and I want to get paid the money that I deserve to get paid for it, and there's a hard part in finding that.
But I also want it to be made possible for, you know, the people who work with me, the people who work for me, everybody to sort of get paid in a way, and they're all making a living.
How it gets distributed is getting harder and harder.
CS: How about the many new tools, you know, VR, AR ...
I find it fascinating that you can't really binge-watch, you can't fast-forward in those things.
What do you see as the future of those for storytelling?
SR: I spent a lot of time in the past year just exploring those, getting lots of demonstrations and paying attention.
I find them fascinating, mainly because I think that -- I think most people think of them for gaming, I think most people think of them for things like action, and I think that there is a sense of intimacy that is very present in those things, the idea that -- picture this, you can sit there and have a conversation with Fitz, or at least sit there while Fitz talks to you, President Fitzgerald Grant III, while he talks to you about why he's making a choice that he makes, and it's a very heartfelt moment.
And instead of you watching a television screen, you're sitting there next to him, and he's having this conversation.
Now, you fall in love with the man while he's doing it from a television screen.
Imagine sitting next to him, or being with a character like Huck who's about to execute somebody.
And instead of having a scene where, you know, he's talking to another character very rapidly, he goes into a closet and turns to you and tells you, you know, what's going to happen and why he's afraid and nervous.
It's a little more like theater, and I'm not sure it would work, but I'm fascinating by the concept of something like that and what that would mean for an audience.
And to get to play with those ideas would be interesting, and I think, you know, for my audience, the people who watch my shows, which is, you know, women 12 to 75, there's something interesting in there for them.
CS: And how about the input of the audience?
How interested are you in the things where the audience can actually go up to a certain point and then decide, oh wait, I'm going to choose my own adventure.
I'm going to run off with Fitz or I'm going to run off with -- SR: Oh, the choose- your-own-adventure stories.
I have a hard time with those, and not necessarily because I want to be in control of everything, but because when I'm watching television or I'm watching a movie, I know for a fact that a story is not as good when I have control over exactly what's going to happen to somebody else's character.
You know, if I could tell you exactly what I wanted to happen to Walter White, that's great, but the story is not the same, and it's not as powerful.
You know, if I'm in charge of how "The Sopranos" ends, then that's lovely and I have an ending that's nice and satisfying, but it's not the same story and it's not the same emotional impact.
CS: I can't stop imagining what that might be.
Sorry, you're losing me for a minute.
SR: But what's wonderful is I don't get to imagine it, because Vince has his own ending, and it makes it really powerful to know that somebody else has told.
You know, if you could decide that, you know, in "Jaws," the shark wins or something, it doesn't do what it needs to do for you.
The story is the story that is told, and you can walk away angry and you can walk away debating and you can walk away arguing, but that's why it works.
That is why it's art.
Otherwise, it's just a game, and games can be art, but in a very different way.
CS: Gamers who actually sell the right to sit there and comment on what's happening, to me that's more community than storytelling.
SR: And that is its own form of campfire.
I don't discount that as a form of storytelling, but it is a group form, I suppose.
CS: All right, what about the super-super -- the fact that everything's getting shorter, shorter, shorter.
And, you know, Snapchat now has something it calls shows that are one minute long.
SR: It's interesting.
Part of me thinks it sounds like commercials.
I mean, it does -- like, sponsored by.
But part of me also gets it completely.
There's something really wonderful about it.
If you think about a world in which most people are watching television on their phones, if you think about a place like India, where most of the input is coming in and that's where most of the product is coming in, shorter makes sense.
If you can charge people more for shorter periods of content, some distributor has figured out a way to make a lot more money.
If you're making content, it costs less money to make it and put it out there.
And, by the way, if you're 14 and have a short attention span, like my daughter, that's what you want to see, that's what you want to make, that's how it works.
And if you do it right and it actually feels like narrative, people will hang on for it no matter what you do.
CS: I'm glad you raised your daughters, because I am wondering how are they going to consume entertainment, and also not just entertainment, but news, too.
When they're not -- I mean, the algorithmic robot overlords are going to feed them what they've already done.
How do you think we will correct for that and make people well-rounded citizens?
SR: Well, me and how I correct for it is completely different than how somebody else might do it.
CS: Feel free to speculate.
SR: I really don't know how we're going to do it in the future.
I mean, my poor children have been the subject of all of my experiments.
We're still doing what I call "Amish summers" where I turn off all electronics and pack away all their computers and stuff and watch them scream for a while until they settle down into, like, an electronic-free summer.
But honestly, it's a very hard world in which now, as grown-ups, we're so interested in watching our own thing, and we don't even know that we're being fed, sometimes, just our own opinions.
You know, the way it's working now, you're watching a feed, and the feeds are being corrected so that you're only getting your own opinions and you're feeling more and more right about yourself.
So how do you really start to discern?
It's getting a little bit disturbing.
So maybe it'll overcorrect, maybe it'll all explode, or maybe we'll all just become -- I hate to be negative about it, but maybe we'll all just become more idiotic.
(Cyndi laughs) CS: Yeah, can you picture any corrective that you could do with scripted, fictional work?
SR: I think a lot about the fact that television has the power to educate people in a powerful way, and when you're watching television -- for instance, they do studies about medical shows.
I think it's 87 percent, 87 percent of people get most of their knowledge about medicine and medical facts from medical shows, much more so than they do from their doctors, than from articles.
So we work really hard to be accurate, and every time we make a mistake, I feel really guilty, like we're going to do something bad, but we also give a lot of good medical information.
There are so many other ways to give information on those shows.
People are being entertained and maybe they don't want to read the news, but there are a lot of ways to give fair information out on those shows, not in some creepy, like, we're going to control people's minds way, but in a way that's sort of very interesting and intelligent and not about pushing one side's version or the other, like, giving out the truth.
It would be strange, though, if television drama was how we were giving the news.
CS: It would be strange, but I gather a lot of what you've written as fiction has become prediction this season?
SR: You know, "Scandal" has been very disturbing for that reason.
We have this show that's about politics gone mad, and basically the way we've always told the show -- you know, everybody pays attention to the papers.
We read everything. We talk about everything.
We have lots of friends in Washington.
And we'd always sort of done our show as a speculation.
We'd sit in the room and think, what would happen if the wheels came off the bus and everything went crazy?
And that was always great, except now it felt like the wheels were coming off the bus and things were actually going crazy, so the things that we were speculating were really coming true.
I mean, our season this year was going to end with the Russians controlling the American election, and we'd written it, we'd planned for it, it was all there, and then the Russians were suspected of being involved in the American election and we suddenly had to change what we were going to do for our season.
I walked in and I was like, "That scene where our mystery woman starts speaking Russian?
We have to fix that and figure out what we're going to do."
That just comes from extrapolating out from what we thought was going to happen, or what we thought was crazy.
CS: That's great.
So where else in US or elsewhere in the world do you look?
Who is doing interesting storytelling right now?
SR: I don't know, there's a lot of interesting stuff out there.
Obviously British television is always amazing and always does interesting things.
I don't get to watch a lot of TV, mainly because I'm busy working.
And I pretty much try not to watch very much television at all, even American television, until I'm done with a season, because things start to creep into my head otherwise.
I start to wonder, like, why can't our characters wear crowns and talk about being on a throne?
It gets crazy.
So I try not to watch much until the seasons are over.
But I do think that there's a lot of interesting European television out there.
I was at the International Emmys and looking around and seeing the stuff that they were showing, and I was kind of fascinated.
There's some stuff I want to watch and check out.
CS: Can you imagine -- I know that you don't spend a lot of time thinking about tech stuff, but you know how a few years ago we had someone here at TED talking about seeing, wearing Google Glass and seeing your TV shows essentially in your eye?
Do you ever fantasize when, you know -- the little girl who sat on the pantry floor in your parents' house, did you ever imagine any other medium?
Or would you now?
SR: Any other medium.
For storytelling, other than books?
I mean, I grew up wanting to be Toni Morrison, so no.
I mean, I didn't even imagine television.
So the idea that there could be some bigger world, some more magical way of making things --- I'm always excited when new technology comes out and I'm always the first one to want to try it.
The possibilities feel endless and exciting right now, which is what excites me.
We're in this sort of Wild West period, to me, it feels like, because nobody knows what we're going to settle on.
You can put stories anywhere right now and that's cool to me, and it feels like once we figure out how to get the technology and the creativity of storytelling to meet, the possibilities are endless.
CS: And also the technology has enabled the thing I briefly flew by earlier, binge-viewing, which is a recent phenomenon, since you've been doing shows, right?
And how do you think does that change the storytelling process at all?
You always had a bible for the whole season beforehand, right?
SR: No, I just always knew where we were going to end.
So for me, the only way I can really comment on that is that I have a show that's been going on for 14 seasons and so there are the people who have been watching it for 14 seasons, and then there are the 12-year-old girls I'd encounter in the grocery store who had watched 297 episodes in three weeks.
Seriously, and that's a very different experience for them, because they've been inside of something really intensely for a very short period of time in a very intense way, and to them the story has a completely different arc and a completely different meaning because it never had any breaks.
CS: It's like visiting a country and then leaving it. It's a strange -- SR: It's like reading an amazing novel and then putting it down.
I think that is the beauty of the experience.
You don't necessarily have to watch something for 14 seasons.
It's not necessarily the way everything's supposed to be.
CS: Is there any topic that you don't think we should touch?
SR: I don't think I think of story that way.
I think of story in terms of character and what characters would do and what characters need to do in order to make them move forward, so I'm never really thinking of story in terms of just plot, and when writers come into my writer's room and pitch me plot, I say, "You're not speaking English."
Like, that's the thing I say.
We're not speaking English. I need to hear what's real.
And so I don't think of it that way.
I don't know if there's a way to think there's something I wouldn't do because that feels like I'm plucking pieces of plot off a wall or something.
CS: That's great. To what extent do you think you will use -- You know, you recently went on the board of Planned Parenthood and got involved in the Hillary Clinton campaign.
To what extent do you think you will use your storytelling in the real world to effect change?
SR: Well, you know, there's -- That's an intense subject to me, because I feel like the lack of narrative that a lot of people have is difficult.
You know, like, there's a lot of organizations that don't have a positive narrative that they've created for themselves that would help them.
There's a lot of campaigns that could be helped with a better narrative.
The Democrats could do a lot with a very strong narrative for themselves.
There's a lot of different things that could happen in terms of using storytelling voice, and I don't mean that in a fiction way, I mean that in a same way that any speechwriter would mean it.
And I see that, but I don't necessarily know that that's, like, my job to do that.
CS: All right.
Please help me thank Shonda. SR: Thank you.
(Applause)
So, indeed, I have spent my life looking into the lives of presidents who are no longer alive.
Waking up with Abraham Lincoln in the morning, thinking of Franklin Roosevelt when I went to bed at night.
But when I try and think about what I've learned about the meaning in life, my mind keeps wandering back to a seminar that I took when I was a graduate student at Harvard with the great psychologist Erik Erikson.
He taught us that the richest and fullest lives attempt to achieve an inner balance between three realms: work, love and play.
And that to pursue one realm to the disregard of the other, is to open oneself to ultimate sadness in older age.
Whereas to pursue all three with equal dedication, is to make possible a life filled not only with achievement, but with serenity.
So since I tell stories, let me look back on the lives of two of the presidents I've studied to illustrate this point -- Abraham Lincoln and Lyndon Johnson.
As for that first sphere of work, I think what Abraham Lincoln's life suggests is that fierce ambition is a good thing.
He had a huge ambition.
But it wasn't simply for office or power or celebrity or fame -- what it was for was to accomplish something worthy enough in life so that he could make the world a little better place for his having lived in it.
Even as a child, it seemed, Lincoln dreamed heroic dreams.
He somehow had to escape that hard-scrabble farm from which he was born.
No schooling was possible for him, except a few weeks here, a few weeks there.
But he read books in every spare moment he could find.
It was said when he got a copy of the King James Bible or "Aesop's Fables," he was so excited he couldn't sleep.
He couldn't eat.
The great poet Emily Dickinson once said, "There is no frigate like a book to take us lands away."
How true for Lincoln.
Though he never would travel to Europe, he went with Shakespeare's kings to merry England, he went with Lord Byron's poetry to Spain and Portugal.
Literature allowed him to transcend his surroundings.
But there were so many losses in his early life that he was haunted by death.
His mother died when he was only nine years old; his only sister, Sarah, in childbirth a few years later; and his first love, Ann Rutledge, at the age of 22.
Moreover, when his mother lay dying, she did not hold out for him the hope that they would meet in an afterworld.
She simply said to him, "Abraham, I'm going away from you now, and I shall never return."
As a result he became obsessed with the thought that when we die our life is swept away -- dust to dust.
But only as he grew older did he develop a certain consolation from an ancient Greek notion -- but followed by other cultures as well -- that if you could accomplish something worthy in your life, you could live on in the memory of others.
Your honor and your reputation would outlive your earthly existence.
And that worthy ambition became his lodestar.
It carried him through the one significant depression that he suffered when he was in his early 30s.
Three things had combined to lay him low.
He had broken his engagement with Mary Todd, not certain he was ready to marry her, but knowing how devastating it was to her that he did that.
His one intimate friend, Joshua Speed, was leaving Illinois to go back to Kentucky because Speed's father had died.
And his political career in the state legislature was on a downward slide.
He was so depressed that friends worried he was suicidal.
They took all knives and razors and scissors from his room.
And his great friend Speed went to his side and said, "Lincoln, you must rally or you will die."
He said that, "I would just as soon die right now, but I've not yet done anything to make any human being remember that I have lived."
So fueled by that ambition, he returned to the state legislature.
He eventually won a seat in Congress.
He then ran twice for the Senate, lost twice.
"Everyone is broken by life," Ernest Hemingway once said, "but some people are stronger in the broken places."
So then he surprised the nation with an upset victory for the presidency over three far more experienced, far more educated, far more celebrated rivals.
And then when he won the general election, he stunned the nation even more by appointing each of these three rivals into his Cabinet.
It was an unprecedented act at the time because everybody thought, "He'll look like a figurehead compared to these people."
They said, "Why are you doing this, Lincoln?"
He said, "Look, these are the strongest and most able men in the country.
The country is in peril. I need them by my side."
But perhaps my old friend Lyndon Johnson might have put it in less noble fashion: "Better to have your enemies inside the tent pissing out, than outside the tent pissing in."
(Laughter) But it soon became clear that Abraham Lincoln would emerge as the undisputed captain of this unruly team.
For each of them soon came to understand that he possessed an unparalleled array of emotional strengths and political skills that proved far more important than the thinness of his external rsum.
For one thing, he possessed an uncanny ability to empathize with and to think about other peoples' point of view.
He repaired injured feelings that might have escalated into permanent hostility.
He shared credit with ease, assumed responsibility for the failure of his subordinates, constantly acknowledged his errors and learned from his mistakes.
These are the qualities we should be looking for in our candidates in 2008.
(Applause) He refused to be provoked by petty grievances.
He never submitted to jealousy or brooded over perceived slights.
And he expressed his unshakeable convictions in everyday language, in metaphors, in stories.
And with a beauty of language -- almost as if the Shakespeare and the poetry he had so loved as a child had worked their way into his very soul.
In 1863, when the Emancipation Proclamation was signed, he brought his old friend, Joshua Speed, back to the White House, and remembered that conversation of decades before, when he was so sad.
And he, pointing to the Proclamation, said, "I believe, in this measure, my fondest hopes will be realized."
But as he was about to put his signature on the Proclamation his own hand was numb and shaking because he had shaken a thousand hands that morning at a New Year's reception.
So he put the pen down.
He said, "If ever my soul were in an act, it is in this act.
But if I sign with a shaking hand, posterity will say, 'He hesitated.'" So he waited until he could take up the pen and sign with a bold and clear hand.
But even in his wildest dreams, Lincoln could never have imagined how far his reputation would reach.
I was so thrilled to find an interview with the great Russian writer, Leo Tolstoy, in a New York newspaper in the early 1900s.
And in it, Tolstoy told of a trip that he'd recently made to a very remote area of the Caucasus, where there were only wild barbarians, who had never left this part of Russia.
Knowing that Tolstoy was in their midst, they asked him to tell stories of the great men of history.
So he said, "I told them about Napoleon and Alexander the Great and Frederick the Great and Julius Caesar, and they loved it.
But before I finished, the chief of the barbarians stood up and said, 'But wait, you haven't told us about the greatest ruler of them all.
We want to hear about that man who spoke with a voice of thunder, who laughed like the sunrise, who came from that place called America, which is so far from here, that if a young man should travel there, he would be an old man when he arrived.
Tell us of that man. Tell us of Abraham Lincoln.'" He was stunned.
He told them everything he could about Lincoln.
And then in the interview he said, "What made Lincoln so great?
Not as great a general as Napoleon, not as great a statesman as Frederick the Great."
But his greatness consisted, and historians would roundly agree, in the integrity of his character and the moral fiber of his being.
So in the end that powerful ambition that had carried Lincoln through his bleak childhood had been realized.
That ambition that had allowed him to laboriously educate himself by himself, to go through that string of political failures and the darkest days of the war.
His story would be told.
So as for that second sphere, not of work, but of love -- encompassing family, friends and colleagues -- it, too, takes work and commitment.
The Lyndon Johnson that I saw in the last years of his life, when I helped him on his memoirs, was a man who had spent so many years in the pursuit of work, power and individual success, that he had absolutely no psychic or emotional resources left to get him through the days once the presidency was gone.
My relationship with him began on a rather curious level.
I was selected as a White House Fellow when I was 24 years old.
We had a big dance at the White House.
President Johnson did dance with me that night.
Not that peculiar -- there were only three women out of the 16 White House Fellows.
But he did whisper in my ear that he wanted me to work directly for him in the White House.
But it was not to be that simple.
For in the months leading up to my selection, like many young people, I'd been active in the anti-Vietnam War movement, and had written an article against Lyndon Johnson, which unfortunately came out in The New Republic two days after the dance in the White House.
(Laugher) And the theme of the article was how to remove Lyndon Johnson from power.
(Laughter) So I was certain he would kick me out of the program.
But instead, surprisingly, he said, "Oh, bring her down here for a year, and if I can't win her over, no one can."
So I did end up working for him in the White House.
Eventually accompanied him to his ranch to help him on those memoirs, never fully understanding why he'd chosen me to spend so many hours with.
I like to believe it was because I was a good listener.
He was a great storyteller.
Fabulous, colorful, anecdotal stories.
There was a problem with these stories, however, which I later discovered, which is that half of them weren't true.
But they were great, nonetheless.
(Laughter) So I think that part of his attraction for me was that I loved listening to his tall tales.
But I also worried that part of it was that I was then a young woman.
And he had somewhat of a minor league womanizing reputation.
So I constantly chatted to him about boyfriends, even when I didn't have any at all.
Everything was working perfectly, until one day he said he wanted to discuss our relationship.
Sounded very ominous when he took me nearby to the lake, conveniently called Lake Lyndon Baines Johnson.
And there was wine and cheese and a red-checked tablecloth -- all the romantic trappings.
And he started out, "Doris, more than any other woman I have ever known ... " And my heart sank.
And then he said, "You remind me of my mother."
(Laughter) It was pretty embarrassing, given what was going on in my mind.
But I must say, the older I've gotten, the more I realize what an incredible privilege it was to have spent so many hours with this aging lion of a man.
A victor in a thousand contests, three great civil rights laws, Medicare, aid to education.
And yet, roundly defeated in the end by the war in Vietnam.
And because he was so sad and so vulnerable, he opened up to me in ways he never would have had I known him at the height of his power -- sharing his fears, his sorrows and his worries.
And I'd like to believe that the privilege fired within me the drive to understand the inner person behind the public figure, that I've tried to bring to each of my books since then.
But it also brought home to me the lessons which Erik Erikson had tried to instill in all of us about the importance of finding balance in life.
For on the surface, Lyndon Johnson should have had everything in the world to feel good about in those last years, in the sense that he had been elected to the presidency; he had all the money he needed to pursue any leisure activity he wanted; he owned a spacious ranch in the countryside, a penthouse in the city, sailboats, speedboats.
He had servants to answer any whim, and he had a family who loved him deeply.
And yet, years of concentration solely on work and individual success meant that in his retirement he could find no solace in family, in recreation, in sports or in hobbies.
It was almost as if the hole in his heart was so large that even the love of a family, without work, could not fill it.
As his spirits sagged, his body deteriorated until, I believe, he slowly brought about his own death.
In those last years, he said he was so sad watching the American people look toward a new president and forgetting him.
He spoke with immense sadness in his voice, saying maybe he should have spent more time with his children, and their children in turn.
But it was too late.
Despite all that power, all that wealth, he was alone when he finally died -- his ultimate terror realized.
So as for that third sphere of play, which he never had learned to enjoy, I've learned over the years that even this sphere requires a commitment of time and energy -- enough so that a hobby, a sport, a love of music, or art, or literature, or any form of recreation, can provide true pleasure, relaxation and replenishment.
So deep, for instance, was Abraham Lincoln's love of Shakespeare, that he made time to spend more than a hundred nights in the theater, even during those dark days of the war.
He said, when the lights went down and a Shakespeare play came on, for a few precious hours he could imagine himself back in Prince Hal's time.
But an even more important form of relaxation for him, that Lyndon Johnson never could enjoy, was a love of -- somehow -- humor, and feeling out what hilarious parts of life can produce as a sidelight to the sadness.
He once said that he laughed so he did not cry, that a good story, for him, was better than a drop of whiskey.
His storytelling powers had first been recognized when he was on the circuit in Illinois.
The lawyers and the judges would travel from one county courthouse to the other, and when anyone was knowing Lincoln was in town, they would come from miles around to listen to him tell stories.
He would stand with his back against a fire and entertain the crowd for hours with his winding tales.
And all these stories became part of his memory bank, so he could call on them whenever he needed to.
And they're not quite what you might expect from our marble monument.
One of his favorite stories, for example, had to do with the Revolutionary War hero, Ethan Allen.
And as Lincoln told the story, Mr. Allen went to Britain after the war.
And the British people were still upset about losing the Revolution, so they decided to embarrass him a little bit by putting a huge picture of General Washington in the only outhouse, where he'd have to encounter it.
They figured he'd be upset about the indignity of George Washington being in an outhouse.
But he came out of the outhouse not upset at all.
And so they said, "Well, did you see George Washington in there?"
"Oh, yes," he said, "perfectly appropriate place for him."
"What do you mean?" they said.
"Well," he said, "there's nothing to make an Englishman shit faster than the sight of General George Washington."
(Laughter) (Applause) So you can imagine, if you are in the middle of a tense cabinet meeting -- and he had hundreds of these stories -- you would have to relax.
So between his nightly treks to the theater, his story telling, and his extraordinary sense of humor and his love of quoting Shakespeare and poetry, he found that form of play which carried him through his days.
In my own life, I shall always be grateful for having found a form of play in my irrational love of baseball.
Which allows me, from the beginning of spring training to the end of the fall, to have something to occupy my mind and heart other than my work.
It all began when I was only six years old, and my father taught me that mysterious art of keeping score while listening to baseball games -- so that when he went to work in New York during the day, I could record for him the history of that afternoon's Brooklyn Dodgers game.
Now, when you're only six years old, and your father comes home every single night and listens to you -- as I now realize that I, in excruciating detail, recounted every single play of every inning of the game that had just taken place that afternoon.
But he made me feel I was telling him a fabulous story.
It makes you think there's something magic about history to keep your father's attention.
In fact, I'm convinced I learned the narrative art from those nightly sessions with my father.
Because at first, I'd be so excited I would blurt out, "The Dodgers won!" or, "The Dodgers lost!"
Which took much of the drama of this two-hour telling away.
(Laughter) So I finally learned you had to tell a story from beginning to middle to end.
I must say, so fervent was my love of the old Brooklyn Dodgers in those days that I had to confess in my first confession two sins that related to baseball.
The first occurred because the Dodgers' catcher, Roy Campanella, came to my hometown of Rockville Centre, Long Island, just as I was in preparation for my first Holy Communion.
And I was so excited -- first person I'd ever see outside of Ebbets Field.
But it so happened he was speaking in a Protestant Church.
When you are brought up as a Catholic, you think that if you ever set foot in a Protestant Church, you'll be struck dead at the threshold.
So I went to my father in tears, "What are we going to do?"
He said, "Don't worry. He's speaking in a parish hall.
We're sitting in folding chairs. He's talking about sportsmanship.
It's not a sin."
But as I left that night, I was certain that somehow I'd traded the life of my everlasting soul for this one night with Roy Campanella.
(Laughter) And there were no indulgences around that I could buy.
So I had this sin on my soul when I went to my first confession.
I told the priest right away.
He said, "No problem. It wasn't a religious service."
But then, unfortunately, he said, "And what else, my child?"
And then came my second sin.
I tried to sandwich it in between talking too much in church, wishing harm to others, being mean to my sisters.
And he said, "To whom did you wish harm?"
And I had to say that I wished that various New York Yankees players would break arms, legs and ankles -- (Laughter) -- so that the Brooklyn Dodgers could win their first World Series.
He said, "How often do you make these horrible wishes?"
And I had to say, every night when I said my prayers.
(Laughter) So he said, "Look, I'll tell you something.
I love the Brooklyn Dodgers, as you do, but I promise you some day they will win fairly and squarely.
You do not need to wish harm on others to make it happen."
"Oh yes," I said.
But luckily, my first confession -- to a baseball-loving priest!
(Laughter) Well, though my father died of a sudden heart attack when I was still in my 20s, before I had gotten married and had my three sons, I have passed his memory -- as well as his love of baseball -- on to my boys.
Though when the Dodgers abandoned us to come to L.A., I lost faith in baseball until I moved to Boston and became an irrational Red Sox fan.
And I must say, even now, when I sit with my sons with our season tickets, I can sometimes close my eyes against the sun and imagine myself, a young girl once more, in the presence of my father, watching the players of my youth on the grassy fields below: Jackie Robinson, Roy Campanella, Pee Wee Reese, and Duke Snider.
I must say there is magic in these moments.
When I open my eyes and I see my sons in the place where my father once sat, I feel an invisible loyalty and love linking my sons to the grandfather whose face they never had a chance to see, but whose heart and soul they have come to know through all the stories I have told.
Which is why, in the end, I shall always be grateful for this curious love of history, allowing me to spend a lifetime looking back into the past.
Allowing me to learn from these large figures about the struggle for meaning for life.
Allowing me to believe that the private people we have loved and lost in our families, and the public figures we have respected in our history, just as Abraham Lincoln wanted to believe, really can live on, so long as we pledge to tell and to retell the stories of their lives.
Thank you for letting me be that storyteller today.
(Applause) Thank you.
A few years ago, about seven years ago, I found myself hiding in a festival toilet, a music festival toilet, and if anyone's been to a music festival, yeah, you'll know that by the third day, it's pretty nasty.
I was standing in the toilet because I couldn't even sit down, because the toilet roll had run out, there was mud everywhere, and it smelled pretty bad.
And I stood there thinking, "What am I doing? I don't even need the toilet."
But the reason I went was because I was volunteering for a large charity on climate justice, and it was seven years ago, when lots of people didn't believe in climate change, people were very cynical about activism, and my role, with all of my teammates, was to get people to sign petitions on climate justice and educate them a bit more about the issue.
And I cared deeply about climate change and lots of inequality, so I'd go and I'd talk to lots of people, which made me nervous and drained me of energy, but I did it because I cared, but I would hide in the toilets, because I'd be exhausted, and I didn't want my teammates doubting my commitment to the cause, thinking that I was slacking.
And we'd go and meet at the end of our shift, and we'd count how many petitions had been signed, and often I'd win the amount of petitions signed even though I had my little breaks in the toilet.
But I was always very jealous of the other activists, because either they had the same amount of energy as they had when they began the shift of getting people to sign petitions, or often they had more energy, and they'd be really excited about going to watch the bands in the evening and having a dance.
And even if I loved the bands, all I wanted to do was to go back to my tent and have a sleep, because I'd just feel completely wiped out, and I was really jealous of people that had the energy to go and party hard at the festivals.
But it also made me really angry, as well, inside.
I thought, "This isn't fair, I'm an introvert, and all of the offline campaigning seems to be favoring extroverts."
I would go on marches which drained me.
Or I'd go and join campaigns outside embassies or shops.
The only thing that was on offer was around lots of people, it was very loud activism, it always involved lots of people, it was performing.
None of it was for introverts, and I not only thought that that wasn't fair, because a third to a half of the world's population are introverts, which isn't fair on them, because we burn out, or we'd be put off by activism and not do it, and everyone needs to be an activist in this world.
And also, I didn't think it was particularly clever, but I could see that a lot of the activism that worked wasn't only extrovert activism.
It wasn't only the loud stuff.
It wasn't about people performing all the time.
A lot of the work that was needed was in the background, was hidden, wasn't seen.
And when I ended up just being a campaigner, because it's the only job I can do, really -- I was campaigning at university, and for the last 10 years, I've been a professional campaigner for large charities, and now I'm a creative campaigner consultant for different charities as well as other work I do -- but I knew that there were other forms of activism that were needed.
I started tinkering about seven years ago to see what quieter forms of activism I could engage with so I didn't burn out as an activist, but also to look at some of the issues I was concerned about in campaigning.
I was very lucky that, when I worked for Oxfam and other big charities, I could read lots of big reports on what influenced politicians and businesses and the general public, what campaigns worked really well, which ones didn't.
And I'm a bit of a geek, so I look at all of that stuff, and I wanted to tinker around to see how I could engage people in social change in a different way, because I think if we want the world to be more beautiful, kind and just, then our activism should be beautiful, kind and just, and often it's not.
And today, I just want to talk about three ways that I think activism needs introverts.
I think there's lot of other ways, but I'm just going to talk about three.
And the first one is: activism is often very quick, and it's about doing, so extroverts, often their immediate response to injustice is, we've got to do stuff now, we've got to react really quickly -- and yes, we do need to react, but we need to be strategic in our campaigning, and if we just act on anger, often we do the wrong things.
I use craft, like needlework -- like this guy behind me is doing -- as a way to not only slow down those extrovert doers, but also to bring in nervous, quiet introverts into activism.
By doing repetitive actions, like handicraft, you can't do it fast, you have to do it slowly.
And those repetitive stitches help you meditate on the big, complex, messy social change issues and figure out what we can do as a citizen, as a consumer, as a constituent, and all of those different things.
It helps you think critically while you're stitching away, and it helps you be more mindful of what are your motives.
Are you that Barbie aid worker that was mentioned before?
Are you about joining people in solidarity, or do you want to be the savior, which often isn't very ethical?
But doing needle work together, as well, extroverts and introverts and ambivert -- everyone's on the scale in different places -- because it's a quiet, slow form of activism, it really helps introverts be heard in other areas, where they are often not heard.
It sounds odd, but while you're stitching, you don't need eye contact with people.
So, for nervous introverts, it means that you can stitch away next to someone or a group of people and ask questions that you're thinking that often you don't get time to ask people, or you're too nervous to ask if you give them eye contact.
So you can get introverts, who are those big, deep thinkers, saying, "That's really interesting that you want to do that extrovert form of activism that's about shaming people or quickly going out somewhere, but who are you trying to target and how, and is that the best way to do it?"
So it means you could have these discussions in a very slow way, which is great for the extrovert to slow down and think deeply, but it's really good for the introvert as well, to be heard and to feel part of that movement for change, in a good way.
Some ways we do it is stitch cards about what values we thread through our activism, and making sure that we don't just react in unethical ways.
One, sometimes we work with art institutions where we will get over 150 people at the V&amp;A who can come for hours, sit and stitch together on a particular issue, and then tweet what they're thinking or how it went, like this one.
Also, I always think that activism needs introverts because we're really good at intimate activism.
So we're good at slow activism, and we're really good at intimate activism, and if this year has told us anything, it's told us that we need to, when we're engaging power holders, we need to engage them by listening to people we disagree with, by building bridges not walls -- walls or wars -- and by being critical friends, not aggressive enemies.
And one example that I do a lot with introverts, but with lots of people, is make gifts for people in power, so not be outside screaming at them, but to give them something like a bespoke handkerchief saying, "Don't blow it.
Use your power for good.
We know you've got a difficult job in your position of power.
How can we help you?"
And what's great is, for the introverts, we can write letters while we're making these gifts, so for us, Marks and Spencer, we tried to campaign to get them to implement the living wage.
So we made all the 14 board members bespoke handkerchiefs.
We wrote them letters, we boxed them up, and we went to the AGM to hand-deliver our gifts and to have that form of intimate activism where we had discussions with them.
And what was brilliant was that the chair of the board told us how amazing our campaign was, how heartfelt it was.
The board members, like Martha Lane Fox, who has hundreds of thousands of followers on Twitter, and highly influential in business, tweeted how impressed she was, and within 10 months, we'd had meetings with Marks and Spencer to say, "We know this is difficult to be a living wage employer, but if you can be one, the rest of the sector will look at it, and it's not right that some of your amazing workers are working full time and still can't pay their bills.
And we love Marks and Spencer.
How can you be the role model that we want you to be?"
So that was that intimate form of activism.
We had lots of meetings with them.
We then gave them Christmas cards and Valentine's cards to say, "We really want to encourage you to implement the living wage, and within 10 months, they'd announced to the media that they were going to pay the independent living wage, and now -- (Applause) Thank you.
And now we're trying to work with them to be accredited, which is really important, and we went back to the last AGM this June and we had these amazing one-to-one discussions with the board members, who told us how much they loved their hankies and how it really moved them, what we were doing, and they all told us that if we were standing outside screaming at them and not being gentle in our protest, they wouldn't have even listened to us, never mind had those discussions with us.
And I think introverts are really good at intimate activism because we like to listen, we like one-to-ones, we don't like small talks, we like those big, juicy issues to discuss with people, we don't like conflict, so we avoid it at all costs, which is really important when we're trying to engage power holders, not to be conflicting with them all the time.
The third way I think activists are really missing out if they don't engage introverts is that introverts, like I said, can be half of the world's population, and most of us won't say that we're introvert, or we get embarrassed by saying what overwhelms us.
So for me, a few years ago, my mom used to send me texts in capital letters -- and she can now do emojis and everything, she's fine -- but as soon as I'd see this text, I'd wince and think, "Ooh, it's capital letters, it's too much."
And I'd have to ignore it to read the lovely text she sent me.
And that's a bit embarrassing, to tell people that capital letters overwhelm you, but we really need introverts to help us do intriguing activism that attracts them rather than puts them off.
We're put off by big and brash giant posters and capital letters and explanation marks telling us what to do and vying for our attention.
So some of the things I do with people around the world who take part is make small bits of provocative street art which are hung off eye level, very small, and they're provocative messages.
They're not preaching at people or telling them what to do.
They're just getting people to engage in different ways, and think for themselves, because we don't like to be told what to do.
It might be wearing a green heart on your sleeve saying what you love and how climate change will affect it, and we'll wear it, and if people say, "Why are you wearing a green heart with the word 'chocolate' on?"
and we can have those one-to-one intimate conversations and say, "I love chocolate.
Climate change is going to affect it, and I think there's lot of other things that climate change will affect, and I really want to make sure I'm part of the solution, not the problem."
And then we deflect, because we don't like to be the center of attention, and say, "What do you love and how will climate change affect it?"
Or it might be shop-dropping instead of shop-lifting, where we'll make little mini-scrolls with lovely stories on about what's the story behind your clothes.
Is it a joyful story of how it's made, or is it a torturous one?
And we'll just drop them in little pockets in shops, all lowercase, all handwritten, with kisses and smiley faces in ribbon, and then people are excited that they found it.
And we often drop them in unethical shops or in front pockets, and it's a way that we can do offline campaigning that engages us and doesn't burn us out, but also engages other people in an intriguing way online and offline.
So I've got two calls to action, for the introverts and for the extroverts.
For the ambivert, you're involved in all of it.
For the extroverts, I want to say that when you're planning a campaign, think about introverts.
Think about how valuable our skills are, just as much as extroverts'.
We're good at slowing down and thinking deeply, and the detail of issues, we're really good at bringing them out.
We're good at intimate activism, so use us in that way.
And we're good at intriguing people by doing strange little things that help create conversations and thought.
Introverts, my call to action for you is, I know you like being on your own, I know you like being in your head, but activism needs you, so sometimes you've got to get out there.
It doesn't mean that you've got to turn into an extrovert and burn out, because that's no use for anyone, but what it does mean is that you should value the skills and the traits that you have that activism needs.
So for everyone in this room, whether you're an extrovert or an introvert or an ambivert, the world needs you now more than ever, and you've got no excuse not to get involved.
Thanks.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: Help us understand what machine learning is, because that seems to be the key driver of so much of the excitement and also of the concern around artificial intelligence.
Sebastian Thrun: So, artificial intelligence and machine learning is about 60 years old and has not had a great day in its past until recently.
And the reason is that today, we have reached a scale of computing and datasets that was necessary to make machines smart.
So here's how it works.
If you program a computer today, say, your phone, then you hire software engineers that write a very, very long kitchen recipe, like, "If the water is too hot, turn down the temperature.
If it's too cold, turn up the temperature."
The recipes are not just 10 lines long.
They are millions of lines long.
A modern cell phone has 12 million lines of code.
A browser has five million lines of code.
And each bug in this recipe can cause your computer to crash.
That's why a software engineer makes so much money.
The new thing now is that computers can find their own rules.
So instead of an expert deciphering, step by step, a rule for every contingency, what you do now is you give the computer examples and have it infer its own rules.
A really good example is AlphaGo, which recently was won by Google.
Normally, in game playing, you would really write down all the rules, but in AlphaGo's case, the system looked over a million games and was able to infer its own rules and then beat the world's residing Go champion.
That is exciting, because it relieves the software engineer of the need of being super smart, and pushes the burden towards the data.
As I said, the inflection point where this has become really possible -- very embarrassing, my thesis was about machine learning.
It was completely insignificant, don't read it, because it was 20 years ago and back then, the computers were as big as a cockroach brain.
Now they are powerful enough to really emulate kind of specialized human thinking.
And then the computers take advantage of the fact that they can look at much more data than people can.
So I'd say AlphaGo looked at more than a million games.
No human expert can ever study a million games.
Google has looked at over a hundred billion web pages.
No person can ever study a hundred billion web pages.
So as a result, the computer can find rules that even people can't find.
CA: So instead of looking ahead to, "If he does that, I will do that," it's more saying, "Here is what looks like a winning pattern, here is what looks like a winning pattern."
ST: Yeah. I mean, think about how you raise children.
You don't spend the first 18 years giving kids a rule for every contingency and set them free and they have this big program.
They stumble, fall, get up, they get slapped or spanked, and they have a positive experience, a good grade in school, and they figure it out on their own.
That's happening with computers now, which makes computer programming so much easier all of a sudden.
Now we don't have to think anymore. We just give them lots of data.
CA: And so, this has been key to the spectacular improvement in power of self-driving cars.
I think you gave me an example.
Can you explain what's happening here?
ST: This is a drive of a self-driving car that we happened to have at Udacity and recently made into a spin-off called Voyage.
We have used this thing called deep learning to train a car to drive itself, and this is driving from Mountain View, California, to San Francisco on El Camino Real on a rainy day, with bicyclists and pedestrians and 133 traffic lights.
And the novel thing here is, many, many moons ago, I started the Google self-driving car team.
And back in the day, I hired the world's best software engineers to find the world's best rules.
This is just trained.
We drive this road 20 times, we put all this data into the computer brain, and after a few hours of processing, it comes up with behavior that often surpasses human agility.
So it's become really easy to program it.
This is 100 percent autonomous, about 33 miles, an hour and a half.
CA: So, explain it -- on the big part of this program on the left, you're seeing basically what the computer sees as trucks and cars and those dots overtaking it and so forth.
ST: On the right side, you see the camera image, which is the main input here, and it's used to find lanes, other cars, traffic lights.
The vehicle has a radar to do distance estimation.
This is very commonly used in these kind of systems.
On the left side you see a laser diagram, where you see obstacles like trees and so on depicted by the laser.
But almost all the interesting work is centering on the camera image now.
We're really shifting over from precision sensors like radars and lasers into very cheap, commoditized sensors.
A camera costs less than eight dollars.
CA: And that green dot on the left thing, what is that?
Is that anything meaningful?
ST: This is a look-ahead point for your adaptive cruise control, so it helps us understand how to regulate velocity based on how far the cars in front of you are.
CA: And so, you've also got an example, I think, of how the actual learning part takes place.
Maybe we can see that. Talk about this.
ST: This is an example where we posed a challenge to Udacity students to take what we call a self-driving car Nanodegree.
We gave them this dataset and said "Hey, can you guys figure out how to steer this car?"
And if you look at the images, it's, even for humans, quite impossible to get the steering right.
And we ran a competition and said, "It's a deep learning competition, AI competition," and we gave the students 48 hours.
So if you are a software house like Google or Facebook, something like this costs you at least six months of work.
So we figured 48 hours is great.
And within 48 hours, we got about 100 submissions from students, and the top four got it perfectly right.
It drives better than I could drive on this imagery, using deep learning.
And again, it's the same methodology.
It's this magical thing.
When you give enough data to a computer now, and give enough time to comprehend the data, it finds its own rules.
CA: And so that has led to the development of powerful applications in all sorts of areas.
You were talking to me the other day about cancer.
Can I show this video?
ST: Yeah, absolutely, please. CA: This is cool.
ST: This is kind of an insight into what's happening in a completely different domain.
This is augmenting, or competing -- it's in the eye of the beholder -- with people who are being paid 400,000 dollars a year, dermatologists, highly trained specialists.
It takes more than a decade of training to be a good dermatologist.
What you see here is the machine learning version of it.
It's called a neural network.
"Neural networks" is the technical term for these machine learning algorithms.
They've been around since the 1980s.
This one was invented in 1988 by a Facebook Fellow called Yann LeCun, and it propagates data stages through what you could think of as the human brain.
It's not quite the same thing, but it emulates the same thing.
It goes stage after stage.
In the very first stage, it takes the visual input and extracts edges and rods and dots.
And the next one becomes more complicated edges and shapes like little half-moons.
And eventually, it's able to build really complicated concepts.
Andrew Ng has been able to show that it's able to find cat faces and dog faces in vast amounts of images.
What my student team at Stanford has shown is that if you train it on 129,000 images of skin conditions, including melanoma and carcinomas, you can do as good a job as the best human dermatologists.
And to convince ourselves that this is the case, we captured an independent dataset that we presented to our network and to 25 board-certified Stanford-level dermatologists, and compared those.
And in most cases, they were either on par or above the performance classification accuracy of human dermatologists.
CA: You were telling me an anecdote.
I think about this image right here.
What happened here?
ST: This was last Thursday. That's a moving piece.
What we've shown before and we published in "Nature" earlier this year was this idea that we show dermatologists images and our computer program images, and count how often they're right.
But all these images are past images.
They've all been biopsied to make sure we had the correct classification.
This one wasn't.
This one was actually done at Stanford by one of our collaborators.
The story goes that our collaborator, who is a world-famous dermatologist, one of the three best, apparently, looked at this mole and said, "This is not skin cancer."
And then he had a second moment, where he said, "Well, let me just check with the app."
So he took out his iPhone and ran our piece of software, our "pocket dermatologist," so to speak, and the iPhone said: cancer.
It said melanoma.
And then he was confused.
And he decided, "OK, maybe I trust the iPhone a little bit more than myself," and he sent it out to the lab to get it biopsied.
And it came up as an aggressive melanoma.
So I think this might be the first time that we actually found, in the practice of using deep learning, an actual person whose melanoma would have gone unclassified, had it not been for deep learning.
CA: I mean, that's incredible.
(Applause) It feels like there'd be an instant demand for an app like this right now, that you might freak out a lot of people.
Are you thinking of doing this, making an app that allows self-checking?
ST: So my in-box is flooded about cancer apps, with heartbreaking stories of people.
I mean, some people have had 10, 15, 20 melanomas removed, and are scared that one might be overlooked, like this one, and also, about, I don't know, flying cars and speaker inquiries these days, I guess.
My take is, we need more testing.
I want to be very careful.
It's very easy to give a flashy result and impress a TED audience.
It's much harder to put something out that's ethical.
And if people were to use the app and choose not to consult the assistance of a doctor because we get it wrong, I would feel really bad about it.
So we're currently doing clinical tests, and if these clinical tests commence and our data holds up, we might be able at some point to take this kind of technology and take it out of the Stanford clinic and bring it to the entire world, places where Stanford doctors never, ever set foot.
CA: And do I hear this right, that it seemed like what you were saying, because you are working with this army of Udacity students, that in a way, you're applying a different form of machine learning than might take place in a company, which is you're combining machine learning with a form of crowd wisdom.
Are you saying that sometimes you think that could actually outperform what a company can do, even a vast company?
ST: I believe there's now instances that blow my mind, and I'm still trying to understand.
What Chris is referring to is these competitions that we run.
We turn them around in 48 hours, and we've been able to build a self-driving car that can drive from Mountain View to San Francisco on surface streets.
It's not quite on par with Google after seven years of Google work, but it's getting there.
And it took us only two engineers and three months to do this.
And the reason is, we have an army of students who participate in competitions.
We're not the only ones who use crowdsourcing.
Uber and Didi use crowdsource for driving.
Airbnb uses crowdsourcing for hotels.
There's now many examples where people do bug-finding crowdsourcing or protein folding, of all things, in crowdsourcing.
But we've been able to build this car in three months, so I am actually rethinking how we organize corporations.
We have a staff of 9,000 people who are never hired, that I never fire.
They show up to work and I don't even know.
Then they submit to me maybe 9,000 answers.
I'm not obliged to use any of those.
I end up -- I pay only the winners, so I'm actually very cheapskate here, which is maybe not the best thing to do.
But they consider it part of their education, too, which is nice.
But these students have been able to produce amazing deep learning results.
So yeah, the synthesis of great people and great machine learning is amazing.
CA: I mean, Gary Kasparov said on the first day [of TED2017] that the winners of chess, surprisingly, turned out to be two amateur chess players with three mediocre-ish, mediocre-to-good, computer programs, that could outperform one grand master with one great chess player, like it was all part of the process.
And it almost seems like you're talking about a much richer version of that same idea.
ST: Yeah, I mean, as you followed the fantastic panels yesterday morning, two sessions about AI, robotic overlords and the human response, many, many great things were said.
But one of the concerns is that we sometimes confuse what's actually been done with AI with this kind of overlord threat, where your AI develops consciousness, right?
The last thing I want is for my AI to have consciousness.
I don't want to come into my kitchen and have the refrigerator fall in love with the dishwasher and tell me, because I wasn't nice enough, my food is now warm.
I wouldn't buy these products, and I don't want them.
But the truth is, for me, AI has always been an augmentation of people.
It's been an augmentation of us, to make us stronger.
And I think Kasparov was exactly correct.
It's been the combination of human smarts and machine smarts that make us stronger.
The theme of machines making us stronger is as old as machines are.
The agricultural revolution took place because it made steam engines and farming equipment that couldn't farm by itself, that never replaced us; it made us stronger.
And I believe this new wave of AI will make us much, much stronger as a human race.
CA: We'll come on to that a bit more, but just to continue with the scary part of this for some people, like, what feels like it gets scary for people is when you have a computer that can, one, rewrite its own code, so, it can create multiple copies of itself, try a bunch of different code versions, possibly even at random, and then check them out and see if a goal is achieved and improved.
So, say the goal is to do better on an intelligence test.
You know, a computer that's moderately good at that, you could try a million versions of that.
You might find one that was better, and then, you know, repeat.
And so the concern is that you get some sort of runaway effect where everything is fine on Thursday evening, and you come back into the lab on Friday morning, and because of the speed of computers and so forth, things have gone crazy, and suddenly -- ST: I would say this is a possibility, but it's a very remote possibility.
So let me just translate what I heard you say.
In the AlphaGo case, we had exactly this thing: the computer would play the game against itself and then learn new rules.
And what machine learning is is a rewriting of the rules.
It's the rewriting of code.
But I think there was absolutely no concern that AlphaGo would take over the world.
It can't even play chess.
CA: No, no, no, but now, these are all very single-domain things.
But it's possible to imagine.
I mean, we just saw a computer that seemed nearly capable of passing a university entrance test, that can kind of -- it can't read and understand in the sense that we can, but it can certainly absorb all the text and maybe see increased patterns of meaning.
Isn't there a chance that, as this broadens out, there could be a different kind of runaway effect?
ST: That's where I draw the line, honestly.
And the chance exists -- I don't want to downplay it -- but I think it's remote, and it's not the thing that's on my mind these days, because I think the big revolution is something else.
Everything successful in AI to the present date has been extremely specialized, and it's been thriving on a single idea, which is massive amounts of data.
The reason AlphaGo works so well is because of massive numbers of Go plays, and AlphaGo can't drive a car or fly a plane.
The Google self-driving car or the Udacity self-driving car thrives on massive amounts of data, and it can't do anything else.
It can't even control a motorcycle.
It's a very specific, domain-specific function, and the same is true for our cancer app.
There has been almost no progress on this thing called "general AI," where you go to an AI and say, "Hey, invent for me special relativity or string theory."
It's totally in the infancy.
The reason I want to emphasize this, I see the concerns, and I want to acknowledge them.
But if I were to think about one thing, I would ask myself the question, "What if we can take anything repetitive and make ourselves 100 times as efficient?"
It so turns out, 300 years ago, we all worked in agriculture and did farming and did repetitive things.
Today, 75 percent of us work in offices and do repetitive things.
We've become spreadsheet monkeys.
And not just low-end labor.
We've become dermatologists doing repetitive things, lawyers doing repetitive things.
I think we are at the brink of being able to take an AI, look over our shoulders, and they make us maybe 10 or 50 times as effective in these repetitive things.
That's what is on my mind.
CA: That sounds super exciting.
The process of getting there seems a little terrifying to some people, because once a computer can do this repetitive thing much better than the dermatologist or than the driver, especially, is the thing that's talked about so much now, suddenly millions of jobs go, and, you know, the country's in revolution before we ever get to the more glorious aspects of what's possible.
ST: Yeah, and that's an issue, and it's a big issue, and it was pointed out yesterday morning by several guest speakers.
Now, prior to me showing up onstage, I confessed I'm a positive, optimistic person, so let me give you an optimistic pitch, which is, think of yourself back 300 years ago.
Europe just survived 140 years of continuous war, none of you could read or write, there were no jobs that you hold today, like investment banker or software engineer or TV anchor.
We would all be in the fields and farming.
Now here comes little Sebastian with a little steam engine in his pocket, saying, "Hey guys, look at this.
It's going to make you 100 times as strong, so you can do something else."
And then back in the day, there was no real stage, but Chris and I hang out with the cows in the stable, and he says, "I'm really concerned about it, because I milk my cow every day, and what if the machine does this for me?"
The reason why I mention this is, we're always good in acknowledging past progress and the benefit of it, like our iPhones or our planes or electricity or medical supply.
We all love to live to 80, which was impossible 300 years ago.
But we kind of don't apply the same rules to the future.
So if I look at my own job as a CEO, I would say 90 percent of my work is repetitive, I don't enjoy it, I spend about four hours per day on stupid, repetitive email.
And I'm burning to have something that helps me get rid of this.
Why?
Because I believe all of us are insanely creative; I think the TED community more than anybody else.
But even blue-collar workers; I think you can go to your hotel maid and have a drink with him or her, and an hour later, you find a creative idea.
What this will empower is to turn this creativity into action.
Like, what if you could build Google in a day?
What if you could sit over beer and invent the next Snapchat, whatever it is, and tomorrow morning it's up and running?
And that is not science fiction.
What's going to happen is, we are already in history.
We've unleashed this amazing creativity by de-slaving us from farming and later, of course, from factory work and have invented so many things.
It's going to be even better, in my opinion.
And there's going to be great side effects.
One of the side effects will be that things like food and medical supply and education and shelter and transportation will all become much more affordable to all of us, not just the rich people.
CA: Hmm.
So when Martin Ford argued, you know, that this time it's different because the intelligence that we've used in the past to find new ways to be will be matched at the same pace by computers taking over those things, what I hear you saying is that, not completely, because of human creativity.
Do you think that that's fundamentally different from the kind of creativity that computers can do?
ST: So, that's my firm belief as an AI person -- that I haven't seen any real progress on creativity and out-of-the-box thinking.
What I see right now -- and this is really important for people to realize, because the word "artificial intelligence" is so threatening, and then we have Steve Spielberg tossing a movie in, where all of a sudden the computer is our overlord, but it's really a technology.
It's a technology that helps us do repetitive things.
And the progress has been entirely on the repetitive end.
It's been in legal document discovery.
It's been contract drafting.
It's been screening X-rays of your chest.
And these things are so specialized, I don't see the big threat of humanity.
In fact, we as people -- I mean, let's face it: we've become superhuman.
We've made us superhuman.
We can swim across the Atlantic in 11 hours.
We can take a device out of our pocket and shout all the way to Australia, and in real time, have that person shouting back to us.
That's physically not possible. We're breaking the rules of physics.
When this is said and done, we're going to remember everything we've ever said and seen, you'll remember every person, which is good for me in my early stages of Alzheimer's.
Sorry, what was I saying? I forgot.
CA: (Laughs) ST: We will probably have an IQ of 1,000 or more.
There will be no more spelling classes for our kids, because there's no spelling issue anymore.
There's no math issue anymore.
And I think what really will happen is that we can be super creative.
And we are. We are creative.
That's our secret weapon.
CA: So the jobs that are getting lost, in a way, even though it's going to be painful, humans are capable of more than those jobs.
This is the dream.
The dream is that humans can rise to just a new level of empowerment and discovery.
That's the dream.
ST: And think about this: if you look at the history of humanity, that might be whatever -- 60-100,000 years old, give or take -- almost everything that you cherish in terms of invention, of technology, of things we've built, has been invented in the last 150 years.
If you toss in the book and the wheel, it's a little bit older.
Or the axe.
But your phone, your sneakers, these chairs, modern manufacturing, penicillin -- the things we cherish.
Now, that to me means the next 150 years will find more things.
In fact, the pace of invention has gone up, not gone down, in my opinion.
I believe only one percent of interesting things have been invented yet. Right?
We haven't cured cancer.
We don't have flying cars -- yet. Hopefully, I'll change this.
That used to be an example people laughed about. (Laughs) It's funny, isn't it? Working secretly on flying cars.
We don't live twice as long yet. OK?
We don't have this magic implant in our brain that gives us the information we want.
And you might be appalled by it, but I promise you, once you have it, you'll love it.
I hope you will.
It's a bit scary, I know.
There are so many things we haven't invented yet that I think we'll invent.
We have no gravity shields.
We can't beam ourselves from one location to another.
That sounds ridiculous, but about 200 years ago, experts were of the opinion that flight wouldn't exist, even 120 years ago, and if you moved faster than you could run, you would instantly die.
So who says we are correct today that you can't beam a person from here to Mars?
CA: Sebastian, thank you so much for your incredibly inspiring vision and your brilliance.
Thank you, Sebastian Thrun.
That was fantastic. (Applause)
Whether or not you realize it, as a surfer youre a master of complicated physics.
The science of surfing begins as soon as you and your board first hit the water.
The boards size and light construction help it displace a lot of water.
In turn, a buoyant force equal to the weight of the displaced water pushes up, counteracting you and your boards weight.
This lets you stay afloat while you wait to paddle for a wave.
And what exactly are you waiting for?
The perfect wave, of course.
Like other waves in physics, ocean waves represent a transfer of energy.
Wind blowing across the ocean accelerates water particles near the surface, leading to the growth of ripples that become waves.
These deviations from the flat surface are acted upon by gravity, which tries to restore the surface to its original flat state.
As the waves then move through the water, particles push and pull on their neighbors through the wave induced pressure, and this motion propagates energy through the water in unison with the wave motion.
The motion of these particles is much more limited than the overall motion of the waves.
Near the shore, the shallower seafloor constrains the motion of the waves to occur in a more limited region than out at sea, concentrating the wave energy near the surface.
If the topography of the shoreline is even and smooth, this will refract the waves to become more parallel to the shore as they approach.
This is the crucial moment.
As the wave gets near, you quickly pivot your board in the same direction as the wave and paddle to match its speed.
Your board forms an angle with the water, and this creates a dynamic pressure on the bottom of it, forcing you and your board out of the water, to skim along the surface.
At the same time, your increased forward momentum makes you more stable, allowing you to stand up and surf along the wave.
Now youve caught the wave, and are riding along its front face parallel to the shoreline.
Fins on the surfboard allow you to alter your speed and direction by repositioning your weight.
Above you is the waves crest, where the water particles are undergoing their greatest acceleration.
That forces them to move faster than the underlying wave, so they shoot ahead before falling under gravitys influence.
This forms the waves characteristic curls, or jets, as they break along the shore.
Sometimes, the curl might completely enclose part of the wave, forming a moving tube of water known as the barrel.
Because of irregularities in the seafloor and the swell itself, few barrels last as long as the legendary 27-second ride off the coast of Namibia.
But many who manage to get barreled have said they feel time passing differently inside, making it one of the most magical experiences a surfer can have.
Of course, not all beaches are created equal.
Offshore underwater canyons or rock formations in certain locations like Nazare, Portugal or Mavericks, California refract the incoming wave energy into a single spot, creating massive waves sought by surfers worldwide.
And some of these waves travel for more than a week, with swells originating more than 10,000 kilometers away from shore.
Waves surfed in sunny California may have originated in the stormy seas near New Zealand.
So while you may not be thinking about weather patterns in the South Pacific, tectonic geology, or fluid mechanics, the art of catching the perfect wave relies on all these things and more.
And the waves we surf, created by wind, are just one visible part of the continuous oscillation of energy that has shaped our universe since its very beginning.
Let's just get started here.
Okay, just a moment.
(Whirring) All right.
(Laughter) Oh, sorry.
(Music) (Beatboxing) Thank you.
(Applause)
On March 3, 1913, protesters parted for the woman in white: dressed in a flowing cape and sitting astride a white horse, the activist Inez Milholland was hard to miss.
She was riding at the helm of the Womens Suffrage Parade- the first mass protest for a womans right to vote on a national scale.
After months of strategic planning and controversy, thousands of women gathered in Washington D.C.
Here, they called for a constitutional amendment granting them the right to vote.
By 1913, womens rights activists had been campaigning for decades.
As a disenfranchised group, women had no voice in the laws that affected their or anyone elses lives.
However, they were struggling to secure broader support for political equality.
Theyd achieved no major victories since 1896, when Utah and Idaho enfranchised women.
That brought the total number of states which recognized a womens right to vote to four.
A new, media-savvy spirit arrived in the form of Alice Paul.
She was inspired by the British suffragettes, who went on hunger strikes and endured imprisonment in the early 1900s.
Rather than conduct costly campaigns on a state-by-state basis, Paul sought the long-lasting impact of a constitutional amendment, which would protect womens voting rights nationwide.
As a member of the National American Women Suffrage Association, Paul proposed a massive pageant to whip up support and rejuvenate the movement.
Washington authorities initially rejected her plan- and then tried to relegate the march to side streets.
But Paul got those decisions overturned and confirmed a parade for the day before the presidential inauguration of Woodrow Wilson.
This would maximize media coverage and grab the attention of the crowds who would be in town.
However, in planning the parade, Paul mainly focused on appealing to white women from all backgrounds, including those who were racist.
She actively discouraged African American activists and organizations from participating- and stated that those who did so should march in the back.
But black women would not be made invisible in a national movement they helped shape.
On the day of the march, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, a ground-breaking investigative journalist and anti-lynching advocate, refused to move to the back and proudly marched under the Illinois banner.
The co-founder of the NAACP, Mary Church Terrell, joined the parade with the 22 founders of the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, an organization created by female students from Howard University.
In these ways and more, black women persevered despite deep hostility from white women in the movement, and at great political and physical risk.
On the day of the parade, suffragists assembled to create a powerful exhibition.
The surging sections of the procession included international suffragists, artists, performers and business-owners.
Floats came in the form of golden chariots; an enormous Liberty Bell; and a map of enfranchised countries.
On the steps of the Treasury Building, performers acted out the historical achievements of women to a live orchestra.
The marchers carried on even as a mob blocked the route, hurling insults and spitting at women, tossing cigars, and physically assaulting participants.
The police did not intervene, and in the end, over 100 women were hospitalized.
Their mistreatment, widely reported throughout the country, catapulted the parade into the public eye and garnered suffragists greater sympathy.
National newspapers lambasted the police, and Congressional hearings investigated their actions during the parade.
After the protest, the "Womens Journal" declared, Washington has been disgraced. Equal suffrage has scored a great victory."
In this way, the march initiated a surge of support for womens voting rights that endured in the coming years.
Suffragists kept up steady pressure on their representatives, attended rallies, and petitioned the White House.
Inez Milholland, the woman on the white horse, campaigned constantly throughout the United States, despite suffering from chronic health problems.
She did not live to see her efforts come to fruition.
In 1916, she collapsed while giving a suffrage speech and died soon after.
According to popular reports, her last words were, Mr. President, how long must women wait for liberty? Though full voting inclusion would take decades, in 1920, Congress ratified the 19th amendment, finally granting women the right to vote.
This is an elementary school in Columbus, Ohio.
And inside of this school there was a student named D.
When D started school here he was six years old: cute as a button, with a smile that brightened the entire room.
But after a few months in school, D became angry, and that smile faded.
D began to do things like flip tables, throw desks and chairs, yell at teachers, stand in windowsills, run in and out of the classroom and even running out of the school.
Sometimes these fits of anger would put the entire school into lockdown mode until D could get himself back together, which could sometimes take over an hour.
No one in the school knew how to help D.
I know this because I was the principal at this school.
And what I quickly and collectively learned with my staff was that this situation was more extreme than anything we had ever been trained for.
Every time that D lashed out, I kept thinking to myself: what did I miss during my principal prep coursework?
What am I supposed to do with a kid like D?
And how am I going to stop him from impeding the learning of all the other students?
And yet after we did everything that we thought we knew, such as talking to D and taking away privileges and parent phone calls home, the only real option we had left to do was to kick him out, and I knew that would not help him.
This scenario is not unique to D.
Students all over the world are struggling with their education.
And though we didn't come up with a fail-safe solution, we did come up with a simple idea: that in order for kids like D to not only survive in school but to thrive, we somehow had to figure out a way to not only teach them how to read and write but also how to help them deal with and manage their own emotions.
And in doing that, we were able to move our school from one of the lowest-performing schools in the state of Ohio, with an F rating, all the way up to a C in just a matter of a few years.
So it might sound obvious, right?
Of course teachers should be focused on the emotional well-being of their kids.
But in reality, when you're in a classroom full of 30 students and one of them's throwing tables at you, it's far easier to exclude that child than to figure out what's going on inside of his head.
But what we learned about D, and for kids like D, was that small changes can make huge differences, and it's possible to start right now.
You don't need bigger budgets or grand strategic plans, you simply need smarter ways of thinking about what you have and where you have it.
In education, we tend to always look outside the box for answers, and we rarely spend enough time, money and effort developing what we already have inside the box.
And this is how meaningful change can happen fast.
So here's what I learned about D.
I was wanting to dig a little bit deeper to figure out how he had become so angry.
And what I learned was his father had left the home and his mother was working long shifts in order to support the family, which left no adult for D to connect with -- and he was in charge of taking care of his younger brother when he got home from school.
Might I remind you that D was six years old?
Can't say that I blame him for having some trouble transitioning into the school environment.
But yet we had to figure out a way to help him with these big emotions all while teaching him core skills of reading and math.
And three things helped us most.
First, we had to figure out where he was struggling the most.
And like most young kids, arrival at school can be a tough transition time as they're moving from a less structured home environment to a more structured school environment.
So what we did for D was we created a calming area for him in our time-out room, which we had equipped with rocking chairs and soft cushions and books, and we allowed D to go to this place in the morning, away from the other kids, allowing him time to transition back into the school environment on his own terms.
And as we began to learn more about D, we learned other strategies that helped him calm down.
For example, D loved to help younger students, so we made him a kindergarten helper, and he went into the kindergarten classroom and taught students how to write their letters.
And he was actually successful with a few of them that the teacher was unable to reach.
And believe it or not, D actually helped calm some of those kindergarten students down, signalling to us that the influence of peers on behavior was far greater than anything we adults could ever do.
We used humor and song with him.
Yes, I know it sounds really silly that the principal and the teachers would actually laugh with kids, but you can imagine the shock on D's face when the principal's cracking a joke or singing a song from the radio station, which almost always ended in a laugh, shortening the length of his outburst and helping us to connect with him in his world.
So I know some you are like, "It's really not practical to lay on this kind of special treatment for every student," but we actually made it happen.
Because once we figured out the tools and tactics that worked for D, our teachers were able to roll that out and use them with other students.
We began to proactively address student behavior instead of simply react to it.
Our teachers actually took time during the lesson plan to teach kids how to identify their feelings and appropriate, healthy coping strategies for dealing with them, such as counting to 10, grabbing a fidget spinner or taking a quick walk.
We incorporated brain breaks throughout the day, allowing kids to sing songs, do yoga poses and participate in structured physical activities.
And for those kids that struggle with sitting for long periods of time, we invested in flexible seating, such as rocking chairs and exercise bikes, and even floor elliptical machines, allowing kids to pedal underneath their desks.
These changes encouraged kids to stay in the classroom, helping them to focus and learn.
And when less kids are disrupting, all kids do better.
And here's the magical thing: it didn't cost us a whole lot of extra money.
We simply thought differently about what we had.
For example, every public school has an instructional supply line.
An instructional supply could be a book, it could be a whiteboard, it could be flexible seating, it could be a fidget spinner, it could even be painting the walls of a school a more calming color, allowing students to thrive.
It's not that we didn't invest in the academic tools -- obviously -- but we took the social tools seriously, too.
And the results speak for themselves.
By taking the emotional development of our kids seriously and helping them manage their emotions, we saw huge growth in our reading and math scores, far exceeding the one year of expected growth and outscoring many schools with our same demographic.
The second thing we did to help our kids manage their emotions was we used leverage.
As a not-so-funded public school, we didn't have the support staff to address the chaos that our kids might be facing at home, and we certainly weren't trained or funded to address it directly.
So we started to reach out to local groups, community agencies, and even the Ohio State University.
Our partnership with the Ohio State University afforded us college students not only studying education but also school psychology and school social work.
These students were paired with our teachers to help our most struggling students.
And everyone benefitted because our teachers got access to the latest college-level thinking, and those college students got real-world, life experiences in the classroom.
Our partnership with our local Nationwide Children's Hospital afforded us -- they're building us a health clinic within our school, providing health and mental health resources for our students.
And our kids benefitted from this, too.
Our absences continued to go down, and our kids had access to counseling that they could access during the school day.
And perhaps the biggest change was not in D or in the kids at all.
It was in the adults in the room.
Teachers are typically good at planning for and delivering academic instruction, but when you throw in disruptive behavior, it can feel completely outside the scope of the job.
But by us taking the emotional development of our kids seriously, we moved from a philosophy of exclusion -- you disrupt, get out -- to one of trust and respect.
It wasn't easy, but we felt at heart, it was a positive way to make change, and I'm in awe at the teachers that took that leap with me.
As part of our personal professional development plan, we studied the research of Dr. Bruce Perry and his research on the effects of different childhood experiences on the developing child's brain.
And what we learned was that some of our students' experiences, such as an absent parent, chaotic home life, poverty and illness, create real trauma on developing brains.
Yes, trauma.
I know it's a very strong word, but it helped us to reframe and understand the behaviors that we were seeing.
And those difficult home experiences created real barbed-wire barriers to learning, and we had to figure out a way over it.
So our teachers continued to practice with lesson plans, doing shorter lesson plans with a single focus, allowing kids to engage, and continued to incorporate these movement breaks, allowing kids to jump up and down in class and dance for two minutes straight, because we learned that taking breaks helps the learner retain new information.
And might I add that the "Cha-Cha Slide" provides a perfect short dance party.
(Laughter) I saw teachers say, "What happened to you?"
instead of "What's wrong with you?"
or "How can I help you?" instead of "Get out."
And this investment in our kids made huge differences, and we continue to see rises in our academic scores.
I'm happy to say that when D got to fourth grade, he rarely got into trouble.
He became a leader in the school, and this behavior became contagious with other students.
We saw and felt our school climate continue to improve, making it a happy and safe place not only for children but for adults, despite any outside influence.
Fast-forward to today, I now work with an alternative education program with high school students who struggle to function in traditional high school setting.
I recently reviewed some of their histories.
Many of them are 17 to 18 years old, experimenting with drugs, in and out of the juvenile detention system and expelled from school.
And what I discovered was that many of them exhibit the same behaviors that I saw in six-year-old D.
So I can't help but wonder: if these kids would've learned healthy coping strategies early on when times get tough, would they now be able to survive in a regular high school?
I can't say for sure, but I have to tell you I believe that it would've helped.
And it's time for all of us to take the social and emotional development of our kids seriously.
The time is now for us to step up and say what we need to do for our kids.
If we teach kids how to read and write, and they graduate but yet they don't know how to manage emotions, what will our communities look like?
I tell people: you can invest now or you will pay later.
The time is now for us to invest in our kids.
They're our future citizens, not just numbers that can or cannot pass a test.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
Nobody likes to make a mistake.
And I made a whopping one.
And figuring out what I did wrong led to a discovery that completely changes the way we think about the Earth and Moon.
I'm a planetary scientist, and my favorite thing to do is smash planets together.
(Laughter) In my lab, I can shoot at rocks using cannons like this one.
(Cannon shot) (Laughter) In my experiments, I can generate the extreme conditions during planet formation.
And with computer models, I can collide whole planets together to make them grow, or I can destroy them.
(Laughter) I want to understand how to make the Earth and the Moon and why the Earth is so different from other planets.
The leading idea for the origin of the Earth and Moon is called the "giant impact theory."
The theory states that a Mars-sized body struck the young Earth, and the Moon formed from the debris disk around the planet.
The theory can explain so many things about the Moon, but it has a huge flaw: it predicts that the Moon is mostly made from the Mars-sized planet, that the Earth and the Moon are made from different materials.
But that's not what we see.
The Earth and the Moon are actually like identical twins.
The genetic code of planets is written in the isotopes of the elements.
The Earth and Moon have identical isotopes.
That means that the Earth and Moon are made from the same materials.
It's really strange that the Earth and the Moon are twins.
All of the planets are made from different materials, so they all have different isotopes, they all have their own genetic code.
No other planetary bodies have the same genetic relationship.
Only the Earth and Moon are twins.
When I started working on the origin of the Moon, there were scientists that wanted to reject the whole idea of the giant impact.
They didn't see any way for this theory to explain the special relationship between the Earth and the Moon.
We were all trying to think of new ideas.
The problem was, there weren't any better ideas.
All of the other ideas had even bigger flaws.
So we were trying to rescue the giant impact theory.
A young scientist in my group suggested that we try changing the spin of the giant impact.
Maybe making the Earth spin faster could mix more material and explain the Moon.
The Mars-sized impactor had been chosen because it could make the Moon and make the length of Earth's day.
People really liked that part of the model.
But what if something else determined the length of Earth's day?
Then there would be many more possible giant impacts that could make the Moon.
I was curious about what could happen, so I tried simulating faster-spinning giant impacts, and I found that it is possible to make a disk out of the same mixture of materials as the planet.
We were pretty excited.
Maybe this was the way to explain the Moon.
The problem is, we also found that that's just not very likely.
Most of the time, the disk is different from the planet, and it looked like making our Moon this way would be an astronomical coincidence, and it was just hard for everyone to accept the idea that the Moon's special connection to Earth was an accident.
The giant impact theory was still in trouble, and we were still trying to figure out how to make the Moon.
Then came the day when I realized my mistake.
My student and I were looking at the data from these fast-spinning giant impacts.
On that day, we weren't actually thinking about the Moon, we were looking at the planet.
The planet gets super-hot and partially vaporized from the energy of the impact.
But the data didn't look like a planet.
It looked really strange.
The planet was weirdly connected to the disk.
I got that super-excited feeling when something really wrong might be something really interesting.
In all of my calculations, I had assumed there was a planet with a separate disk around it.
Calculating what was in the disk as how we tested whether an impact could make the Moon.
But it didn't look that simple anymore.
We were making the mistake of thinking that a planet was always going to look like a planet.
On that day, I knew that a giant impact was making something completely new.
I've had eureka moments.
This was not one of them.
(Laughter) I really didn't know what was going on.
I had this strange, new object in front of me and the challenge to try and figure it out.
What do you do when faced with the unknown?
How do you even start?
We questioned everything: What is a planet?
When is a planet no longer a planet anymore?
We played with new ideas.
We had to get rid of our old way of thinking, and by playing, I could throw away all of the data, all of the rules of the real world, and free my mind to explore.
And by making a mental space where I could try out outrageous ideas and then bring them back into the real world to test them, I could learn.
And by playing, we learned so much.
I combined my lab experiments with computer models and discovered that after most giant impacts, the Earth is so hot, there's no surface.
There's just a deep layer of gas that gets denser and denser with depth.
The Earth would have been like Jupiter.
There's nothing to stand on.
And that was just part of the problem.
I wanted to understand the whole problem.
I couldn't let go of the challenge to figure out what was really going on in giant impacts.
It took almost two years of throwing away old ideas and building new ones that we understood the data and knew what it meant for the Moon.
I discovered a new type of astronomical object.
It's not a planet.
It's made from planets.
A planet is a body whose self-gravity is strong enough to give it its rounded shape.
It spins around all together.
Make it hotter and spin it faster, the equator gets bigger and bigger until it reaches a tipping point.
Push past the tipping point, and the material at the equator spreads into a disk.
It's now broken all the rules of being a planet.
It can't spin around together anymore, its shape keeps changing as it gets bigger and bigger; the planet has become something new.
We gave our discovery its name: synestia.
We named it after the goddess Hestia, the Greek goddess of the hearth and home, because we think the Earth became one.
The prefix means "all together," to emphasize the connection between all of the material.
A synestia is what a planet becomes when heat and spin push it over the limit of a spheroidal shape.
Would you like to see a synestia?
(Cheers) In this visualization of one of my simulations, the young Earth is already spinning quickly from a previous giant impact.
Its shape is deformed, but our planet would be recognizable by the water on its surface.
The energy from the impact vaporizes the surface, the water, the atmosphere, and mixes all of the gases together in just a few hours.
We discovered that many giant impacts make synestias, but these burning, bright objects don't live very long.
They cool down, shrink and turn back into planets.
While rocky planets like Earth were growing, they probably turned into synestias one or more times.
A synestia gives us a new way to solve the problem of the origin of the Moon.
We propose that the Moon formed inside a huge, vaporous synestia.
The Moon grew from magma rain that condensed out of the rock vapor.
The Moon's special connection to Earth is because the Moon formed inside the Earth when Earth was a synestia.
The Moon could have orbited inside the synestia for years, hidden from view.
The Moon is revealed by the synestia cooling and shrinking inside of its orbit.
The synestia turns into planet Earth only after cooling for hundreds of years longer.
In our new theory, the giant impact makes a synestia, and the synestia divides into two new bodies, creating our isotopically identical Earth and Moon.
Synestias have been created throughout the universe.
And we only just realized that by finding them in our imagination: What else am I missing in the world around me?
What is hidden from my view by my own assumptions?
The next time you look at the Moon, remember: the things you think you know may be the opportunity to discover something truly amazing.
(Applause)
The informal markets of Africa are stereotypically seen as chaotic and lackadaisical.
The downside of hearing the word "informal" is this automatic grand association we have, which is very negative, and it's had significant consequences and economic losses, easily adding -- or subtracting -- 40 to 60 percent of the profit margin for the informal markets alone.
As part of a task of mapping the informal trade ecosystem, we've done an extensive literature review of all the reports and research on cross-border trade in East Africa, going back 20 years.
This was to prepare us for fieldwork to understand what was the problem, what was holding back informal trade in the informal sector.
What we discovered over the last 20 years was, nobody had distinguished between illicit -- which is like smuggling or contraband in the informal sector -- from the legal but unrecorded, such as tomatoes, oranges, fruit.
This criminalization -- what in Swahili refers to as "biashara," which is the trade or the commerce, versus "magendo," which is the smuggling or contraband -- this criminalization of the informal sector, in English, by not distinguishing between these aspects, easily can cost each African economy between 60 to 80 percent addition on the annual GDP growth rate, because we are not recognizing the engine of what keeps the economies running.
The informal sector is growing jobs at four times the rate of the traditional formal economy, or "modern" economy, as many call it.
It offers employment and income generation opportunities to the most "unskilled" in conventional disciplines.
But can you make a french fry machine out of an old car?
So, this, ladies and gentlemen, is what so desperately needs to be recognized.
As long as the current assumptions hold that this is criminal, this is shadow, this is illegal, there will be no attempt at integrating the informal economic ecosystem with the formal or even the global one.
I'm going to tell you a story of Teresia, a trader who overturned all our assumptions, made us question all the stereotypes that we'd gone in on, based on 20 years of literature review.
Teresia sells clothes under a tree in a town called Malaba, on the border of Uganda and Kenya.
You think it's very simple, don't you?
We'll go hang up new clothes from the branches, put out the tarp, settle down, wait for customers, and there we have it.
She was everything we were expecting according to the literature, to the research, right down to she was a single mom driven to trade, supporting her kids.
So what overturned our assumptions?
What surprised us?
First, Teresia paid the county government market fees every single working day for the privilege of setting up shop under her tree.
She's been doing it for seven years, and she's been getting receipts.
She keeps records.
We're seeing not a marginal, underprivileged, vulnerable African woman trader by the side of the road -- no.
We were seeing somebody who's keeping sales records for years; somebody who had an entire ecosystem of retail that comes in from Uganda to pick up inventory; someone who's got handcarts bringing the goods in, or the mobile money agent who comes to collect cash at the end of the evening.
Can you guess how much Teresia spends, on average, each month on inventory -- stocks of new clothes that she gets from Nairobi?
One thousand five hundred US dollars.
That's around 20,000 US dollars invested in trade goods and services every year.
This is Teresia, the invisible one, the hidden middle.
And she's only the first rung of the small entrepreneurs, the micro-businesses that can be found in these market towns.
At least in the larger Malaba border, she's at the first rung.
The people further up the value chain are easily running three lines of business, investing 2,500 to 3,000 US dollars every month.
So the problem turned out that it wasn't the criminalization; you can't really criminalize someone you're charging receipts from.
It's the lack of recognition of their skilled occupations.
The bank systems and structures have no means to recognize them as micro-businesses, much less the fact that, you know, her tree doesn't have a forwarding address.
So she's trapped in the middle.
She's falling through the cracks of our assumptions.
You know all those microloans to help African women traders?
They're going to loan her 50 dollars or 100 dollars.
What's she going to do with it?
She spends 10 times that amount every month just on inventory -- we're not talking about the additional services or the support ecosystem.
These are the ones who fit neither the policy stereotype of the low-skilled and the marginalized, nor the white-collar, salaried office worker or civil servant with a pension that the middle classes are allegedly composed of.
Instead, what we have here are the proto-SMEs these are the fertile seeds of businesses and enterprises that keep the engines running.
They put food on your table.
Even here in this hotel, the invisible ones -- the butchers, the bakers the candlestick makers -- they make the machines that make your french fries and they make your beds.
These are the invisible businesswomen trading across borders, all on the side of the road, and so they're invisible to data gatherers.
And they're mashed together with the vast informal sector that doesn't bother to distinguish between smugglers and tax evaders and those running illegal whatnot, and the ladies who trade, and who put food on the table and send their kids to university.
So that's really what I'm asking here.
That's all that we need to start by doing.
Can we start by recognizing the skills, the occupations?
We could transform the informal economy by beginning with this recognition and then designing the customized doorways for them to enter or integrate with the formal, with the global, with the entire system.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
(Applause)
I think all of us have been interested, at one time or another, in the romantic mysteries of all those societies that collapsed, such as the classic Maya in the Yucatan, the Easter Islanders, the Anasazi, Fertile Crescent society, Angor Wat, Great Zimbabwe and so on. And within the last decade or two, archaeologists have shown us that there were environmental problems underlying many of these past collapses.
But there were also plenty of places in the world where societies have been developing for thousands of years without any sign of a major collapse, such as Japan, Java, Tonga and Tikopea. So evidently, societies in some areas are more fragile than in other areas.
How can we understand what makes some societies more fragile than other societies? The problem is obviously relevant to our situation today, because today as well, there are some societies that have already collapsed, such as Somalia and Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. There are also societies today that may be close to collapse, such as Nepal, Indonesia and Columbia.
What about ourselves?
What is there that we can learn from the past that would help us avoid declining or collapsing in the way that so many past societies have?
Obviously the answer to this question is not going to be a single factor. If anyone tells you that there is a single-factor explanation for societal collapses, you know right away that they're an idiot. This is a complex subject.
But how can we make sense out of the complexities of this subject?
In analyzing societal collapses, I've arrived at a five-point framework -- a checklist of things that I go through to try and understand collapses. And I'll illustrate that five-point framework by the extinction of the Greenland Norse society.
This is a European society with literate records, so we know a good deal about the people and their motivation.
In AD 984 Vikings went out to Greenland, settled Greenland, and around 1450 they died out -- the society collapsed, and every one of them ended up dead.
Why did they all end up dead? Well, in my five-point framework, the first item on the framework is to look for human impacts on the environment: people inadvertently destroying the resource base on which they depend. And in the case of the Viking Norse, the Vikings inadvertently caused soil erosion and deforestation, which was a particular problem for them because they required forests to make charcoal, to make iron.
So they ended up an Iron Age European society, virtually unable to make their own iron. A second item on my checklist is climate change. Climate can get warmer or colder or dryer or wetter.
In the case of the Vikings -- in Greenland, the climate got colder in the late 1300s, and especially in the 1400s. But a cold climate isn't necessarily fatal, because the Inuit -- the Eskimos inhabiting Greenland at the same time -- did better, rather than worse, with cold climates. So why didn't the Greenland Norse as well?
The third thing on my checklist is relations with neighboring friendly societies that may prop up a society. And if that friendly support is pulled away, that may make a society more likely to collapse. In the case of the Greenland Norse, they had trade with the mother country -- Norway -- and that trade dwindled: partly because Norway got weaker, partly because of sea ice between Greenland and Norway.
The fourth item on my checklist is relations with hostile societies.
In the case of Norse Greenland, the hostiles were the Inuit -- the Eskimos sharing Greenland -- with whom the Norse got off to bad relationships. And we know that the Inuit killed the Norse and, probably of greater importance, may have blocked access to the outer fjords, on which the Norse depended for seals at a critical time of the year.
And then finally, the fifth item on my checklist is the political, economic, social and cultural factors in the society that make it more or less likely that the society will perceive and solve its environmental problems. In the case of the Greenland Norse, cultural factors that made it difficult for them to solve their problems were: their commitments to a Christian society investing heavily in cathedrals; their being a competitive-ranked chiefly society; and their scorn for the Inuit, from whom they refused to learn. So that's how the five-part framework is relevant to the collapse and eventual extinction of the Greenland Norse.
What about a society today?
For the past five years, I've been taking my wife and kids to Southwestern Montana, where I worked as a teenager on the hay harvest. And Montana, at first sight, seems like the most pristine environment in the United States.
But scratch the surface, and Montana suffers from serious problems.
Going through the same checklist: human environmental impacts?
Yes, acute in Montana. Toxic problems from mine waste have caused damage of billions of dollars.
Problems from weeds, weed control, cost Montana nearly 200 million dollars a year. Montana has lost agricultural areas from salinization, problems of forest management, problems of forest fires. Second item on my checklist: climate change. Yes -- the climate in Montana is getting warmer and drier, but Montana agriculture depends especially on irrigation from the snow pack, and as the snow is melting -- for example, as the glaciers in Glacier National Park are disappearing -- that's bad news for Montana irrigation agriculture.
Third thing on my checklist: relations with friendlies that can sustain the society. In Montana today, more than half of the income of Montana is not earned within Montana, but is derived from out of state: transfer payments from social security, investments and so on -- which makes Montana vulnerable to the rest of the United States.
Fourth: relations with hostiles. Montanans have the same problems as do all Americans, in being sensitive to problems created by hostiles overseas affecting our oil supplies, and terrorist attacks. And finally, last item on my checklist: question of how political, economic, social, cultural attitudes play into this. Montanans have long-held values, which today seem to be getting in the way of their solving their own problems.
Long-held devotion to logging and to mines and to agriculture, and to no government regulation; values that worked well in the past, but they don't seem to be working well today.
So, I'm looking at these issues of collapses for a lot of past societies and for many present societies.
Are there any general conclusions that arise?
In a way, just like Tolstoy's statement about every unhappy marriage being different, every collapsed or endangered society is different -- they all have different details. But nevertheless, there are certain common threads that emerge from these comparisons of past societies that did or did not collapse and threatened societies today. One interesting common thread has to do with, in many cases, the rapidity of collapse after a society reaches its peak. There are many societies that don't wind down gradually, but they build up -- get richer and more powerful -- and then within a short time, within a few decades after their peak, they collapse. For example, the classic lowland Maya of the Yucatan began to collapse in the early 800s -- literally a few decades after the Maya were building their biggest monuments, and Maya population was greatest.
Or again, the collapse of the Soviet Union took place within a couple of decades, maybe within a decade, of the time when the Soviet Union was at its greatest power.
An analogue would be the growth of bacteria in a petri dish.
These rapid collapses are especially likely where there's a mismatch between available resources and resource consumption, or a mismatch between economic outlays and economic potential.
In a petri dish, bacteria grow. Say they double every generation, and five generations before the end the petri dish is 15/16ths empty, and then the next generation's 3/4ths empty, and the next generation half empty. Within one generation after the petri dish still being half empty, it is full. There's no more food and the bacteria have collapsed.
So, this is a frequent theme: societies collapse very soon after reaching their peak in power.
What it means to put it mathematically is that, if you're concerned about a society today, you should be looking not at the value of the mathematical function -- the wealth itself -- but you should be looking at the first derivative and the second derivatives of the function. That's one general theme. A second general theme is that there are many, often subtle environmental factors that make some societies more fragile than others. Many of those factors are not well understood. For example, why is it that in the Pacific, of those hundreds of Pacific islands, why did Easter Island end up as the most devastating case of complete deforestation?
It turns out that there were about nine different environmental factors -- some, rather subtle ones -- that were working against the Easter Islanders, and they involve fallout of volcanic tephra, latitude, rainfall. Perhaps the most subtle of them is that it turns out that a major input of nutrients which protects island environments in the Pacific is from the fallout of continental dust from central Asia.
Easter, of all Pacific islands, has the least input of dust from Asia restoring the fertility of its soils. But that's a factor that we didn't even appreciate until 1999.
So, some societies, for subtle environmental reasons, are more fragile than others. And then finally, another generalization. I'm now teaching a course at UCLA, to UCLA undergraduates, on these collapses of societies. What really bugs my UCLA undergraduate students is, how on earth did these societies not see what they were doing?
How could the Easter Islanders have deforested their environment?
What did they say when they were cutting down the last palm tree?
Didn't they see what they were doing? How could societies not perceive their impacts on the environments and stop in time?
And I would expect that, if our human civilization carries on, then maybe in the next century people will be asking, why on earth did these people today in the year 2003 not see the obvious things that they were doing and take corrective action?
It seems incredible in the past. In the future, it'll seem incredible what we are doing today. And so I've been trying to develop a hierarchical set of considerations about why societies fail to solve their problems -- why they fail to perceive the problems or, if they perceive them, why they fail to tackle them. Or, if they tackle them, why do they fail to succeed in solving them?
I'll just mention two generalizations in this area.
One blueprint for trouble, making collapse likely, is where there is a conflict of interest between the short-term interest of the decision-making elites and the long-term interest of the society as a whole, especially if the elites are able to insulate themselves from the consequences of their actions. Where what's good in the short run for the elite is bad for the society as a whole, there's a real risk of the elite doing things that would bring the society down in the long run.
For example, among the Greenland Norse -- a competitive rank society -- what the chiefs really wanted is more followers and more sheep and more resources to outcompete the neighboring chiefs. And that led the chiefs to do what's called flogging the land: overstocking the land, forcing tenant farmers into dependency. And that made the chiefs powerful in the short run, but led to the society's collapse in the long run.
Those same issues of conflicts of interest are acute in the United States today. Especially because the decision makers in the United States are frequently able to insulate themselves from consequences by living in gated compounds, by drinking bottled water and so on. And within the last couple of years, it's been obvious that the elite in the business world correctly perceive that they can advance their short-term interest by doing things that are good for them but bad for society as a whole, such as draining a few billion dollars out of Enron and other businesses. They are quite correct that these things are good for them in the short term, although bad for society in the long term.
So, that's one general conclusion about why societies make bad decisions: conflicts of interest.
And the other generalization that I want to mention is that it's particularly hard for a society to make quote-unquote good decisions when there is a conflict involving strongly held values that are good in many circumstances but are poor in other circumstances. For example, the Greenland Norse, in this difficult environment, were held together for four-and-a-half centuries by their shared commitment to religion, and by their strong social cohesion. But those two things -- commitment to religion and strong social cohesion -- also made it difficult for them to change at the end and to learn from the Inuit. Or today -- Australia.
One of the things that enabled Australia to survive in this remote outpost of European civilization for 250 years has been their British identity.
But today, their commitment to a British identity is serving Australians poorly in their need to adapt to their situation in Asia. So it's particularly difficult to change course when the things that get you in trouble are the things that are also the source of your strength.
What's going to be the outcome today?
Well, all of us know the dozen sorts of ticking time bombs going on in the modern world, time bombs that have fuses of a few decades to -- all of them, not more than 50 years, and any one of which can do us in; the time bombs of water, of soil, of climate change, invasive species, the photosynthetic ceiling, population problems, toxics, etc., etc. -- listing about 12 of them. And while these time bombs -- none of them has a fuse beyond 50 years, and most of them have fuses of a few decades -- some of them, in some places, have much shorter fuses. At the rate at which we're going now, the Philippines will lose all its accessible loggable forest within five years. And the Solomon Islands are only one year away from losing their loggable forest, which is their major export. And that's going to be spectacular for the economy of the Solomons. People often ask me, Jared, what's the most important thing that we need to do about the world's environmental problems?
And my answer is, the most important thing we need to do is to forget about there being any single thing that is the most important thing we need to do.
Instead, there are a dozen things, any one of which could do us in.
And we've got to get them all right, because if we solve 11, we fail to solve the 12th -- we're in trouble. For example, if we solve our problems of water and soil and population, but don't solve our problems of toxics, then we are in trouble.
The fact is that our present course is a non-sustainable course, which means, by definition, that it cannot be maintained.
And the outcome is going to get resolved within a few decades.
That means that those of us in this room who are less than 50 or 60 years old will see how these paradoxes are resolved, and those of us who are over the age of 60 may not see the resolution, but our children and grandchildren certainly will.
The resolution is going to achieve either of two forms: either we will resolve these non-sustainable time-fuses in pleasant ways of our own choice by taking remedial action, or else these conflicts are going to get settled in unpleasant ways not of our choice -- namely, by war, disease or starvation. But what's for sure is that our non-sustainable course will get resolved in one way or another in a few decades. In other words, since the theme of this session is choices, we have a choice. Does that mean that we should get pessimistic and overwhelmed? I draw the reverse conclusion.
The big problems facing the world today are not at all things beyond our control. Our biggest threat is not an asteroid about to crash into us, something we can do nothing about.
Instead, all the major threats facing us today are problems entirely of our own making. And since we made the problems, we can also solve the problems. That then means that it's entirely in our power to deal with these problems.
In particular, what can all of us do? For those of you who are interested in these choices, there are lots of things you can do. There's a lot that we don't understand, and that we need to understand. And there's a lot that we already do understand, but aren't doing, and that we need to be doing. Thank you.
(Applause)
I grew up in Europe, and World War II caught me when I was between seven and 10 years old.
And I realized how few of the grown-ups that I knew were able to withstand the tragedies that the war visited on them -- how few of them could even resemble a normal, contented, satisfied, happy life once their job, their home, their security was destroyed by the war.
So I became interested in understanding what contributed to a life that was worth living.
And I tried, as a child, as a teenager, to read philosophy and to get involved in art and religion and many other ways that I could see as a possible answer to that question.
And finally I ended up encountering psychology by chance.
I was at a ski resort in Switzerland without any money to actually enjoy myself, because the snow had melted and I didn't have money to go to a movie. But I found that on the -- I read in the newspapers that there was to be a presentation by someone in a place that I'd seen in the center of Zurich, and it was about flying saucers [that] he was going to talk.
And I thought, well, since I can't go to the movies, at least I will go for free to listen to flying saucers.
And the man who talked at that evening lecture was very interesting.
Instead of talking about little green men, he talked about how the psyche of the Europeans had been traumatized by the war, and now they're projecting flying saucers into the sky.
He talked about how the mandalas of ancient Hindu religion were kind of projected into the sky as an attempt to regain some sense of order after the chaos of war.
And this seemed very interesting to me.
And I started reading his books after that lecture.
And that was Carl Jung, whose name or work I had no idea about.
Then I came to this country to study psychology and I started trying to understand the roots of happiness.
This is a typical result that many people have presented, and there are many variations on it.
But this, for instance, shows that about 30 percent of the people surveyed in the United States since 1956 say that their life is very happy.
And that hasn't changed at all.
Whereas the personal income, on a scale that has been held constant to accommodate for inflation, has more than doubled, almost tripled, in that period.
But you find essentially the same results, namely, that after a certain basic point -- which corresponds more or less to just a few 1,000 dollars above the minimum poverty level -- increases in material well-being don't seem to affect how happy people are.
In fact, you can find that the lack of basic resources, material resources, contributes to unhappiness, but the increase in material resources does not increase happiness.
So my research has been focused more on -- after finding out these things that actually corresponded to my own experience, I tried to understand: where -- in everyday life, in our normal experience -- do we feel really happy?
And to start those studies about 40 years ago, I began to look at creative people -- first artists and scientists, and so forth -- trying to understand what made them feel that it was worth essentially spending their life doing things for which many of them didn't expect either fame or fortune, but which made their life meaningful and worth doing.
This was one of the leading composers of American music back in the '70s.
And the interview was 40 pages long.
But this little excerpt is a very good summary of what he was saying during the interview.
And it describes how he feels when composing is going well.
And he says by describing it as an ecstatic state.
Now, "ecstasy" in Greek meant simply to stand to the side of something.
And then it became essentially an analogy for a mental state where you feel that you are not doing your ordinary everyday routines.
So ecstasy is essentially a stepping into an alternative reality.
And it's interesting, if you think about it, how, when we think about the civilizations that we look up to as having been pinnacles of human achievement -- whether it's China, Greece, the Hindu civilization, or the Mayas, or Egyptians -- what we know about them is really about their ecstasies, not about their everyday life.
We know the temples they built, where people could come to experience a different reality.
We know about the circuses, the arenas, the theaters.
These are the remains of civilizations and they are the places that people went to experience life in a more concentrated, more ordered form.
Now, this man doesn't need to go to a place like this, which is also -- this place, this arena, which is built like a Greek amphitheatre, is a place for ecstasy also.
We are participating in a reality that is different from that of the everyday life that we're used to.
But this man doesn't need to go there.
He needs just a piece of paper where he can put down little marks, and as he does that, he can imagine sounds that had not existed before in that particular combination.
So once he gets to that point of beginning to create, like Jennifer did in her improvisation, a new reality -- that is, a moment of ecstasy -- he enters that different reality.
Now he says also that this is so intense an experience that it feels almost as if he didn't exist.
And that sounds like a kind of a romantic exaggeration.
But actually, our nervous system is incapable of processing more than about 110 bits of information per second.
And in order to hear me and understand what I'm saying, you need to process about 60 bits per second.
That's why you can't hear more than two people.
You can't understand more than two people talking to you.
Well, when you are really involved in this completely engaging process of creating something new, as this man is, he doesn't have enough attention left over to monitor how his body feels, or his problems at home.
He can't feel even that he's hungry or tired.
His body disappears, his identity disappears from his consciousness, because he doesn't have enough attention, like none of us do, to really do well something that requires a lot of concentration, and at the same time to feel that he exists.
So existence is temporarily suspended.
And he says that his hand seems to be moving by itself.
Now, I could look at my hand for two weeks, and I wouldn't feel any awe or wonder, because I can't compose. (Laughter) So what it's telling you here is that obviously this automatic, spontaneous process that he's describing can only happen to someone who is very well trained and who has developed technique.
And it has become a kind of a truism in the study of creativity that you can't be creating anything with less than 10 years of technical-knowledge immersion in a particular field.
Whether it's mathematics or music, it takes that long to be able to begin to change something in a way that it's better than what was there before.
Now, when that happens, he says the music just flows out.
And because all of these people I started interviewing -- this was an interview which is over 30 years old -- so many of the people described this as a spontaneous flow that I called this type of experience the "flow experience."
And it happens in different realms.
For instance, a poet describes it in this form.
This is by a student of mine who interviewed some of the leading writers and poets in the United States.
And it describes the same effortless, spontaneous feeling that you get when you enter into this ecstatic state.
This poet describes it as opening a door that floats in the sky -- a very similar description to what Albert Einstein gave as to how he imagined the forces of relativity, when he was struggling with trying to understand how it worked.
But it happens in other activities.
For instance, this is another student of mine, Susan Jackson from Australia, who did work with some of the leading athletes in the world.
And you see here in this description of an Olympic skater, the same essential description of the phenomenology of the inner state of the person.
You don't think; it goes automatically, if you merge yourself with the music, and so forth.
It happens also, actually, in the most recent book I wrote, called "Good Business," where I interviewed some of the CEOs who had been nominated by their peers as being both very successful and very ethical, very socially responsible.
You see that these people define success as something that helps others and at the same time makes you feel happy as you are working at it.
And like all of these successful and responsible CEOs say, you can't have just one of these things be successful if you want a meaningful and successful job.
Anita Roddick is another one of these CEOs we interviewed.
She is the founder of Body Shop, the natural cosmetics king.
It's kind of a passion that comes from doing the best and having flow while you're working.
This is an interesting little quote from Masaru Ibuka, who was at that time starting out Sony without any money, without a product -- they didn't have a product, they didn't have anything, but they had an idea.
And the idea he had was to establish a place of work where engineers can feel the joy of technological innovation, be aware of their mission to society and work to their heart's content.
I couldn't improve on this as a good example of how flow enters the workplace.
Now, when we do studies -- we have, with other colleagues around the world, done over 8,000 interviews of people -- from Dominican monks, to blind nuns, to Himalayan climbers, to Navajo shepherds -- who enjoy their work.
And regardless of the culture, regardless of education or whatever, there are these seven conditions that seem to be there when a person is in flow.
There's this focus that, once it becomes intense, leads to a sense of ecstasy, a sense of clarity: you know exactly what you want to do from one moment to the other; you get immediate feedback.
You know that what you need to do is possible to do, even though difficult, and sense of time disappears, you forget yourself, you feel part of something larger.
And once the conditions are present, what you are doing becomes worth doing for its own sake.
In our studies, we represent the everyday life of people in this simple scheme.
And we can measure this very precisely, actually, because we give people electronic pagers that go off 10 times a day, and whenever they go off you say what you're doing, how you feel, where you are, what you're thinking about.
And two things that we measure is the amount of challenge people experience at that moment and the amount of skill that they feel they have at that moment.
So for each person we can establish an average, which is the center of the diagram.
That would be your mean level of challenge and skill, which will be different from that of anybody else.
But you have a kind of a set point there, which would be in the middle.
If we know what that set point is, we can predict fairly accurately when you will be in flow, and it will be when your challenges are higher than average and skills are higher than average.
And you may be doing things very differently from other people, but for everyone that flow channel, that area there, will be when you are doing what you really like to do -- play the piano, be with your best friend, perhaps work, if work is what provides flow for you.
And then the other areas become less and less positive.
Arousal is still good because you are over-challenged there.
Your skills are not quite as high as they should be, but you can move into flow fairly easily by just developing a little more skill.
So, arousal is the area where most people learn from, because that's where they're pushed beyond their comfort zone and to enter that -- going back to flow -- then they develop higher skills.
Control is also a good place to be, because there you feel comfortable, but not very excited.
It's not very challenging any more.
And if you want to enter flow from control, you have to increase the challenges.
So those two are ideal and complementary areas from which flow is easy to go into.
The other combinations of challenge and skill become progressively less optimal.
Relaxation is fine -- you still feel OK.
Boredom begins to be very aversive and apathy becomes very negative: you don't feel that you're doing anything, you don't use your skills, there's no challenge.
Unfortunately, a lot of people's experience is in apathy.
The largest single contributor to that experience is watching television; the next one is being in the bathroom, sitting.
Even though sometimes watching television about seven to eight percent of the time is in flow, but that's when you choose a program you really want to watch and you get feedback from it.
So the question we are trying to address -- and I'm way over time -- is how to put more and more of everyday life in that flow channel.
And that is the kind of challenge that we're trying to understand.
And some of you obviously know how to do that spontaneously without any advice, but unfortunately a lot of people don't.
And that's what our mandate is, in a way, to do.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why are transgender people suddenly everywhere?
(Laughter) As a trans activist, I get this question a lot.
Keep in mind, less than one percent of American adults openly identify as trans.
According to a recent GLAAD survey, about 16 percent of non-trans Americans claim to know a trans person in real life.
So for the other 84 percent, this may seem like a new topic.
But trans people are not new.
Gender variance is older than you think, and trans people are part of that legacy.
From central Africa to South America to the Pacific Islands and beyond, there have been populations who recognize multiple genders, and they go way back.
The hijra of India and Pakistan, for example, have been cited as far back as 2,000 years ago in the Kama Sutra.
Indigenous American nations each have their own terms, but most share the umbrella term "two-spirit."
They saw gender-variant people as shamans and healers in their communities, and it wasn't until the spread of colonialism that they were taught to think otherwise.
Now, in researching trans history, we look for both trans people and trans practices.
Take, for example, the women who presented as men so they could fight in the US Civil War.
After the war, most resumed their lives as women, but some, like Albert Cashier, continued to live as men.
Albert was eventually confined to an asylum and forced to wear a dress for the rest of his life.
(Sighs) Around 1895, a group of self-described androgynes formed the Cercle Hermaphroditos.
Their mission was to unite for defense against the world's bitter persecution.
And in doing that, they became one of the earliest trans support groups.
By the '40s and '50s, medical researchers were starting to study trans medicine, but they were aided by their trans patients, like Louise Lawrence, a trans woman who had corresponded extensively with people who had been arrested for public cross-dressing.
She introduced sexual researchers like Alfred Kinsey to a massive trans network.
Other early figures would follow, like Virginia Prince, Reed Erickson and the famous Christine Jorgensen, who made headlines with her very public transition in 1952.
But while white trans suburbanites were forming their own support networks, many trans people of color had to carve their own path.
Some, like Miss Major Griffin-Gracy, walked in drag balls.
Others were the so-called "street queens," who were often targeted by police for their gender expression and found themselves on the forefront of seminal events in the LGBT rights movement.
This brings us to the riots at Cooper Do-nuts in 1959, Compton's Cafeteria in 1966 and the famous Stonewall Inn in 1969.
In 1970, Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson, two veterans of Stonewall, established STAR: Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries.
Trans people continued to fight for equal treatment under the law, even as they faced higher rates of discrimination, unemployment, arrests, and the looming AIDS epidemic.
For as long as we've been around, those in power have sought to disenfranchise trans people for daring to live lives that are ours.
This motion picture still, taken in Berlin in 1933, is sometimes used in history textbooks to illustrate how the Nazis burned works they considered un-German.
But what's rarely mentioned is that included in this massive pile are works from the Institute for Sexual Research.
See, I just recapped the trans movement in America, but Magnus Hirschfeld and his peers in Germany had us beat by a few decades.
Magnus Hirschfeld was an early advocate for LGBT people.
He wrote the first book-length account of trans individuals.
He helped them obtain medical services and IDs.
He worked with the Berlin Police Department to end discrimination of LGBT people, and he hired them at the Institute.
So when the Nazi Party burned his library, it had devastating implications for trans research around the world.
This was a deliberate attempt to erase trans people, and it was neither the first nor the last.
So whenever people ask me why trans people are suddenly everywhere, I just want to tell them that we've been here.
These stories have to be told, along with the countless others that have been buried by time.
Not only were our lives not celebrated, but our struggles have been forgotten and, yeah, to some people, that makes trans issues seem new.
Today, I meet a lot of people who think that our movement is just a phase that will pass, but I also hear well-intentioned allies telling us all to be patient, because our movement is "still new."
Imagine how the conversation would shift if we acknowledge just how long trans people have been demanding equality.
Are we still overreacting?
Should we continue to wait?
Or should we, for example, do something about the trans women of color who are murdered and whose killers never see justice?
Do our circumstances seem dire to you yet?
(Sighs) Finally, I want other trans people to realize they're not alone.
I grew up thinking my identity was an anomaly that would die with me.
People drilled this idea of otherness into my mind, and I bought it because I didn't know anyone else like me.
Maybe if I had known my ancestors sooner, it wouldn't have taken me so long to find a source of pride in my identity and in my community.
Because I belong to an amazing, vibrant community of people that uplift each other even when others won't, that take care of each other even when we are struggling, that somehow, despite it all, still find cause to celebrate each other, to love each other, to look one another in the eyes and say, "You are not alone.
You have us.
And we're not going anywhere."
Thank you.
(Applause)
A shooting star crashes on Earth, and a hideous blob emerges.
It creeps and leaps, it glides and slides.
Its also unstoppable: weapons, fire, extreme temperatures no matter what you throw at it, it just regrows and continues its rampage.
Its expansion is breathtaking; it doubles in size every hour.
But theres one opportunity: after each hour, it goes to sleep, forming itself into a flat triangle and resting for a few minutes before it begins eating and growing again.
Your only chance to save the planet involves a satellite-mounted nano-fission ray that can cut through the blob.
When the blog is active it heals itself within seconds.
However, when you break the sleeping blob into two triangles, you make a critical discovery.
The acute triangle portion, with all angles less than 90 degrees, is inert.
It never wakes up. The obtuse triangle, which has an angle greater than 90 degrees, wakes up as usual and keeps growing.
Similar experiments show that all shapes other than acute triangles, including right triangles, will also wake up.
For the next few minutes, the blob is sleeping in its obtuse triangle form.
You can make clean, straight-line cuts between any two points on or inside the triangle.
But youll only have time to make 7 cuts while the satellite is above you.
By the time it completes its orbit and returns, the blob will have consumed the entire world, if even a single portion that will wake up remains.
How can you cut the blob entirely into acute triangles and stop it from destroying the planet?
Pause the video now to figure out for yourself Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1 While this seems doable at first, theres a hidden difficulty when it comes to avoiding obtuse and right angles.
Every time you make a cut that reaches an edge, it either makes an acute and an obtuse angle, or two right angles.
That makes it seems like youre doomed to keep creating obtuse angles.
But as with so many of lifes problems, we can look to pizza for inspiration.
Imagine squaring off the outside of a pizza, so that instead of a circle, its an octagon.
When we cut it into slices, each of the eight triangles is acute.
This works with larger polygons too.
Importantly, it also works for some polygons with fewer sides, including heptagons, hexagons, and pentagons.
Thats good news, because if you cut off the sharp corners of the blob triangle, a pentagon is exactly what youll be left with.
And just like a pizza, you can cut the blob pentagon into five acute triangles.
Thats 7 cuts, and it renders the blob completely inert.
Youve saved the day!
Now you just need to figure out what to do with all of these giant, practically indestructible triangles.
In 2004, a new company called Vemma Nutrition started offering a life-changing opportunity to earn full time income for part time work.
Vemmas offer was open to everybody, regardless of prior experience or education.
There were only two steps to start get started earning: purchase a $500-600 kit of their liquid nutrition products, and recruit two more members to do the same.
Vemma Nutrition Company grew quickly, becoming a global operation that brought in 30,000 new members per month at its peak.
There was just one problem while the company generated $200 million of annual revenue by 2013, the vast majority of participants earned less than they paid in.
Vemma was eventually charged with operating a pyramid scheme: a common type of fraud where members make money by recruiting more people to buy in.
Typically, the founder solicits an initial group of people to buy in and promote the scheme.
They are then encouraged to recruit others and promised part of the money those people invest, while the founder also takes a share.
The pattern repeats for each group of new participants, with money from recent arrivals funneled to those who recruited them.
This differs from a Ponzi scheme, where the founders recruit new members and secretly use their fees to pay existing members, who think the payments come from a legitimate investment.
As a pyramid scheme grows, it becomes increasingly difficult for new recruits to make money.
Thats because the number of participants expands exponentially.
Take a structure where each person has to recruit six more to earn a profit.
The founder recruits six people to start, and each of them recruits six more.
There are 36 people in that second round of recruits, who then each recruit 6 people a total of 216 new recruits.
By the twelfth round of recruiting, the 2.1 billion newest members would have to recruit over 13 billion more people total to make money more than the entire world population.
In this scenario, the most recent recruits, over 80% of the schemes participants, lose all the money they paid in.
And in real life, many earlier joiners lose out too.
Pyramid schemes are illegal in most countries, but they can be difficult to detect.
They are presented as many different things, including gifting groups, investment clubs, and multi-level marketing businesses.
The distinction between pyramid schemes and legitimate multi-level marketing can be particularly hazy.
In theory, the difference is that the members of the multi-level marketing companies primarily earn compensation from selling a particular product or a service to retail customers, while pyramid schemes primarily compensate members for recruitment of new sellers.
In practice, though, many multi-level marketing companies make it all but impossible for members to profit purely through sales.
And many pyramid schemes, like Vemma Nutrition, disguise themselves as legal multi-level marketing businesses, using a product or service to hide the pay-and-recruit structure.
Many pyramid schemes also capitalize on already existing trust within churches, immigrant communities, or other tightly knit groups.
The first few members are encouraged to report a good experience before they actually start making a profit.
Others in their network follow their example, and the schemes balloon in size before it comes clear that most members arent actually profiting.
Often, the victims are embarrassed into silence.
Pyramid schemes entice people with the promise of opportunity and empowerment.
So when members dont end up making money, they can blame themselves rather than the scheme, thinking they werent tenacious enough to earn the returns promised.
Some victims keep trying, investing in multiple schemes, and losing money each time.
In spite of all these factors, there are ways to spot a pyramid scheme.
Time pressure is one red flag be wary of directives to act now or miss a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Promises of large, life-altering amounts of income are also suspect.
And finally, a legitimate multi-level marketing business shouldnt require members to pay for the opportunity to sell a product or service.
Pyramid schemes can be incredibly destructive to individuals, communities, and even entire countries.
But you can fight fire with fire by sending this video to three people you know, and encouraging them to do the same.
I was six when I had the first chance to learn what patience means.
My grandmother gave me a magic box as a birthday present, which neither of us knew would become a gift for life.
I became obsessed with magic, and at 20, I became an amateur dove magician.
This act of magic requires that I train my doves to sit and wait inside my clothing.
As a young magician, I was always in a rush to make them appear, but my teacher told me the secret to the success of this magical act is to make my doves appear only after they've waited patiently in my tuxedo.
It has to be a mindful kind of patience, the kind that took me some years to master.
When life took me to Shanghai seven years ago, the mindful patience I learned became almost impossible to practice.
In China, where everyone and everything is in a hurry, you need to outperform over 1.3 billion other people to build a better life.
You hack the system, bend the rules, circumvent the boundaries.
It is the same when it comes to food ...
except that when it comes to food, impatience can have dire consequences.
In the haste to grow more, sell more, 4,000 years of agriculture in a country of rich natural resources is spoiled by the overuse of chemicals and pesticides.
In 2016, the Chinese government revealed half a million food safety violations in just nine months.
Alarmingly, one in every four diabetics in the world now comes from China.
The stories around food are scary and somewhat overwhelming, and I told myself it's time to bring a mindful patience into the impatience.
When I say mindful patience, I don't mean the ability to wait.
I mean knowing how to act while waiting.
And so, while I wait for the day when a sustainable food system becomes a reality in China, I launched one of China's first online farmers market to bring local, organically grown produce to families.
When we went live, 18 months ago, the food we could sell then was somewhat dismal.
We had no fruit and hardly any meat to sell, as none that was sent to the lab passed our zero tolerance test towards pesticides, chemicals, antibiotics and hormones.
I told our very anxious employees that we would not give up until we've met every local farmer in China.
Today, we supply 240 types of produce from 57 local farmers.
After almost one year of searching, we finally found chemical-free bananas grown in the backyards of villagers on Hainan Island.
And only two hours away from Shanghai, on an island that even Google Maps does not have coordinates for, we found a place where cows eat grass and roam free under the blue sky.
We also work hard on logistics.
We deliver our customers' orders in as fast as three hours on electric vehicles, and we use biodegradable, reusable boxes to minimize our environmental footprint.
I have no doubt that our offerings will continue to grow, but it will take time, and I know a lot more people are needed to shape the future of good food.
So last year, I founded China's first food tech accelerator and VC platform to help start-ups to shape the future of good food the way they want, be that through using edible insects as a more sustainable source of protein or using essential oils to keep food fresh for longer.
So, you may still ask: Why are you trying to build a sustainable food system by driving a patient movement in a country where it's almost a crime to take it slow?
Because, for me, the real secret to success is patience -- a mindful kind of patience that requires knowing how to act while waiting, the kind of patience I learned with my grandmother's magic box.
After all, we do not inherit the earth from our ancestors.
We borrow it from our children.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Reaching heights of over 100 meters, Californian sequoias tower over Earths other estimated 60,000 tree species.
Growing in the misty Sierra Nevada mountains, their massive trunks support the tallest known trees in the world.
But even these behemoths seem to have their limits.
No sequoia on record has been able to grow taller than 130 meters  and many researchers say these trees wont beat that cap even if they live for thousands of years to come.
So what exactly is stopping these trees from growing taller, forever?
It all comes down to sap.
In order for trees to grow, they need to bring sugars obtained from photosynthesis and nutrients brought in through the root system to wherever growth is happening.
And just like blood circulates in the human body, trees are designed to circulate two kinds of sap throughout their bodies  carrying all the substances a trees cells need to live.
The first is phloem sap.
Containing the sugars generated in leaves during photosynthesis, phloem sap is thick, like honey, and flows down the plants phloem tissue to distribute sugar throughout the tree.
By the end of its journey, the phloem sap has thinned into a watery substance, pooling at the base of the tree.
Right beside the phloem is the trees other tissue type: the xylem.
This tissue is packed with nutrients and ions like calcium, potassium, and iron, which the tree has absorbed through its roots.
Here at the trees base, there are more of these particles in one tissue than the other, so the water from the phloem sap is absorbed into the xylem to correct the balance.
This process, called osmotic movement, creates nutrient-rich xylem sap, which will then travel up the trunk to spread those nutrients through the tree.
But this journey faces a formidable obstacle: gravity.
To accomplish this herculean task, the xylem relies on three forces: transpiration, capillary action, and root pressure.
As part of photosynthesis, leaves open and close pores called stomata.
These openings allow oxygen and carbon dioxide in and out of the leaf, but they also create an opening through which water evaporates.
This evaporation, called transpiration, creates negative pressure in the xylem, pulling watery xylem sap up the tree.
This pull is aided by a fundamental property of water called capillary action.
In narrow tubes, the attraction between water molecules and the adhesive forces between the water and its environment can beat out gravity.
This capillary motion is in full effect in xylem filaments thinner than human hair.
And where these two forces pull the sap, the osmotic movement at the trees base creates root pressure, pushing fresh xylem sap up the trunk.
Together these forces launch sap to dizzying heights, distributing nutrients, and growing new leaves to photosynthesize  far above the trees roots.
But despite these sophisticated systems, every centimeter is a fight against gravity.
As trees grow taller and taller, the supply of these vital fluids begins to dwindle.
At a certain height, trees can no longer afford the lost water that evaporates during photosynthesis.
And without the photosynthesis needed to support additional growth, the tree instead turns its resources towards existing branches.
This model, known as the hydraulic limitation hypothesis, is currently our best explanation for why trees have limited heights, even in perfect growing conditions.
And using this model alongside growth rates and known needs for nutrients and photosynthesis, researchers have been able to propose height limits for specific species.
So far these limits have held up  even the worlds tallest tree still falls about fifteen meters below the cap.
Researchers are still investigating the possible explanations for this limit, and there may not be one universal reason why trees stop growing.
But until we learn more, the height of trees is yet another way that gravity, literally, shapes life on Earth.
In 1925, Frida Kahlo was on her way home from school in Mexico City when the bus she was riding collided with a streetcar.
She suffered near-fatal injuries to her spine, pelvis and hips, and was bedridden for months afterward.
During her recovery, she had a special easel attached to her bed so she could practice painting techniques.
When she set to work, she began to paint the world according to her own singular vision.
Over the course of her life, she would establish herself as the creator and muse behind extraordinary art.
Though you may have met Kahlo's gaze before, her work provides an opportunity to see the world through her eyes.
She painted friends and family, still lives and spiritual scenes; but it was her mesmerizing self-portraits which first caught the worlds attention.
In an early work, "Self Portrait with Velvet Dress," the focus is on her strong brows, facial hair, long neck and formidable stare.
Such features remained, but Kahlo soon began to present herself in more unusual ways.
For example, "The Broken Column" uses symbolism, religious imagery and a ruptured landscape to reveal her physical and mental state.
In 1928, Kahlo started dating fellow painter Diego Rivera.
They became lifelong partners and cultivated an eccentric celebrity.
Together, they traveled the world and dedicated themselves to art, Communist politics and Mexican nationalism.
Kahlo and Rivera shared a deep affinity with Mexicanidad, a movement which celebrated indigenous culture after the Revolution.
In her daily life, Kahlo wore traditional Tehuana dress and immersed herself in native spirituality.
And in her work, she constantly referenced Mexican folk painting, incorporating its bright colors and references to death, religion and nature.
With her imagery of giant floating flowers, undulating landscapes, transplanted body parts and billowing clouds of demons, Kahlo has often been associated with Surrealism.
But while surrealists used dreamlike images to explore the unconscious mind, Kahlo used them to represent her physical body and life experiences.
Two of her most-explored experiences were her physical disabilities and her marriage.
As a result of the bus accident, she experienced life-long health complications and endured many hospitalizations.
She often contemplated the physical and psychological effects of disability in her work; painting herself in agony, recuperating from operations, or including objects such as her back brace and wheelchair.
Meanwhile, her relationship with Rivera was tempestuous, marked by infidelity on both sides.
At one point they even divorced, then remarried a year later.
During this period, she painted the double self-portrait "The Two Fridas," which speaks to the anguish of loss and a splintered sense of self.
The Frida to the left has a broken heart, which drips blood onto her old-fashioned Victorian dress.
She symbolizes a version of the artist who is wounded by the past but is also connected by an artery to a second self.
This Frida is dressed in Tehuana attire and although she remembers Diego with the tiny portrait in her hand, her heart remains intact.
Together, the two suggest a position caught between past and present, individuality and dependency.
Kahlo died in 1954 at the age of 47.
In the years after her death, she experienced a surge in popularity that has lasted to this day.
And although her image has proliferated, Kahlos body of work reminds us that there are no simple truths about the life, work and legacy of the woman behind the icon.
Rather, she put multiple versions of her reality on display and provided us with a few entry-ways into the contents of her soul.
"All I wanted was a much-deserved promotion, and he told me to 'Get up on the desk and spread 'em.'" "All the men in my office wrote down on a piece of paper the sexual favors that I could do for them.
All I had asked for was an office with a window."
"I asked for his advice about how I could get a bill out of committee; he asked me if I brought my kneepads."
Those are just a few of the horrific stories that I heard from women over the last year, as I've been investigating workplace sexual harassment.
And what I found out is that it's an epidemic across the world.
It's a horrifying reality for millions of women, when all they want to do every day is go to work.
Sexual harassment doesn't discriminate.
You can wear a skirt, hospital scrubs, army fatigues.
You can be young or old, married or single, black or white.
You can be a Republican, a Democrat or an Independent.
I heard from so many women: police officers, members of our military, financial assistants, actors, engineers, lawyers, bankers, accountants, teachers ...
journalists.
Sexual harassment, it turns out, is not about sex.
It's about power, and about what somebody does to you to try and take away your power.
And I'm here today to encourage you to know that you can take that power back.
(Applause) On July 6, 2016, I jumped off a cliff all by myself.
It was the scariest moment of my life; an excruciating choice to make.
I fell into an abyss all alone, not knowing what would be below.
But then, something miraculous started to happen.
Thousands of women started reaching out to me to share their own stories of pain and agony and shame.
They told me that I became their voice -- they were voiceless.
And suddenly, I realized that even in the 21st century, every woman still has a story.
Like Joyce, a flight attendant supervisor whose boss, in meetings every day, would tell her about the porn that he'd watched the night before while drawing penises on his notepad.
She went to complain.
She was called "crazy" and fired.
Like Joanne, Wall Street banker.
Her male colleagues would call her that vile c-word every day.
She complained -- labeled a troublemaker, never to do another Wall Street deal again.
Like Elizabeth, an army officer.
Her male subordinates would wave one-dollar bills in her face, and say, "Dance for me!"
And when she went to complain to a major, he said, "What? Only one dollar?
You're worth at least five or ten!"
After reading, replying to all and crying over all of these emails, I realized I had so much work to do.
Here are the startling facts: one in three women -- that we know of -- have been sexually harassed in the workplace.
Seventy-one percent of those incidences never get reported.
Why?
Because when women come forward, they're still called liars and troublemakers and demeaned and trashed and demoted and blacklisted and fired.
Reporting sexual harassment can be, in many cases, career-ending.
Of all the women that reached out to me, almost none are still today working in their chosen profession, and that is outrageous.
I, too, was silent in the beginning.
It happened to me at the end of my year as Miss America, when I was meeting with a very high-ranking TV executive in New York City.
I thought he was helping me throughout the day, making a lot of phone calls.
We went to dinner, and in the back seat of a car, he suddenly lunged on top of me and stuck his tongue down my throat.
I didn't realize that to "get into the business" -- silly me -- he also intended to get into my pants.
And just a week later, when I was in Los Angeles meeting with a high-ranking publicist, it happened again.
Again, in a car.
And he took my neck in his hand, and he shoved my head so hard into his crotch, I couldn't breathe.
These are the events that suck the life out of all of your self-confidence.
These are the events that, until recently, I didn't even call assault.
And this is why we have so much work to do.
After my year as Miss America, I continued to meet a lot of well-known people, including Donald Trump.
When this picture was taken in 1988, nobody could have ever predicted where we'd be today.
(Laughter) Me, fighting to end sexual harassment in the workplace; he, president of the United States in spite of it.
And shortly thereafter, I got my first gig in television news in Richmond, Virginia.
Check out that confident smile with the bright pink jacket.
Not so much the hair.
(Laughter) I was working so hard to prove that blondes have a lot of brains.
But ironically, one of the first stories I covered was the Anita Hill hearings in Washington, DC.
And shortly thereafter, I, too, was sexually harassed in the workplace.
I was covering a story in rural Virginia, and when we got back into the car, my cameraman started saying to me, wondering how much I had enjoyed when he touched my breasts when he put the microphone on me.
And it went downhill from there.
I was bracing myself against the passenger door -- this was before cellphones.
I was petrified.
I actually envisioned myself rolling outside of that door as the car was going 50 miles per hour like I'd seen in the movies, and wondering how much it would hurt.
When the story about Harvey Weinstein came to light -- one the most well-known movie moguls in all of Hollywood -- the allegations were horrific.
But so many women came forward, and it made me realize what I had done meant something.
(Applause) He had such a lame excuse.
He said he was a product of the '60s and '70s, and that that was the culture then.
Yeah, that was the culture then, and unfortunately, it still is.
Why?
Because of all the myths that are still associated with sexual harassment.
"Women should just take another job and find another career."
Yeah, right.
Tell that to the single mom working two jobs, trying to make ends meet, who's also being sexually harassed.
"Women -- they bring it on themselves."
By the clothes that we wear and the makeup that we put on.
Yeah, I guess those hoodies that Uber engineers wear in Silicon Valley are just so provocative.
"Women make it up."
Yeah, because it's so fun and rewarding to be demeaned and taken down.
I would know.
"Women bring these claims because they want to be famous and rich."
Our own president said that.
I bet Taylor Swift, one of the most well-known and richest singers in the world, didn't need more money or fame when she came forward with her groping case for one dollar.
And I'm so glad she did.
Breaking news: the untold story about women and sexual harassment in the workplace: women just want a safe, welcoming and harass-free environment.
That's it.
(Applause) So how do we go about getting our power back?
I have three solutions.
Number one: we need to turn bystanders and enablers into allies.
Ninety-eight percent of United States corporations right now have sexual harassment training policies.
Seventy percent have prevention programs.
But still, overwhelmingly, bystanders and witnesses don't come forward.
In 2016, the Harvard Business Review called it the "bystander effect."
And yet -- remember 9/11.
Millions of times we've heard, "If you see something, say something."
Imagine how impactful that would be if we carried that through to bystanders in the workplace regarding sexual harassment -- to recognize and interrupt these incidences; to confront the perpetrators to their face; to help and protect the victims.
This is my shout-out to men: we need you in this fight.
And to women, too -- enablers to allies.
Number two: change the laws.
How many of you out there know whether or not you have a forced arbitration clause in your employment contract?
Not a lot of hands.
And if you don't know, you should, and here's why.
TIME Magazine calls it, right there on the screen, "The teeny tiny little print in contracts that keeps sexual harassment claims unheard."
Here's what it is.
Forced arbitration takes away your Seventh Amendment right to an open jury process.
It's secret.
You don't get the same witnesses or depositions.
In many cases, the company picks the arbitrator for you.
There are no appeals, and only 20 percent of the time does the employee win.
But again, it's secret, so nobody ever knows what happened to you.
This is why I've been working so diligently on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC to change the laws.
And here's what I tell the Senators: sexual harassment is apolitical.
Before somebody harasses you, they don't ask you if you're a Republican or Democrat first.
They just do it.
And this is why we should all care.
Number three: be fierce.
It starts when we stand tall, and we build that self-confidence.
And we stand up and we speak up, and we tell the world what happened to us.
I know it's scary, but let's do it for our kids.
Let's stop this for the next generations.
I know that I did it for my children.
They were paramount in my decision-making about whether or not I would come forward.
My beautiful children, my 12-year-old son, Christian, my 14-year-old daughter, Kaia.
And boy, did I underestimate them.
The first day of school last year happened to be the day my resolution was announced, and I was so anxious about what they would face.
My daughter came home from school and she said, "Mommy, so many people asked me what happened to you over the summer."
Then she looked at me in the eyes and she said, "And mommy, I was so proud to say that you were my mom."
And two weeks later, when she finally found the courage to stand up to two kids who had been making her life miserable, she came home to me and she said, "Mommy, I found the courage to do it because I saw you do it."
(Applause) You see, giving the gift of courage is contagious.
And I hope that my journey has inspired you, because right now, it's the tipping point.
We are watching history happen.
More and more women are coming forward and saying, "Enough is enough."
(Applause) Here's my one last plea to companies.
Let's hire back all those women whose careers were lost because of some random jerk.
Because here's what I know about women: we will not longer be underestimated, intimidated or set back; we will not be silenced by the ways of the establishment or the relics of the past.
No.
We will stand up and speak up and have our voices heard.
We will be the women we were meant to be.
And above all, we will always be fierce.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What if you could make your sleep more efficient?
As a sleep scientist, this is the question that has captivated me for the past 10 years.
Because while the lightbulb and technology have brought about a world of 24-hour work and productivity, it has come at the cost of our naturally occurring circadian rhythm and our body's need for sleep.
The circadian rhythm dictates our energy level throughout the day, and only recently we've been conducting a global experiment on this rhythm, which is putting our sleep health and ultimately our life quality in jeopardy.
Because of this, we aren't getting the sleep we need, with the average American sleeping a whole hour less than they did in the 1940s.
For some reason, we decided to wear it as a badge of honor that we can get by on not enough sleep.
This all adds up to a real health crisis.
Most of us know that poor sleep is linked to diseases like Alzheimer's, cardiovascular disease, stroke and diabetes.
And if you go untreated with a sleep disorder like sleep apnea, you're more likely to get many of these illnesses.
But did you know about sleep's impact on your mental states?
Poor sleep makes us make risky, rash decisions and is a drain on our capacity for empathy.
When sleep deprivation literally makes us more sensitive to our own pain, it's not so surprising that we have a hard time relating to others and just generally being a good and healthy person when we're sleep-deprived.
Scientists are now starting to understand how not only the quantity but also the quality of sleep impacts our health and well-being.
My research focuses on what many scientists believe is the most regenerative stage of sleep: deep sleep.
We now know that generally speaking, there are three stages of sleep: light sleep, rapid eye movement or REM and deep sleep.
We measure these stages by connecting electrodes to the scalp, chin and chest.
In light sleep and REM, our brain waves are very similar to our brain waves in waking life.
But our brain waves in deep sleep have these long-burst brain waves that are very different from our waking life brain waves.
These long-burst brain waves are called delta waves.
When we don't get the deep sleep we need, it inhibits our ability to learn and for our cells and bodies to recover.
Deep sleep is how we convert all those interactions that we make during the day into our long-term memory and personalities.
As we get older, we're more likely to lose these regenerative delta waves.
So in way, deep sleep and delta waves are actually a marker for biological youth.
So naturally, I wanted to get more deep sleep for myself and I literally tried almost every gadget, gizmo, device and hack out there -- consumer-grade, clinical-grade, what have you.
I learned a lot, and I found I really do need, like most people, eight hours of sleep.
I even shifted my circadian component by changing my meals, exercise and light exposure, but I still couldn't find a way to get a deeper night of sleep ...
that is until I met Dr. Dmitry Gerashchenko from Harvard Medical School.
Dmitry told me about a new finding in the literature, where a lab out of Germany showed that if you could play certain sounds at the right time in people's sleep, you could actually make sleep deeper and more efficient.
And what's more, is that this lab showed that you actually could improve next-day memory performance with this sound.
Dmitry and I teamed up, and we began working on a way to build this technology.
With our research lab collaborators at Penn State, we designed experiments in order to validate our system.
And we've since received grant funding from the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of Health to develop this deep-sleep stimulating technology.
Here's how it works.
People came into the lab and we hooked them up to a number of devices, two of which I have on right here -- not a fashion statement.
(Laughter) When we detected that people were in deep sleep, we played the deep-sleep stimulating sounds that were shown to make them have deeper sleep.
I'm going to demo this sound for you right now.
(Repeating sound waves) Pretty weird, right?
(Laughter) So that sound is actually at the same burst frequency as your brain waves when your brain is in deep sleep.
That sound pattern actually primes your mind to have more of these regenerative delta waves.
When we asked participants the next day about the sounds, they were completely unaware that we played the sounds, yet their brains responded with more of these delta waves.
Here's an image of someone's brain waves from the study that we conducted.
See the bottom panel?
This shows the sound being played at that burst frequency.
Now look at the brain waves in the upper part of the graph.
You can see from the graph that the sound is actually producing more of these regenerative delta waves.
We learned that we could accurately track sleep without hooking people up to electrodes and make people sleep deeper.
We're continuing to develop the right sound environment and sleep habitat to improve people's sleep health.
Our sleep isn't as regenerative as it could be, but maybe one day soon, we could wear a small device and get more out of our sleep.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most people think that new technology or advanced technology can never start in Africa.
Instead, they think that the best way to help the continent advance is by providing aid or services that the continent can't provide for itself.
So while we see advanced technology like robotics and artificial intelligence growing exponentially in the developed world, those same people are worried that a technologically backward Africa is falling behind.
That attitude couldn't be more wrong.
I'm a robotics entrepreneur who's spent a lot of time here in Africa.
And in 2014 we created Zipline, which is a company that uses electric autonomous aircraft to deliver medicine to hospitals and health centers on demand.
Last year, we launched the world's first automated delivery system operating at national scale.
And guess what?
We did not do that in the US, we didn't do it in Japan, and we didn't do it in Europe.
It was actually President Paul Kagame and the Rwandan Ministry of Health that made a big bet on the potential of this technology and signed a commercial contract to deliver a majority of the country's blood on demand.
(Applause) Yeah, they deserve the applause.
So why is blood important?
Rwanda collects between 60- and 80,000 units of blood a year.
So this is a product that when you need it, you really, really need it.
But blood is also challenging, because it has a very short shelf life, there are lots of different storage requirements, and it's really hard to predict the demand for all of these different blood groups before a patient actually needs something.
But the cool thing is that using this technology, Rwanda has been able to keep more blood centralized and then provide it when a patient needs something to any hospital or health center in an average of just 20 or 30 minutes.
Do you guys want to see how it works?
(Audience) Yes.
This is our distribution center, which is about 20 kilometers outside of Kigali.
This actually used to be a cornfield nine months ago, and with the Rwandan government, we leveled it and built this center in a couple weeks.
So when a patient is having an emergency, a doctor or a nurse at that hospital can send us a WhatsApp, telling us what they need.
And then our team will immediately spring into action.
We pull the blood from our stock, which is delivered from the National Center for Blood Transfusion; we scan the blood into our system so the Ministry of Health knows where the blood is going; and then we'll basically pack it into a Zip, which is what we call these little autonomous airplanes that run on batteries.
And then once that Zip is ready to go, we accelerate it from zero to 100 kilometers an hour in about half of a second.
(Audience) Whoa!
And from the moment it leaves the end of the launcher, it's completely autonomous.
(Video: Air traffic controller directs traffic) This is our air traffic controller calling it in to Kigali International Airport.
And when the Zip arrives at the hospital, it descends to about 30 feet and drops the package.
We use a really simple paper parachute -- simple things are best -- that allows the package to come to the ground gently and reliably in the same place every time.
So it's just like ride sharing; the doctors get a text message one minute before we arrive, saying, "Walk outside and receive your delivery."
(Laughter) And then -- (Applause) and then the doctors have what they need to save a patient's life.
This is actually watching a delivery happen from our distribution center; this vehicle is about 50 kilometers away.
We're able to watch the vehicle as it makes a delivery at a hospital in real time.
You may have noticed there are pings that are coming off of that vehicle on the screen.
Those pings are actually data packets that we're getting over the cell phone networks.
So these planes have SIM cards just like your cell phone does, and they're communicating over the cell network to tell us where they are and how they're doing at all times.
Believe it or not, we actually buy family plans -- (Laughter) for this fleet of vehicles, because that's how we get the best rates.
(Laughter) It's actually not a joke.
(Laughter) So today, we're delivering about 20 percent of the national blood supply of Rwanda outside of Kigali.
We serve about 12 hospitals, and we're adding hospitals to that network at an accelerating rate.
All of those hospitals only receive blood in this way, and most of those hospitals actually place multiple orders every day.
So the reason -- in all of health care logistics, you're always trading off waste against access.
So if you want to solve waste, you keep everything centralized.
As a result, when patients are having emergencies, sometimes they don't have the medical product they need.
If you want to solve access, you stock a lot of medicine at the last mile, at hospitals or health centers, and then patients have the medicine they need.
But you end up throwing a lot of medicine out, which is very expensive.
What's so amazing is that the Rwandan government has been able to break this cycle permanently.
Because doctors can get what they need instantly, they actually stock less blood at the hospitals.
So although use of blood products has increased substantially at all the hospitals we serve, in the last nine months, zero units of blood have expired at any of these hospitals.
(Applause) That's an amazing result.
That's actually not been achieved by any other health care system on the planet, and it happened here.
But obviously, when we're talking about delivering medical products instantly, the most important thing is patients.
Let me give you an example.
A couple months ago, a 24-year-old mother came into one of the hospitals that we serve, and she gave birth via C-section.
But that led to complications, and she started to bleed.
Luckily, the doctors had some blood of her blood type on hand that had been delivered via Zipline's routine service, and so they transfused her with a couple units of blood.
But she bled out of those units in about 10 minutes.
In this case, that mother's life is in grave danger -- in any hospital in the world.
But luckily, the doctors who were taking care of her immediately called our distribution center, they placed an emergency order, and our team actually did emergency delivery after emergency delivery after emergency delivery.
They ended up sending seven units of red blood cells, four units of plasma and two units of platelets.
That's more blood than you have in your entire body.
All of it was transfused into her, the doctors were able to stabilize her, and she is healthy today.
(Applause) Since we launched, we've done about 400 emergency deliveries like that, and there's a story like that one behind most of those emergencies.
Here are just a couple of the moms who have received transfusions in this way in the last couple months.
We're always reminded: when we can help a doctor save a mom's life, it's not just her life that you're saving.
That's also a baby boy or a baby girl who has a mother while they're growing up.
(Applause) But I want to be clear: postpartum hemorrhaging -- it's not a Rwanda problem, it's not a developing-world problem -- this is a global problem.
Maternal health is a challenge everywhere.
The main difference is that Rwanda was the first country to use radical technology to do something about it.
And that's the reason this attitude of Africa being disrupted or advanced technology not working here or needing aid is so totally wrong.
Africa can be the disrupter.
These small, agile, developing economies can out-innovate large, rich ones.
And they can totally leapfrog over the absence of legacy infrastructure to go straight to newer and better systems.
In 2000, if you had said that high-quality cellular networks were about to roll out across all of Africa, people would have told you that you were crazy.
And yet, no one anticipated how fast those networks were going to connect and empower people.
Today, 44 percent of the GDP of Kenya flows through M-Pesa, their mobile payment platform.
And not only that, but our autonomous fleet of vehicles relies on that cellular network.
Over the next few years as we start serving private health care facilities, we'll also use that mobile payment platform to collect fees for deliveries.
So innovation leads to more innovation leads to more innovation.
And meanwhile, most people who live in developed economies think that drone delivery is technologically impossible, let alone happening at national scale in East Africa.
And I do mean East Africa, not just Rwanda.
On Thursday, just a couple days ago, the Tanzanian Ministry of Health announced that they are going to use this same technology to provide instant delivery of a wide range of medical products to 10 million of the hardest to reach people in the country.
(Applause) It's actually going to be the largest autonomous system anywhere in the world.
To give you a sense of what this looks like, this is one of the first distribution centers.
You can see a 75-kilometer service radius around the distribution center, and that allows us to serve hundreds of health facilities and hospitals, all of which are rural, from that single distribution center.
But to serve over 20 percent of the population of Tanzania, we're going to need multiple distribution centers.
We'll actually need four.
And from these distribution centers, we expect to be doing several hundred lifesaving deliveries every day, and this system will ultimately serve over 1,000 health facilities and hospitals in the country.
So yeah, East Africa is moving really fast.
One thing that people, I think, often miss is that these kinds of leaps generate compounding gains.
For example, Rwanda, by investing in this infrastructure for health care, now has an aerial logistics network that they can use to catalyze other parts of their economy, like agriculture or e-commerce.
Even more importantly, 100 percent of the teams we hire at these distribution centers are local.
So here's our Rwandan team, which is a group of extraordinary engineers and operators.
They run the world's only automated delivery system operating at national scale.
They have been able to master something that the largest technology companies in the world have not yet been able to figure out.
So they are total heroes.
(Applause) They're total heroes.
Our team's mission is to deliver basic access to medicine to all seven billion people on the planet, no matter how hard it is to reach them.
We often tell people about that mission, and they say, "That's so generous of you, it's so philanthropic."
No!
Philanthropy has nothing to do with it.
Because of the commercial contracts that we sign with ministries of health, these networks are 100 percent sustainable and scalable.
And the reason we feel so strongly about correcting that misperception is that entrepreneurship is the only force in human history that has lifted millions of people out of poverty.
(Applause) No amount of foreign aid is going to sustainably employ 250 million African youth.
And the jobs that these kids may have gotten 10 years ago are largely being automated or are being changed dramatically by technology.
So they are looking for new skill sets, new competitive advantages.
They're looking for start-ups.
So why aren't there more start-ups that are tackling these global problems that are faced by billions of people in developing economies?
The reason is that investors and entrepreneurs are totally blind to the opportunity.
We think these problems are the domain of NGOs or governments, not private companies.
That's what we have to change.
You may have noticed I left something out of the video that I showed you.
I didn't show you how the planes land when they get back to the distribution center.
So, it might be obvious to you: none of our planes have landing gear.
We also don't have runways where we operate.
So we have to be able to decelerate the plane from about 100 kilometers an hour to zero in half of a second.
And the way we do that is we actually use a wire that tracks that plane as it comes in, with centimeter-level accuracy.
We snag the plane out of the sky, and then we gently plop it onto an actively inflated cushion.
This is basically a combination of an aircraft carrier and a bouncy castle.
(Laughter) So let me show you.
(Laughter) (Applause) And it might be obvious to you why I wanted to end with this video.
I wanted to show you the kids and the teenagers who line up on the fence every day.
They cheer every launch and every landing.
(Laughter) (Applause) Sometimes I actually show up at the distribution center early because I'm jet-lagged.
I'll show up an hour before we begin operation.
And there will be kids on the fence getting good seats.
(Laughter) And you go up and you ask them, "What do you think about the planes?"
And they'll say, "Oh, it's a sky ambulance."
So they get it.
I mean, they get it more than most adults.
So I was asking earlier: Who is going to be creating the disruptive technology companies of Africa over the next decade?
Ultimately, it's going to be up to these kids.
They are the engineers of Rwanda and Africa.
They are the engineers of our shared future.
But the only way they can build that future is if we realize that world-changing companies can scale in Africa, and that disruptive technology can start here first.
Thanks.
(Applause)
Charles Van Doren, who was later a senior editor of Britannica, said the ideal encyclopedia should be radical -- it should stop being safe.
But if you know anything about the history of Britannica since 1962, it was anything but radical: still a very completely safe, stodgy type of encyclopedia.
Wikipedia, on the other hand, begins with a very radical idea, and that's for all of us to imagine a world in which every single person on the planet is given free access to the sum of all human knowledge.
And that's what we're doing.
So Wikipedia -- you just saw the little demonstration of it -- it's a freely licensed encyclopedia.
It's written by thousands of volunteers all over the world in many, many languages.
It's written using wiki software -- which is the type of software he just demonstrated -- so anyone can quickly edit and save, and it goes live on the Internet immediately.
And everything about Wikipedia is managed by virtually an all-volunteer staff.
So when Yochai is talking about new methods of organization, he's exactly describing Wikipedia.
And what I'm going to do today is tell you a little bit more about how it really works on the inside.
So Wikipedia's owned by the Wikimedia Foundation, which I founded, a nonprofit organization.
And our goal, the core aim of the Wikimedia Foundation, is to get a free encyclopedia to every single person on the planet.
And so, if you think about what that means, it means a lot more than just building a cool website.
We're really interested in all the issues of the digital divide, poverty worldwide, empowering people everywhere to have the information that they need to make good decisions.
And so we're going to have to do a lot of work that goes beyond just the Internet.
And so that's a big part of why we've chosen the free licensing model, because that empowers local entrepreneurs or anyone who wants to -- they can take our content and do anything they like with it -- you can copy it, redistribute it -- and you can do it commercially or non-commercially.
So there's a lot of opportunities that are going to arise around Wikipedia all over the world.
We're funded by donations from the public, and one of the more interesting things about that is how little money it actually takes to run Wikipedia.
So Yochai showed you the graph of what the cost of a printing press was.
And I'm going to tell you what the cost of Wikipedia is.
So we've got over 600,000 articles in English.
We've got two million total articles across many, many different languages.
The biggest languages are German, Japanese, French -- all the Western-European languages are quite big.
But only around one-third of all of our traffic to our web clusters to the English Wikipedia, which is surprising to a lot of people.
A lot of people think in a very English-centric way on the Internet, but for us, we're truly global.
We're in many, many languages.
How popular we've gotten to be -- we're a top-50 website and we're more popular than the New York Times.
So this is where we get to Yochai's discussion.
This shows the growth of Wikipedia -- we're the blue line there -- and this is the New York Times over there.
And what's interesting about this is the New York Times website is a huge, enormous corporate operation with I have no idea how many hundreds of employees.
We have exactly one employee, and that employee is our lead software developer.
And he's only been our employee since January 2005, all the other growth before that ...
So the servers are managed by a ragtag band of volunteers.
All the editing is done by volunteers.
And the way that we're organized is not like any traditional organization you can imagine.
People are always asking, "Well, who's in charge of this?"
or "Who does that?"
It's a very unusual and chaotic thing.
We've got over 90 servers now in three locations.
These are managed by volunteer system administrators who are online.
I can go online any time of the day or night and see eight to 10 people waiting for me to ask a question or something, anything about the servers.
You could never afford to do this in a company.
You could never afford to have a standby crew of people 24 hours a day and do what we're doing at Wikipedia.
So we're doing around 1.4 billion page views monthly, so it's really gotten to be a huge thing.
And everything is managed by the volunteers.
And the total monthly cost for our bandwidth is about 5,000 dollars.
And that's essentially our main cost.
We could actually do without the employee.
We hired Brian because he was working part-time for two years and full-time at Wikipedia, so we actually hired him, so he could get a life and go to the movies sometimes.
So the big question when you've got this really chaotic organization is, why isn't it all rubbish?
Well, it's pretty good.
It isn't perfect, but it's much better than you would expect, given our completely chaotic model.
So when you saw him make a ridiculous edit to the page about me, you think, "Oh, this is obviously just going to degenerate into rubbish."
But when we've seen quality tests -- and there haven't been enough of these yet and I'm really encouraging people to do more, comparing Wikipedia to traditional things -- we win hands down.
So a German magazine compared German Wikipedia, which is much, much smaller than English, to Microsoft Encarta and to Brockhaus multimedial, and we won across the board.
They hired experts to come and look at articles and compare the quality, and we were very pleased with that result.
So a lot of people have heard about the Wikipedia Bush-Kerry controversy.
The media has covered this somewhat extensively.
It started out with an article in Red Herring.
The reporters called me up and they -- I mean, I have to say they spelled my name right, but they really wanted to say the Bush-Kerry election is so contentious, it's tearing apart the Wikipedia community.
And so they quote me as saying, "They're the most contentious in the history of Wikipedia."
What I actually said is they're not contentious at all.
So it's a slight misquote.
And it is true that we did have to lock the articles on a couple of occasions.
Time magazine recently reported that "Extreme action sometimes has to be taken, and Wales locked the entries on Kerry and Bush for most of 2004."
This came after I told the reporter that we had to lock it for -- occasionally a little bit here and there.
So the truth in general is that the kinds of controversies that you would probably think we have within the Wikipedia community are not really controversies at all.
Articles on controversial topics are edited a lot, but they don't cause much controversy within the community.
And the reason for this is that most people understand the need for neutrality.
The real struggle is not between the right and the left -- that's where most people assume -- but it's between the party of the thoughtful and the party of the jerks.
And no side of the political spectrum has a monopoly on either of those qualities.
The actual truth about the specific Bush-Kerry incident is that the Bush-Kerry articles were locked less than one percent of the time in 2004, and it wasn't because they were contentious; it was just because there was routine vandalism -- which happens sometimes even on stage ...
(Laughter) Sometimes even reporters have reported to me that they vandalized Wikipedia and were amazed that it was fixed so quickly.
And I said -- you know, I always say, please don't do that.
So how do we do this?
How do we manage the quality control?
How does it work?
So there's a few elements, mostly social policies and some elements of the software.
So the biggest and the most important thing is our neutral point of view policy.
This is something that I set down, from the very beginning, as a core principle of the community that's completely not debatable.
It's a social concept of cooperation, so we don't talk a lot about truth and objectivity.
The reason for this is if we say we're only going to write the "truth" about some topic, that doesn't do us a damn bit of good of figuring out what to write, because I don't agree with you about what's the truth.
But we have this jargon term of neutrality, which has its own long history within the community, which basically says, any time there's a controversial issue, Wikipedia itself should not take a stand on the issue.
We should merely report on what reputable parties have said about it.
So this neutrality policy is really important for us because it empowers a community that is very diverse to come together and actually get some work done.
So we have very diverse contributors in terms of political, religious, cultural backgrounds.
By having this firm neutrality policy, which is non-negotiable from the beginning, we ensure that people can work together and that the entries don't become simply a war back and forth between the left and the right.
If you engage in that type of behavior, you'll be asked to leave the community.
So, real-time peer review.
Every single change on the site goes to the "Recent changes" page.
So as soon as he made his change, it went to the "Recent changes" page.
That recent changes page was also fed into an IRC channel, which is an Internet chat channel that people are monitoring with various software tools.
And people can get RSS feeds -- they can get email notifications of changes.
And then users can set up their own personal watch list.
So my page is on quite a few volunteers' watch lists, because it is sometimes vandalized.
And therefore, what happens is someone will notice the change very quickly, and then they'll just simply revert the change.
There's a "new pages feed," for example, so you can go to a certain page of Wikipedia and see every new page as it's created.
This is really important because a lot of new pages are just garbage that has to be deleted, you know, "ASDFASDF."
But also, that's some of the most interesting and fun things, some of the new articles.
People will start an article on some interesting topic, other people will find that intriguing and jump in and help and make it much better.
So we do have edits by anonymous users, which is one of the most controversial and intriguing things about Wikipedia.
So, Chris was able to do his change -- he didn't have to log in or anything; he just went on the website and made a change.
But it turns out that only about 18 percent of all the edits to the website are done by anonymous users.
And that's a really important thing to understand: the vast majority of the edits that go on on the website are from a very close-knit community of maybe 600 to 1,000 people who are in constant communication.
And we have over 40 IRC channels, 40 mailing lists.
All these people know each other.
These are the people who are doing the bulk of the site, and they are, in a sense, semi-professionals at what they're doing.
The standards we set for ourselves are equal to or higher than professional standards of quality.
We don't always meet those standards, but that's what we're striving for.
And so that tight community is who really cares for the site, and these are some of the smartest people I've ever met.
It's my job to say that, but it's actually true.
The type of people who were drawn to writing an encyclopedia for fun tend to be pretty smart people.
The tools and the software: there's lots of tools that allow us -- allow us, meaning the community -- to self-monitor and to monitor all the work.
This is an example of a page history on "flat Earth," and you can see some changes that were made.
What's nice about this page is you can immediately take a look at this and see, "OK, I understand now."
When somebody goes and looks at -- they see that someone, an anonymous IP number, made an edit to my page.
That sounds suspicious. Who is this person?
Somebody looks at it -- they can immediately see highlighted in red all of the changes that took place -- to see, OK, well, these words have changed, things like this.
So that's one tool that we can use to very quickly monitor the history of a page.
Another thing that we do within the community is we leave everything very open-ended.
Most of the social rules and the methods of work are left completely open-ended in the software.
All of that stuff is just on Wiki pages.
And so there's nothing in the software that enforces the rules.
The example I've got up here is the Votes for Deletion page.
So, I mentioned earlier, people type "ASDFASDF" -- it needs to be deleted.
Cases like that, the administrators just delete it.
There's no reason to have a big argument about it.
But you can imagine there's a lot of other areas where the question is, is this notable enough to go in an encyclopedia?
Is the information verifiable? Is it a hoax? Is it true? Is it what?
So we needed a social method for figuring out the answer to this.
And so the method that arose organically within the community is the Votes For Deletion page.
And in the particular example we have here, it's a film, "Twisted Issues," and the first person says, "Now this is supposedly a film. It fails the Google test miserably."
The Google test is you look in Google and see if it's there, because if something's not even in Google, it probably doesn't exist at all.
It's not a perfect rule, but it's a nice starting point for quick research.
So somebody says, "Delete it, please. Delete it -- it's not notable."
And then somebody says, "Wait, I found it. I found it in a book, 'Film Threat Video Guide: the 20 Underground Films You Must See.'" So the next persons says, "Clean it up."
Somebody says, "I've found it on IMDB. Keep, keep, keep."
And what's interesting about this is that the software is -- these votes are just text typed into a page.
This is not really a vote so much as it is a dialogue.
Now it is true that at the end of the day, an administrator can go through here and take a look at this and say, "OK, 18 deletes, two keeps: we'll delete it."
But in other cases, this could be 18 deletes and two keeps, and we would keep it, because if those last two keeps say, "Wait a minute. Nobody else saw this but I found it in a book, and I found a link to a page that describes it, and I'm going to clean it up tomorrow, so please don't delete it," then it would survive.
And it also matters who the people are who are voting.
Like I say, it's a tight-knit community.
Down here at the bottom, "Keep, real movie," RickK.
RickK is a very famous Wikipedian who does an enormous amount of work with vandalism, hoaxes and votes for deletion.
His voice carries a lot of weight within the community because he knows what he's doing.
So how is all this governed?
People really want to know about administrators, things like that.
So the Wikipedia governance model, the governance of the community, is a very confusing, but workable mix of consensus -- meaning we try not to vote on the content of articles, because the majority view is not necessarily neutral -- some amount of democracy -- all of the administrators -- these are the people who have the ability to delete pages.
That doesn't mean that they have the right to delete pages.
They still have to follow all the rules -- but they're elected by the community.
Sometimes people -- random trolls on the Internet -- like to accuse me of handpicking the administrators to bias the content of the encyclopedia.
I always laugh at this, because I have no idea how they're elected, actually.
There's a certain amount of aristocracy.
You got a hint of that when I mentioned, like, RickK's voice would carry a lot more weight than someone we don't know.
I give this talk sometimes with Angela, who was just re-elected to the board from the community -- to the Board of the Foundation, with more than twice the votes of the person who didn't make it.
And I always embarrass her because I say, "Well, Angela, for example, could get away with doing absolutely anything within Wikipedia, because she's so admired and so powerful."
But the irony is, of course, that Angela can do this because she's the one person who you know would never, ever break any rules of Wikipedia.
And I also like to say she's the only person who actually knows all the rules of Wikipedia, so ...
And then there's monarchy, and that's my role on the community, so ...
(Laughter) I was describing this in Berlin once, and the next day in the newspaper the headline said, "I am the Queen of England."
(Laughter) And that's not exactly what I said, but -- (Laughter) the point is my role in the community -- Within the free software world, there's been a long-standing tradition of the "benevolent dictator" model.
So if you look at most of the major free software projects, they have one single person in charge who everyone agrees is the benevolent dictator.
Well, I don't like the term "benevolent dictator," and I don't think that it's my job or my role in the world of ideas to be the dictator of the future of all human knowledge compiled by the world.
It just isn't appropriate.
But there is a need still for a certain amount of monarchy, a certain amount of -- sometimes we have to make a decision and we don't want to get bogged down too heavily in formal decision-making processes.
So as an example of how this can be important: we recently had a situation where a neo-Nazi website discovered Wikipedia, and they said, "Oh, well, this is horrible, this Jewish conspiracy of a website, and we're going to get certain articles deleted that we don't like.
And we see they have a voting process, so we're going to send -- we have 40,000 members and we're going to send them over and they're all going to vote and get these pages deleted."
Well, they managed to get 18 people to show up.
That's neo-Nazi math for you.
They always think they've got 40,000 members when they've got 18.
But they managed to get 18 people to come and vote in a fairly absurd way to delete a perfectly valid article.
Of course, the vote ended up being about 85 to 18, so there was no real danger to our democratic processes.
On the other hand, people said, "But what are we going to do?
I mean, this could happen.
What if some group gets really seriously organized and comes in and wants to vote?"
Then I said, "Well, fuck it, we'll just change the rules."
That's my job in the community: to say we won't allow our openness and freedom to undermine the quality of the content.
And so, as long as people trust me in my role, then that's a valid place for me.
Of course, because of the free licensing, if I do a bad job, the volunteers are more than happy to take and leave -- I can't tell anyone what to do.
So the final point here is that to understand how Wikipedia works, it's important to understand that our wiki model is the way we work, but we are not fanatical web anarchists.
In fact, we're very flexible about the social methodology, because ultimately, the passion of the community is for the quality of the work, not necessarily for the process that we use to generate it.
(Applause) Ben Saunders: Yeah, hi, Ben Saunders.
Jimmy, you mentioned impartiality being a key to Wikipedia's success.
It strikes me that much of the textbooks that are used to educate our children are inherently biased.
Have you found Wikipedia being used by teachers and how do you see Wikipedia changing education?
Jimmy Wales: Yeah, so, a lot of teachers are beginning to use Wikipedia.
There's a media storyline about Wikipedia, which I think is false.
It builds on the storyline of bloggers versus newspapers.
And the storyline is, there's this crazy thing, Wikipedia, but academics hate it and teachers hate it.
The last time I got an email from a journalist saying, "Why do academics hate Wikipedia?"
I sent it from my Harvard email address because I was recently appointed a fellow there.
And I said, "Well, they don't all hate it."
(Laughter) But I think there's going to be huge impacts.
And we actually have a project that I'm personally really excited about, which is the Wikibooks project, which is an effort to create textbooks in all the languages.
And that's a much bigger project.
It's going to take 20 years or so to come to fruition.
But part of that is to fulfill our mission of giving an encyclopedia to every single person on the planet.
We don't mean we're going to Spam them with AOL-style CDs.
We mean we're going to give them a tool that they can use.
And for a lot of people in the world, if I give you an encyclopedia that's written at a university level, it doesn't do you any good without a whole host of literacy materials to build you up to the point where you can actually use it.
The Wikibooks project is an effort to do that.
And I think that we're going to see -- it may not even come from us; there's all kinds of innovation going on.
But freely licensed textbooks are the next big thing in education.
Whoa, dude.
Actually, for the next 18 minutes I'm going to do the best I can to describe the beauty of particle physics without equations.
It turns out there's a lot we can learn from coral.
A coral is a very beautiful and unusual animal.
Each coral head consists of thousands of individual polyps.
These polyps are continually budding and branching into genetically identical neighbors.
If we imagine this to be a hyperintelligent coral, we can single out an individual and ask him a reasonable question.
We can ask how exactly he got to be in this particular location compared to his neighbors -- if it was just chance, or destiny, or what?
Now, after admonishing us for turning the temperature up too high, he would tell us that our question was completely stupid.
These corals can be kind of mean, you see, and I have surfing scars to prove that.
But this polyp would continue and tell us that his neighbors were quite clearly identical copies of him.
That he was in all these other locations as well, but experiencing them as separate individuals.
For a coral, branching into different copies is the most natural thing in the world.
Unlike us, a hyperintelligent coral would be uniquely prepared to understand quantum mechanics.
The mathematics of quantum mechanics very accurately describes how our universe works.
And it tells us our reality is continually branching into different possibilities, just like a coral.
It's a weird thing for us humans to wrap our minds around, since we only ever get to experience one possibility.
This quantum weirdness was first described by Erwin Schrdinger and his cat.
The cat likes this version better.
(Laughter) In this setup, Schrdinger is in a box with a radioactive sample that, by the laws of quantum mechanics, branches into a state in which it is radiated and a state in which it is not.
(Laughter) In the branch in which the sample radiates, it sets off a trigger that releases poison and Schrdinger is dead.
But in the other branch of reality, he remains alive.
These realities are experienced separately by each individual.
As far as either can tell, the other one doesn't exist.
This seems weird to us, because each of us only experiences an individual existence, and we don't get to see other branches.
It's as if each of us, like Schrdinger here, are a kind of coral branching into different possibilities.
The mathematics of quantum mechanics tells us this is how the world works at tiny scales.
It can be summed up in a single sentence: Everything that can happen, does.
That's quantum mechanics.
But this does not mean everything happens.
The rest of physics is about describing what can happen and what can't.
What physics tells us is that everything comes down to geometry and the interactions of elementary particles.
And things can happen only if these interactions are perfectly balanced.
Now I'll go ahead and describe how we know about these particles, what they are and how this balance works.
In this machine, a beam of protons and antiprotons are accelerated to near the speed of light and brought together in a collision, producing a burst of pure energy.
This energy is immediately converted into a spray of subatomic particles, with detectors and computers used to figure out their properties.
This enormous machine -- the Large Hadron Collider at CERN in Geneva -- has a circumference of 17 miles and, when it's operating, draws five times as much power as the city of Monterey.
We can't predict specifically what particles will be produced in any individual collision.
Quantum mechanics tells us all possibilities are realized.
But physics does tell us what particles can be produced.
These particles must have just as much mass and energy as is carried in by the proton and antiproton.
Any particles more massive than this energy limit aren't produced, and remain invisible to us.
This is why this new particle accelerator is so exciting.
It's going to push this energy limit seven times beyond what's ever been done before, so we're going to get to see some new particles very soon.
But before talking about what we might see, let me describe the particles we already know of.
There's a whole zoo of subatomic particles.
Most of us are familiar with electrons.
A lot of people in this room make a good living pushing them around.
(Laughter) But the electron also has a neutral partner called the neutrino, with no electric charge and a very tiny mass.
In contrast, the up and down quarks have very large masses, and combine in threes to make the protons and neutrons inside atoms.
All of these matter particles come in left- and right-handed varieties, and have antiparticle partners that carry opposite charges.
These familiar particles also have less familiar second and third generations, which have the same charges as the first but have much higher masses.
These matter particles all interact with the various force particles.
The electromagnetic force interacts with electrically charged matter via particles called photons.
There is also a very weak force called, rather unimaginatively, the weak force ...
(Laughter) that interacts only with left-handed matter.
The strong force acts between quarks which carry a different kind of charge, called color charge, and come in three different varieties: red, green and blue.
You can blame Murray Gell-Mann for these names -- they're his fault.
Finally, there's the force of gravity, which interacts with matter via its mass and spin.
The most important thing to understand here is that there's a different kind of charge associated with each of these forces.
These four different forces interact with matter according to the corresponding charges that each particle has.
A particle that hasn't been seen yet, but we're pretty sure exists, is the Higgs particle, which gives masses to all these other particles.
The main purpose of the Large Hadron Collider is to see this Higgs particle, and we're almost certain it will.
But the greatest mystery is what else we might see.
And I'm going to show you one beautiful possibility towards the end of this talk.
Now, if we count up all these different particles using their various spins and charges, there are 226.
That's a lot of particles to keep track of.
And it seems strange that nature would have so many elementary particles.
But if we plot them out according to their charges, some beautiful patterns emerge.
The most familiar charge is electric charge.
Electrons have an electric charge, a negative one, and quarks have electric charges in thirds.
So when two up quarks and a down quark are combined to make a proton, it has a total electric charge of plus one.
These particles also have antiparticles, which have opposite charges.
Now, it turns out the electric charge is actually a combination of two other charges: hypercharge and weak charge.
If we spread out the hypercharge and weak charge and plot the charges of particles in this two-dimensional charge space, the electric charge is where these particles sit along the vertical direction.
The electromagnetic and weak forces interact with matter according to their hypercharge and weak charge, which make this pattern.
This is called the unified electroweak model, and it was put together back in 1967.
The reason most of us are only familiar with electric charge and not both of these is because of the Higgs particle.
The Higgs, over here on the left, has a large mass and breaks the symmetry of this electroweak pattern.
It makes the weak force very weak by giving the weak particles a large mass.
Since this massive Higgs sits along the horizontal direction in this diagram, the photons of electromagnetism remain massless and interact with electric charge along the vertical direction in this charge space.
So the electromagnetic and weak forces are described by this pattern of particle charges in two-dimensional space.
We can include the strong force by spreading out its two charge directions and plotting the charges of the force particles in quarks along these directions.
The charges of all known particles can be plotted in a four-dimensional charge space, and projected down to two dimensions like this so we can see them.
Whenever particles interact, nature keeps things in a perfect balance along all four of these charge directions.
If a particle and an antiparticle collide, it creates a burst of energy and a total charge of zero in all four charge directions.
At this point, anything can be created as long as it has the same energy and maintains a total charge of zero.
For example, this weak force particle and its antiparticle can be created in a collision.
In further interactions, the charges must always balance.
One of the weak particles could decay into an electron and an antineutrino, and these three still add to zero total charge.
Nature always keeps a perfect balance.
So these patterns of charges are not just pretty.
They tell us what interactions are allowed to happen.
And we can rotate this charge space in four dimensions to get a better look at the strong interaction, which has this nice hexagonal symmetry.
In a strong interaction, a strong force particle, such as this one, interacts with a colored quark, such as this green one, to give a quark with a different color charge -- this red one.
And strong interactions are happening millions of times each second in every atom of our bodies, holding the atomic nuclei together.
But these four charges corresponding to three forces are not the end of the story.
We can also include two more charges corresponding to the gravitational force.
When we include these, each matter particle has two different spin charges, spin-up and spin-down.
So they all split and give a nice pattern in six-dimensional charge space.
We can rotate this pattern in six dimensions and see that it's quite pretty.
Right now, this pattern matches our best current knowledge of how nature is built at the tiny scales of these elementary particles.
This is what we know for certain.
Some of these particles are at the very limit of what we've been able to reach with experiments.
From this pattern we already know the particle physics of these tiny scales -- the way the universe works at these tiny scales is very beautiful.
But now I'm going to discuss some new and old ideas about things we don't know yet.
We want to expand this pattern using mathematics alone, and see if we can get our hands on the whole enchilada.
We want to find all the particles and forces that make a complete picture of our universe.
And we want to use this picture to predict new particles that we'll see when experiments reach higher energies.
So there's an old idea in particle physics that this known pattern of charges, which is not very symmetric, could emerge from a more perfect pattern that gets broken -- similar to how the Higgs particle breaks the electroweak pattern to give electromagnetism.
In order to do this, we need to introduce new forces with new charge directions.
When we introduce a new direction, we get to guess what charges the particles have along this direction, and then we can rotate it in with the others.
If we guess wisely, we can construct the standard charges in six charge dimensions as a broken symmetry of this more perfect pattern in seven charge dimensions.
This particular choice corresponds to a grand unified theory introduced by Pati and Salam in 1973.
When we look at this new unified pattern, we can see a couple of gaps where particles seem to be missing.
This is the way theories of unification work.
A physicist looks for larger, more symmetric patterns that include the established pattern as a subset.
The larger pattern allows us to predict the existence of particles that have never been seen.
This unification model predicts the existence of these two new force particles, which should act a lot like the weak force, only weaker.
Now, we can rotate this set of charges in seven dimensions and consider an odd fact about the matter particles: the second and third generations of matter have exactly the same charges in six-dimensional charge space as the first generation.
These particles are not uniquely identified by their six charges.
They sit on top of one another in the standard charge space.
However, if we work in eight-dimensional charge space, then we can assign unique new charges to each particle.
Then we can spin these in eight dimensions and see what the whole pattern looks like.
Here we can see the second and third generations of matter now, related to the first generation by a symmetry called "triality."
This particular pattern of charges in eight dimensions is actually part of the most beautiful geometric structure in mathematics.
It's a pattern of the largest exceptional Lie group, E8.
This Lie group is a smooth, curved shape with 248 dimensions.
Each point in this pattern corresponds to a symmetry of this very complex and beautiful shape.
One small part of this E8 shape can be used to describe the curved space-time of Einstein's general relativity, explaining gravity.
Together with quantum mechanics, the geometry of this shape could describe everything about how the universe works at the tiniest scales.
The pattern of this shape living in eight-dimensional charge space is exquisitely beautiful, and it summarizes thousands of possible interactions between these elementary particles, each of which is just a facet of this complicated shape.
As we spin it, we can see many of the other intricate patterns contained in this one.
And with a particular rotation, we can look down through this pattern in eight dimensions along a symmetry axis and see all the particles at once.
It's a very beautiful object, and as with any unification, we can see some holes where new particles are required by this pattern.
There are 20 gaps where new particles should be, two of which have been filled by the Pati-Salam particles.
From their location in this pattern, we know that these new particles should be scalar fields like the Higgs particle, but have color charge and interact with the strong force.
Filling in these new particles completes this pattern, giving us the full E8.
This E8 pattern has very deep mathematical roots.
It's considered by many to be the most beautiful structure in mathematics.
It's a fantastic prospect that this object of great mathematical beauty could describe the truth of particle interactions at the smallest scales imaginable.
And this idea that nature is described by mathematics is not at all new.
In 1623, Galileo wrote this: "Nature's grand book, which stands continually open to our gaze, is written in the language of mathematics.
Its characters are triangles, circles and other geometrical figures, without which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of it; without these, one is wandering around in a dark labyrinth."
I believe this to be true, and I've tried to follow Galileo's guidance in describing the mathematics of particle physics using only triangles, circles and other geometrical figures.
Of course, when other physicists and I actually work on this stuff, the mathematics can resemble a dark labyrinth.
But it's reassuring that at the heart of this mathematics is pure, beautiful geometry.
Joined with quantum mechanics, this mathematics describes our universe as a growing E8 coral, with particles interacting at every location in all possible ways according to a beautiful pattern.
And as more of the pattern comes into view using new machines like the Large Hadron Collider, we may be able to see whether nature uses this E8 pattern or a different one.
This process of discovery is a wonderful adventure to be involved in.
If the LHC finds particles that fit this E8 pattern, that will be very, very cool.
If the LHC finds new particles, but they don't fit this pattern -- well, that will be very interesting, but bad for this E8 theory.
And, of course, bad for me personally.
(Laughter) Now, how bad would that be?
Well, pretty bad.
(Laughter) But predicting how nature works is a very risky game.
This theory and others like it are long shots.
One does a lot of hard work knowing that most of these ideas probably won't end up being true about nature.
That's what doing theoretical physics is like: there are a lot of wipeouts.
In this regard, new physics theories are a lot like start-up companies.
As with any large investment, it can be emotionally difficult to abandon a line of research when it isn't working out.
But in science, if something isn't working, you have to toss it out and try something else.
Now, the only way to maintain sanity and achieve happiness in the midst of this uncertainty is to keep balance and perspective in life.
I've tried the best I can to live a balanced life.
(Laughter) I try to balance my life equally between physics, love and surfing -- my own three charge directions.
(Laughter) This way, even if the physics I work on comes to nothing, I still know I've lived a good life.
And I try to live in beautiful places.
For most of the past ten years I've lived on the island of Maui, a very beautiful place.
Now, it's one of the greatest mysteries in the universe to my parents how I managed to survive all that time without engaging in anything resembling full-time employment.
(Laughter) I'm going to let you in on that secret.
This was a view from my home office on Maui.
And this is another, and another.
And you may have noticed that these beautiful views are similar, but in slightly different places.
That's because this used to be my home and office on Maui.
(Laughter) I've chosen a very unusual life.
But not worrying about rent allowed me to spend my time doing what I love.
Living a nomadic existence has been hard at times, but it's allowed me to live in beautiful places and keep a balance in my life that I've been happy with.
It allows me to spend a lot of my time hanging out with hyperintelligent coral.
But I also greatly enjoy the company of hyperintelligent people.
So I'm very happy to have been invited here to TED.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) I probably understood two percent of that, but I still absolutely loved it.
Your theory of everything -- Garrett Lisi: I'm used to coral.
CA: That's right.
The reason it's got a few people at least excited is because, if you're right, it brings gravity and quantum theory together.
So are you saying that we should think of the universe, at its heart -- that the smallest things that there are, are somehow an E8 object of possibility?
I mean, is there a scale to it, at the smallest scale, or ...?
GL: Well, right now the pattern I showed you that corresponds to what we know about elementary particle physics -- that already corresponds to a very beautiful shape.
And that's the one that I said we knew for certain.
And that shape has remarkable similarities -- and the way it fits into this E8 pattern, which could be the rest of the picture.
And these patterns of points that I've shown for you actually represent symmetries of this high-dimensional object that would be warping and moving and dancing over the space-time that we experience.
And that would be what explains all these elementary particles that we see.
CA: But a string theorist, as I understand it, explains electrons in terms of much smaller strings vibrating -- I know, you don't like string theory -- vibrating inside it.
How should we think of an electron in relation to E8?
GL: Well, it would be one of the symmetries of this E8 shape.
So what's happening is, as the shape is moving over space-time, it's twisting.
And the direction it's twisting as it moves is what particle we see.
So it would be -- CA: The size of the E8 shape, how does that relate to the electron?
I feel like I need that for my picture. Is it bigger? Is it smaller?
GL: As far as we know, electrons are point particles, so this would be going down to the smallest possible scales.
So the way these things are explained in quantum field theory is, all possibilities are expanding and developing at once.
And this is why I use the analogy to coral.
And -- in this way, the way that E8 comes in is it will be as a shape that's attached at each point in the space-time.
And, as I said, the way the shape twists -- the directional along which way the shape is twisting as it moves over this curved surface -- is what the elementary particles are, themselves.
So through quantum field theory, they manifest themselves as points and interact that way.
I don't know if I'll be able to make this any clearer.
(Laughter) CA: It doesn't really matter.
It's evoking a kind of sense of wonder, and I certainly want to understand more of this.
But thank you so much for coming. That was absolutely fascinating.
(Applause)
Since their emergence over 200,000 years ago, modern humans have established homes and communities all over the planet.
But they didnt do it alone.
Whatever corner of the globe you find homo sapiens in today, youre likely to find another species nearby: Canis lupus familiaris.
Whether theyre herding, hunting, sledding, or slouching the sheer variety of domestic dogs is staggering.
But what makes the story of mans best friend so surprising is that they all evolved from a creature often seen as one of our oldest rivals: Canis lupus, or the gray wolf.
When our Paleolithic ancestors first settled Eurasia roughly 100,000 years ago, wolves were one of their main rivals at the top of the food chain.
Able to exert over 300 lbs. of pressure in one bone-crushing bite and sniff out prey more than a mile away, these formidable predators didnt have much competition.
Much like human hunter-gatherers, they lived and hunted in complex social groups consisting of a few nuclear families, and used their social skills to cooperatively take down larger creatures.
Using these group tactics, they operated as effective persistence hunters, relying not on outrunning their prey, but pursuing it to the point of exhaustion.
But when pitted against the similar strengths of their invasive new neighbors, wolves found themselves at a crossroads.
For most packs, these bourgeoning bipeds represented a serious threat to their territory.
But for some wolves, especially those without a pack, human camps offered new opportunities.
Wolves that showed less aggression towards humans could come closer to their encampments, feeding on leftovers.
And as these more docile scavengers outlasted their aggressive brethren, their genetic traits were passed on, gradually breeding tamer wolves in areas near human populations.
Over time humans found a multitude of uses for these docile wolves.
They helped to track and hunt prey, and might have served as sentinels to guard camps and warn of approaching enemies.
Their similar social structure made it easy to integrate with human families and learn to understand their commands.
Eventually they moved from the fringes of our communities into our homes, becoming humanitys first domesticated animal.
The earliest of these Proto-Dogs or Wolf-Dogs, seem to have appeared around 33,000 years ago, and would not have looked all that different from their wild cousins.
They were primarily distinguished by their smaller size and a shorter snout full of comparatively smaller teeth.
But as human cultures and occupations became more diverse and specialized, so did our friends.
Short stocky dogs to herd livestock by nipping their heels; elongated dogs to flush badgers and foxes out of burrows; thin and sleek dogs for racing; and large, muscular dogs for guard duty.
With the emergence of kennel clubs and dog shows during Englands Victorian era, these dog types were standardized into breeds, with many new ones bred purely for appearance.
Sadly, while all dog breeds are the product of artificial selection, some are healthier than others.
Many of these aesthetic characteristics come with congenital health problems, such as difficulty breathing or being prone to spinal injuries.
Humanitys longest experiment in controlled evolution has had other side effects as well.
Generations of selection for tameness have favored more juvenile and submissive traits that were pleasing to humans.
This phenomenon of selecting traits associated with youth is known as neoteny, and can be seen in many domestic animals.
Thousands of years of co-evolution may even have bonded us chemically.
Not only can canines understand our emotions and body language, but when dogs and humans interact, both our bodies release oxytocin; a hormone commonly associated with feelings of love and protectiveness.
It might be difficult to fathom how every Pomeranian, Chihuahua, and Poodle are descended from fierce wolves.
But the diversity of breeds today is the result of a relationship that precedes cities, agriculture, and even the disappearance of our Neanderthal cousins.
And its heartening to know that given enough time, even our most dangerous rivals can become our fiercest friends.
In 132 CE, Chinese polymath Zhang Heng presented the Han court with his latest invention.
This large vase, he claimed, could tell them whenever an earthquake occurred in their kingdom including the direction they should send aid.
The court was somewhat skeptical, especially when the device triggered on a seemingly quiet afternoon.
But when messengers came for help days later, their doubts turned to gratitude.
Today, we no longer rely on pots to identify seismic events, but earthquakes still offer a unique challenge to those trying to track them.
So why are earthquakes so hard to anticipate, and how could we get better at predicting them?
To answer that, we need to understand some theories behind how earthquakes occur.
Earths crust is made from several vast, jagged slabs of rock called tectonic plates, each riding on a hot, partially molten layer of Earths mantle.
This causes the plates to spread very slowly, at anywhere from 1 to 20 centimeters per year.
But these tiny movements are powerful enough to cause deep cracks in the interacting plates.
And in unstable zones, the intensifying pressure may ultimately trigger an earthquake.
Its hard enough to monitor these miniscule movements, but the factors that turn shifts into seismic events are far more varied.
Different fault lines juxtapose different rocks some of which are strongeror weaker under pressure.
Diverse rocks also react differently to friction and high temperatures.
Some partially melt, and can release lubricating fluids made of superheated minerals that reduce fault line friction.
But some are left dry, prone to dangerous build-ups of pressure.
And all these faults are subject to varying gravitational forces, as well as the currents of hot rocks moving throughout Earths mantle.
So which of these hidden variables should we be analyzing, and how do they fit into our growing prediction toolkit?
Because some of these forces occur at largely constant rates, the behavior of the plates is somewhat cyclical.
Today, many of our most reliable clues come from long-term forecasting, related to when and where earthquakes have previously occurred.
At the scale of millennia, this allows us to make predictions about when highly active faults, like the San Andreas, are overdue for a massive earthquake.
But due to the many variables involved, this method can only predict very loose timeframes.
To predict more imminent events, researchers have investigated the vibrations Earth elicits before a quake.
Geologists have long used seismometers to track and map these tiny shifts in the earths crust.
And today, most smartphones are also capable of recording primary seismic waves.
With a network of phones around the globe, scientists could potentially crowdsource a rich, detailed warning system that alerts people to incoming quakes.
Unfortunately, phones might not be able to provide the advance notice needed to enact safety protocols.
But such detailed readings would still be useful for prediction tools like NASAs Quakesim software, which can use a rigorous blend of geological data to identify regions at risk.
However, recent studies indicate the most telling signs of a quake might be invisible to all these sensors.
In 2011, just before an earthquake struck the east coast of Japan, nearby researchers recorded surprisingly high concentrations of the radioactive isotope pair: radon and thoron.
As stress builds up in the crust right before an earthquake, microfractures allow these gases to escape to the surface.
These scientists think that if we built a vast network of radon-thoron detectors in earthquake-prone areas, it could become a promising warning system potentially predicting quakes a week in advance.
Of course, none of these technologies would be as helpful as simply looking deep inside the earth itself.
With a deeper view we might be able to track and predict large-scale geological changes in real time, possibly saving tens of thousands of lives a year.
But for now, these technologies can help us prepare and respond quickly to areas in need without waiting for directions from a vase.
I dabble in design. I'm a curator of architecture and design; I happen to be at the Museum of Modern Art.
But what we're going to talk about today is really design. Really good designers are like sponges: they really are curious and absorb every kind of information that comes their way, and transform it so that it can be used by people like us.
And so that gives me an opportunity, because every design show that I curate kind of looks at a different world. And it's great, because it seems like every time I change jobs.
And what I'm going to do today is I'm going to give you a preview of the next exhibition that I'm working on, which is called "Design and the Elastic Mind."
The world that I decided to focus on this particular time is the world of science and the world of technology.
Technology always comes into play when design is involved, but science does a little less.
But designers are great at taking big revolutions that happen and transforming them so that we can use them.
And this is what this exhibition looks at.
If you think about your life today, you go every day through many different scales, many different changes of rhythm and pace.
You work over different time zones, you talk to very different people, you multitask. We all know it, and we do it kind of automatically.
Some of the minds in this audience are super elastic, others are a little slower, others have a few stretch marks, but nonetheless this is a quite exceptional audience from that viewpoint.
Other people are not as elastic.
I can't get my father in Italy to work on the Internet.
He doesn't want to put high-speed Internet at home.
And that's because there's some little bit of fear, little bit of resistance or just clogged mechanisms.
So designers work on this particular malaise that we have, these kinds of discomforts that we have, and try to make life easier for us.
Elasticity of mind is something that we really need, you know, we really need, we really cherish and we really work on.
And this exhibition is about the work of designers that help us be more elastic, and also of designers that really work on this elasticity as an opportunity. And one last thing is that it's not only designers, but it's also scientists.
And before I launch into the display of some of the slides and into the preview, I would like to point out this beautiful detail about scientists and design.
You can say that the relationship between science and design goes back centuries. You can of course talk about Leonardo da Vinci and many other Renaissance men and women -- and there's a gigantic history behind it.
But according to a really great science historian you might know, Peter Galison -- he teaches at Harvard -- what nanotechnology in particular and quantum physics have brought to designers is this renewed interest, this real passion for design.
So basically, the idea of being able to build things bottom up, atom by atom, has made them all into tinkerers.
And all of a sudden scientists are seeking designers, just like designers are seeking scientists.
It's a brand-new love affair that we're trying to cultivate at MOMA. Together with Adam Bly, who is the founder of Seed magazine -- that's now a multimedia company, you might know it -- we founded about a year ago a monthly salon for designers and scientists, and it's quite beautiful.
And Keith has come, and also Jonathan has come and many others.
And it was great, because at the beginning was this apology fest -- you know, scientists would tell designers, you know, I don't know what style is, I'm not really elegant.
And designers would like, oh, I don't know how to do an equation, I don't understand what you're saying. And then all of a sudden they really started talking each others' language, and now we're already at the point that they collaborate.
Paul Steinhardt, a physicist from New York, and Aranda/Lasch, architects, collaborated in an installation in London at the Serpentine.
And it's really interesting to see how this happens.
The exhibition will talk about the work of both designers and scientists, and show how they're presenting the possibilities of the future to us.
I'm showing to you different sections of the show right now, just to give you a taste of it.
Nanophysics and nanotechnology, for instance, have really opened the designer's mind.
In this case I'm showing more the designers' work, because they're the ones that have really been stimulated.
A lot of the objects in the show are concepts, not objects that exist already. But what you're looking at here is the work of some scientists from UCLA.
This kind of alphabet soup is a new way to mark proteins -- not only by color but literally by alphabet letters.
So they construct it, and they can construct all kinds of forms at the nanoscale. This is the work of design students from the Royal College of Arts in London that have been working together with their tutor, Tony Dunne, and with a bunch of scientists around Great Britain on the possibilities of nanotechnology for design in the future.
New sensing elements on the body -- you can grow hairs on your nails, and therefore grab some of the particles from another person.
They seem very, very obsessed with finding out more about the ideal mate.
So they're working on enhancing everything: touch, smell -- everything they can, in order to find the perfect mate.
Very interesting. This is a typeface designer from Israel who has designed -- he calls them "typosperma."
He's thinking -- of course it's all a concept -- of injecting typefaces into spermatozoa, I don't know how to say it in English -- spermatazoi -- in order to make them become -- to almost have a song or a whole poem written with every ejaculation. (Laughter) I tell you, designers are quite fantastic, you know.
So, tissue design.
In this case too, you have a mixture of scientists and designers.
This here is part of the same lab at the Royal College of Arts.
The RCA is really quite an amazing school from that viewpoint.
One of the assignments for a year was to work with in-vitro meat.
You know that already you can grow meat in vitro.
In Australia they did it -- this research company, called SymbioticA.
But the problem is that it's a really ugly patty.
And so, the assignment to the students was, how should the steak of tomorrow be?
When you don't have to kill cows and it can have any shape, what should it be like?
So this particular student, James King, went around the beautiful English countryside, picked the best, best cow that he could see, and then put her in the MRI machine.
Then, he took the scans of the best organs and made the meat -- of course, this is done with a Japanese resins food maker, but you know, in the future it could be made better -- which reproduces the best MRI scan of the best cow he could find.
Instead, this element here is much more banal.
Something that you know can be done already is to grow bone tissue, so that you can make a wedding ring out of the bone tissue of your loved one -- literally.
So, this is indeed made of human bone tissue.
This is SymbioticA, and they've been working -- they were the first ones to do this in-vitro meat -- and now they've also done an in-vitro coat, a leather coat.
It's miniscule, but it's a real coat. It's shaped like one.
So, we'll be able to really not have any excuse to be wearing everything leather in the future.
One of the most important topics of the show -- you know, as anything in our life today, we can look at it from many, many different viewpoints, and at different levels.
One of the most interesting and most important concepts is the idea of scale. We change scale very often: we change resolution of screens, and we're not really fazed by it, we do it very comfortably.
So you go, even in the exhibition, from the idea of nanotechnology and the nanoscale to the manipulation of really great amounts of data -- the mapping and tagging of the universe and of the world.
In this particular case a section will be devoted to information design.
You see here the work of Ben Fry. This is "Human vs. Chimps" -- the few chromosomes that distinguish us from chimps.
It was a beautiful visualization that he did for Seed magazine.
And here's the whole code of Pac-Man, visualized with all the go-to, go-back-to, also made into a beautiful choreography.
And then also graphs by scientists, this beautiful diagraph of protein homology.
Scientists are starting to also consider aesthetics.
We were discussing with Keith Shrubb* this morning the fact that many scientists tend not to use anything beautiful in their presentations, otherwise they're afraid of being considered dumb blondes.
So they pick the worst background from any kind of PowerPoint presentation, the worst typeface.
It's only recently that this kind of marriage between design and science is producing some of the first "pretty" -- if we can say so -- scientific presentations.
Another aspect of contemporary design that I think is mind-opening, promising and will really be the future of design, is the idea of collective design.
You know, the whole XO laptop, from One Laptop per Child, is based on the idea of collaboration and mash and networking.
So, the more the merrier.
The more computers, the stronger the signal, and children work on the interface so that it's all based on doing things together, tasks together.
So the idea of collective design is something that will become even bigger in the future, and this is chosen as an example.
Related to the idea of collective design and to the new balance between the individual and the collectiveness, collectivity is the idea of existence maximum.
That's a term that I coined a few years ago while I was thinking of how pressed we are together, and at the same time how these small objects, like the Walkman first and then the iPod, create bubbles of space around us that enable us to have a metaphysical space that is much bigger than our physical space.
You can be in the subway and you can be completely isolated and have your own room in your iPod.
And this is the work of several designers that really enhance the idea of solitude and expansion by means of various techniques.
This is a spa telephone. The idea is that it's become so difficult to have a private conversation anywhere that you go to the spa, you have a massage, you have a facial, maybe a rub, and then you have this beautiful pool with this perfect temperature, and you can have this isolation tank phone conversation with whomever you've been wanting to talk with for a long time.
And same thing here, Social Tele-presence.
It's actually already used by the military a little bit, but it's the idea of being able to be somewhere else with your senses while you're removed from it physically.
And this is called Blind Date. It's a [unclear], so if you're too shy to be really at the date, you can stay at a distance with your flowers and somebody else reenacts the date for you.
Rapid manufacturing is another big area in which technology and design are, I think, bound to change the world. You've heard about it before many times.
Rapid manufacturing is a computer file sent directly from the computer to the manufacturing machine.
It used to be called rapid prototyping, rapid modeling.
It started out in the '80s, but at the beginning it was machines carving out of a foam block a model that was very, very fragile, and could not have any real use.
Slowly but surely, the materials became better -- better resins.
Techniques became better -- not only carving but also stereolithography and laser -- solidifying all kinds of resins, whether in powder or in liquid form. And the vats became bigger, to the point that now we can have actual chairs made by rapid manufacturing.
It takes seven days today to manufacture a chair, but you know what? One day it will take seven hours.
And then the dream is that you'll be able to, from home, customize your chair. You know, companies and designers will be designing the matrix or the margins that respect both solidity and brand, and design identity.
And then you can send it to the Kinko's store at the corner and go get your chair. Now, the implications of this are enormous, not only regarding the participation of the final buyer in the design process, but also no tracking, no warehousing, no wasted materials.
Also, I can imagine many design manufacturers will have to retool their own business plans and maybe invest in this Kinko's store. But it really is a big change.
And here I'm showing a picture that was in Wired Magazine -- you know, the Artifacts of the Future section that I love so much -- that shows you can have your desktop 3D printer and print your own basketball.
But here instead are examples, you can already 3D-print textiles, which is very interesting.
This is just a really nice touch -- it's called slow prototyping.
It's a designer that put 10,000 bees at work and they built this vase.
They had a particular shape that they had to stay in.
Mapping and tagging.
As the capacity of computers becomes really, really big, and the capacity of our mind not that much bigger, we find that we need to tag as much as we can what we do in order to then retrace our path.
Also, we do it in order to share with other people.
Again, this communal sense of experience that seems to be so important today.
So, various ways to map and tag are also the work of many designers nowadays.
Also, the senses -- designers and scientists all work on trying to expand our senses capabilities so that we can achieve more.
And also animal senses in a way.
This particular object that many people love so much is actually based on kind of a scientific experiment -- the fact that bees have a very strong olfactory sense, and so -- much like dogs that can smell certain kinds of skin cancer -- bees can be trained by Pavlovian reflex to detect one type of cancer, and also pregnancy.
And so this student at the RCA designed this beautiful blown-glass object where the bees move from one chamber to the other if they detect that particular smell that signifies, in this case, pregnancy.
Another shape is made for cancer.
Design for Debate is a very interesting new endeavor that designers have really shaped for themselves.
Some designers don't design objects, products, things that we're going to actually use, but rather, they design scenarios that are object-based.
They're still very useful.
They help companies and other designers think better about the future.
And usually they are accompanied by videos.
This is quite beautiful. It's Dunne and Raby, "All the Robots."
Those are a series of robots that are meant to be taken care of.
We always think that robots will take care of us, and instead they designed these robots that are very, very needy.
You need to take one in your arms and look at it in the eyes for about five minutes before it does something.
Another one gets really, really nervous if you get in to the room, and starts shaking, so you have to calm it down.
So it's really a way to make us think more about what robots mean to us.
Noam Toran and "Accessories for Lonely Men": the idea is that when you lose your loved one or you go through a bad breakup, what you miss the most are those annoying things that you used to hate when you were with the other person.
So he designed all these series of accessories.
This one is something that takes away the sheets from you at night.
Then there's another one that breathes on your neck.
There's another one that throws plates and breaks them.
So it's just this idea of what we really miss in life.
Elio Caccavale: he took the idea of those dolls that explain leukemia.
He's working on dolls that explain xenotransplantation, and also the spider gene into the goat, from a few years ago.
He's working for the exhibition on a whole series of dolls that explain to children where babies come from today.
Because it's not anymore Mom, Dad, the flowers and the bees, and then there's the baby. No, it can be two moms, three dads, in-vitro -- there's the whole idea of how babies can be made today that has changed.
So it's a series of dolls that he's working on right now.
One of the most beautiful things is that designers really work on life, even though they take technology into account.
And many designers have been working recently on the idea of death and mourning, and what we can do about it today with new technologies.
Or how we should behave about it with new technologies.
These three objects over there are hard drives with a Bluetooth connection. But they're in reality very, very beautiful sculpted artifacts that contain the whole desktop and computer memory of somebody who passed away.
So instead of having only the pictures, you will be able to put this object next to the computer and all of a sudden have, you know, Gertrude's whole life and all of her files and her address book come alive.
And this is even better. This is Auger-Loizeau, "AfterLife."
It's the idea that some people don't believe in an afterlife.
So to give them something tangible that shows that there is something after death, they take the gastric juices of people who passed away and concentrate them, and put them into a battery that can actually be used to power flashlights. They also go -- you know, sex toys, whatever.
It's quite amazing how these things can make you smile, can make you laugh, can make you cry sometimes.
But I'm hoping that this particular exhibition will be able to trace a new portrait of where design is going -- which is always, hopefully, a portrait a few years in advance of where the world is going.
Thank you very much.
Pollinator decline is a grand challenge in the modern world.
Of the 200,000 species of pollinators, honeybees are the most well-understood, partly because of our long history with them dating back 8,000 years ago to our cave drawings in what is now modern-day Spain.
And yet we know that this indicator species is dying off.
Last year alone, we lost 40 percent of all beehives in the United States.
That number is even higher in areas with harsh winters, like here in Massachusetts, where we lost 47 percent of beehives in one year alone.
Can you imagine if we lost half of our people last year?
And if those were the food-producing people?
It's untenable.
And I predict that in 10 years, we will lose our bees.
If not for the work of beekeepers replacing these dead beehives, we would be without foods that we rely upon: fruits, vegetables, crunchy almonds and nuts, tart apples, sour lemons.
Even the food that our cattle rely upon to eat, hay and alfalfa -- gone, causing global hunger, economic collapse, a total moral crisis across earth.
Now, I first started keeping bees here in Cape Cod right after I finished my doctorate in honeybee immunology.
(Laughter) (Applause) Imagine getting such a degree in a good economy -- and it was 2009: the Great Recession.
And I was onto something.
I knew that I could find out how to improve bee health.
And so the community on Cape Cod here in Provincetown was ripe for citizen science, people looking for ways to get involved and to help.
And so we met with people in coffee shops.
A wonderful woman named Natalie got eight beehives at her home in Truro, and she introduced us to her friend Valerie, who let us set up 60 beehives at an abandoned tennis court on her property.
And so we started testing vaccines for bees.
We were starting to look at probiotics.
We called it "bee yogurt" -- ways to make bees healthier.
And our citizen science project started to take off.
Meanwhile, back in my apartment here, I was a bit nervous about my landlord.
I figured I should tell him what we were doing.
(Laughter) I was terrified; I really thought I was going to get an eviction notice, which really was the last thing we needed, right?
I must have caught him on a good day, though, because when I told him what we were doing and how we started our nonprofit urban beekeeping laboratory, he said, "That's great! Let's get a beehive in the back alley."
I was shocked.
I was completely surprised.
I mean, instead of getting an eviction notice, we got another data point.
And in the back alley of this image, what you see here, this hidden beehive -- that beehive produced more honey that first year than we have ever experienced in any beehive we had managed.
It shifted our research perspective forever.
It changed our research question away from "How do we save the dead and dying bees?"
to "Where are bees doing best?"
And we started to be able to put maps together, looking at all of these citizen science beehives from people who had beehives at home decks, gardens, business rooftops.
We started to engage the public, and the more people who got these little data points, the more accurate our maps became.
And so when you're sitting here thinking, "How can I get involved?"
you might think about a story of my friend Fred, who's a commercial real estate developer.
He was thinking the same thing.
He was at a meeting, thinking about what he could do for tenant relations and sustainability at scale.
And while he was having a tea break, he put honey into his tea and noticed on the honey jar a message about corporate sustainability from the host company of that meeting.
And it sparked an idea.
He came back to his office.
An email, a phone call later, and -- boom! -- we went national together.
We put dozens of beehives on the rooftops of their skyscrapers across nine cities nationwide.
Nine years later -- (Applause) Nine years later, we have raised over a million dollars for bee research.
We have a thousand beehives as little data points across the country, 18 states and counting, where we have created paying jobs for local beekeepers, 65 of them, to manage beehives in their own communities, to connect with people, everyday people, who are now data points together making a difference.
So in order to explain what's actually been saving bees, where they're thriving, I need to first tell you what's been killing them.
The top three killers of bees are agricultural chemicals such as pesticides, herbicides, fungicides; diseases of bees, of which there are many; and habitat loss.
So what we did is we looked on our maps and we identified areas where bees were thriving.
This was mostly in cities, we found.
Data are now showing that urban beehives produce more honey than rural beehives and suburban beehives.
Urban beehives have a longer life span than rural and suburban beehives, and bees in the city are more biodiverse; there are more bee species in urban areas.
(Laughter) Right?
Why is this?
That was our question.
So we started with these three killers of bees, and we flipped it: Which of these is different in the cities?
So the first one, pesticides.
We partnered up with the Harvard School of Public Health.
We shared our data with them.
We collected samples from our citizen science beehives at people's homes and business rooftops.
We looked at pesticide levels.
We thought there would be less pesticides in areas where bees are doing better.
That's not the case.
So what we found here in our study is -- the orange bars are Boston, and we thought those bars would be the lowest, there would be the lowest levels of pesticides.
And, in fact, there are the most pesticides in cities.
So the pesticide hypothesis for what's saving bees -- less pesticides in cities -- is not it.
And this is very typical of my life as a scientist.
Anytime I've had a hypothesis, not only is it not supported, but the opposite is true.
(Laughter) Which is still an interesting finding, right?
We moved on.
The disease hypothesis.
We looked at diseases all over our beehives.
And what we found in a similar study to this one with North Carolina State is: there's no difference between disease in bees in urban, suburban and rural areas.
Diseases are everywhere; bees are sick and dying.
In fact, there were more diseases of bees in cities.
This was from Raleigh, North Carolina.
So again, my hypothesis was not supported. The opposite was true.
We're moving on.
(Laughter) The habitat hypothesis.
This said that areas where bees are thriving have a better habitat -- more flowers, right?
But we didn't know how to test this.
So I had a really interesting meeting.
An idea sparked with my friend and colleague Anne Madden, fellow TED speaker.
We thought about genomics, kind of like AncestryDNA or 23andMe.
Have you done these?
You spit in a tube and you find out, "I'm German!"
(Laughter) Well, we developed this for honey.
So we have a sample of honey and we look at all the plant DNA, and we find out, "I'm sumac!"
(Laughter) And that's what we found here in Provincetown.
So for the first time ever, I'm able to report to you what type of honey is from right here in our own community.
HoneyDNA, a genomics test.
Spring honey in Provincetown is from privet.
What's privet? Hedges.
What's the message?
Don't trim your hedges to save the bees.
(Laughter) I know we're getting crunchy and it's controversial, so before you throw your tomatoes, we'll move to the summer honey, which is water lily honey.
If you have honey from Provincetown right here in the summer, you're eating water lily juice; in the fall, sumac honey.
We're learning about our food for the first time ever.
And now we're able to report, if you need to do any city planning: What are good things to plant?
What do we know the bees are going to that's good for your garden?
For the first time ever for any community, we now know this answer.
What's more interesting for us is deeper in the data.
So, if you're from the Caribbean and you want to explore your heritage, Bahamian honey is from the laurel family, cinnamon and avocado flavors.
But what's more interesting is 85 different plant species in one teaspoon of honey.
That's the measure we want, the big data.
Indian honey: that is oak.
Every sample we've tested from India is oak, and that's 172 different flavors in one taste of Indian honey.
Provincetown honey goes from 116 plants in the spring to over 200 plants in the summer.
These are the numbers that we need to test the habitat hypothesis.
In another citizen science approach, you find out about your food and we get some interesting data.
We're finding out now that in rural areas, there are 150 plants on average in a sample of honey.
That's a measure for rural.
Suburban areas, what might you think?
Do they have less or more plants in suburban areas with lawns that look nice for people but they're terrible for pollinators?
Suburbs have very low plant diversity, so if you have a beautiful lawn, good for you, but you can do more.
You can have a patch of your lawn that's a wildflower meadow to diversify your habitat, to improve pollinator health.
Anybody can do this.
Urban areas have the most habitat, best habitat, as you can see here: over 200 different plants.
We have, for the first time ever, support for the habitat hypothesis.
We also now know how we can work with cities.
The City of Boston has eight times better habitat than its nearby suburbs.
And so when we work with governments, we can scale this.
You might think on my tombstone, it'll say, "Here lies Noah. Plant a flower." Right?
I mean -- it's exhausting after all of this.
But when we scale together, when we go to governments and city planners -- like in Boston, the honey is mostly linden trees, and we say, "If a dead tree needs to be replaced, consider linden."
When we take this information to governments, we can do amazing things.
This is a rooftop from Fred's company.
We can plant those things on top of rooftops worldwide to start restoring habitat and securing food systems.
We've worked with the World Bank and the presidential delegation from the country of Haiti.
We've worked with wonderful graduate students at Yale University and Ethiopia.
In these countries, we can add value to their honey by identifying what it is, but informing the people of what to plant to restore their habitat and secure their food systems.
But what I think is even more important is when we think about natural disasters.
For the first time, we now know how we can have a baseline measure of any habitat before it might be destroyed.
Think about your hometown.
What risks does the environment pose to it?
This is how we're going to save Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria.
We now have a baseline measure of honey, honey DNA from before and after the storm.
We started in Humacao.
This is right where Hurricane Maria made landfall.
And we know what plants to replace and in what quantity and where by triangulating honey DNA samples.
You might even think about right here, the beautiful land that connected us, that primed us, all the citizen science to begin with, the erosion, the winter storms that are getting more violent every year.
What are we going to do about this, our precious land?
Well, looking at honey DNA, we can see what plants are good for pollinators that have deep roots, that can secure the land, and together, everybody can participate.
And the solution fits in a teaspoon.
If your hometown might get swept away or destroyed by a natural disaster, we now have a blueprint suspended in time for how to restore that on Earth, or perhaps even in a greenhouse on Mars.
I know it sounds crazy, but think about this: a new Provincetown, a new hometown, a place that might be familiar that's also good for pollinators for a stable food system, when we're thinking about the future.
Now, together, we know what's saving bees -- by planting diverse habitat.
Now, together, we know how bees are going to save us -- by being barometers for environmental health, by being blueprints, sources of information, little data factories suspended in time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You all know this story.
In the summer of 1950, Enrico Fermi, the Italian-American physicist and atomic-pile builder, went to lunch at Los Alamos National Laboratory and joined some colleagues there, and asked them a question: "Where is everybody?"
This confused his colleagues, obviously, because they were sitting right there with him.
And then he had to clarify that he wasn't talking about them.
He was talking about the space aliens.
You see, this was only a few years after the supposed flying saucer crash at Roswell, New Mexico.
And even though that turned out to be nothing, nothing at all -- (Laughter) -- merely a downed weather balloon piloted by small hairless men with slits for mouths ...
Still, America had gone saucer-mad, even famous scientists who were eating lunch.
Fermi's reasoning, if I may paraphrase badly, is that the universe is so vast that it stands to reason, there should be other intelligent life out there.
And the universe is so old that unless we were the very first civilization ever to evolve, we should have some evidence of their existence by now.
And yet, to the best of our knowledge, we are alone.
"Where is everybody?" asked Fermi, and his colleagues had no answer.
Fermi then went on with the same blunt logic to disprove fairies, Sasquatch, God, the possibility of love -- and thereafter, as you know, Enrico Fermi ate alone.
(Laughter) Now, I am not a scientist.
I have never built an atomic pile.
Although, I might argue that, technically, every pile is atomic.
(Laughter) However, with respect, I might point out two possibilities that Enrico Fermi perhaps did not consider.
One is that the aliens might be very far away.
Perhaps, I dare say, even on other planets.
The other possibility -- (Laughter) -- is, perhaps, Enrico Fermi himself was an alien.
(Laughter) Think about it.
Isn't it a little convenient that in the midst of the World War, out of nowhere, suddenly an Italian scientist showed up with an amazing new technology that would transform everything in the world and darken the history of the human species forever after?
And isn't it a little strange that he required no payment for this?
That he asked for only one thing -- a gift of two healthy sperm whales?
That's -- that's not true.
But it is strange.
(Laughter) And if Enrico Fermi were indeed a space alien, wouldn't he be the first to have tried to convince his fellow scientists that the space aliens are not already here?
For it is given in certain UFO-ology or UFOlogy circles, that the aliens are already here and have been for millennia; that they have walked among us in disguise, observing us, guiding our evolution from ape to man -- if you believe in that sort of thing -- and, occasionally, kidnapping us in their flying saucers and taking us away to have sex with us in pyramids.
(Laughter) It's a difficult theory to discount, I think you'll agree.
(Laughter) For even in my own life, there are memories I have that are difficult to explain -- happenings that are so odd and unaccountably weird, that it is difficult to imagine they were not the result of prolonged and frequent contact with aliens throughout my life.
For how else will you explain the amazing and absolutely true close encounters that I had and will describe to you now?
Encounter one: Ocean City, New Jersey, 1980.
This was the summer when the special edition of "Close Encounters of the Third Kind" was released.
And I went on vacation with my parents to the Jersey shore.
Within 12 hours, I was horribly sunburned, just like Richard Dreyfuss in the movie.
(Laughter) And so I spent the rest of the vacation largely sitting outside our little rental house at night, the sidewalk still warm from the sun, watching the skies for UFOs.
What did I see? Stars, satellites, blinking airplanes -- typical sky junk.
Occasionally, kids would come and join me and watch, but their necks soon got sore, and they would go off to the boardwalk to play video games and mingle with humans.
I was pretty good at the video games. I was not very good at the other part, so I stayed alone with the cosmos.
And that's when it happened.
An elderly couple came walking down the street.
I would say they were in their late seventies, and I would say that they were on a date, because he was wearing a very neat little suit with a yellow tie -- a brown suit.
And she was wearing a cardigan, because it was now fully night and a chill was coming in off the ocean.
I remember, for some reason, that they were exactly the same height.
And then they stopped, and the man turned to me and said, "What are you looking for, flying saucers?"
(Laughter) You have to admit, that's a pretty boss piece of detective work for an old man on a date.
But what was stranger still -- and even I realized it at the time, as a nine-year-old child -- was that they stopped at all.
That this old man would interrupt his moonlight stroll with his sweetheart with the precise reason of making fun of a child.
"Oh," he said, "little green men."
And then his girlfriend joined in, too.
"There's no such thing as space men," she said.
"There's no such thing."
And then they both laughed. "Ha, ha, ha."
I looked around.
The street was entirely empty.
I had stopped hearing the sound of the ocean.
It was as though time had stopped.
I did not know why they were teasing me.
I looked into their strangely angry faces, and I remember wondering, are they wearing rubber masks?
(Laughter) And what would be behind those rubber masks, if they were?
Giant, almond-shaped, unblinking eyes?
Slits for mouths?
The old man crooked his finger as though he were firing a gun, and then he made laser sounds.
"Kew, kew, kew -- watch out."
And they turned at once and walked away.
The old man reached out his knobbly claw for the woman's hand, and found it, and left me alone.
Now, you could describe this as a simple misunderstanding -- a strange encounter among humans.
Maybe it was swamp gas, but -- (Laughter) -- I know what I saw.
Close encounter two: Brookline, Massachusetts, 1984.
I went to see the movie "Dune," and a girl talked to me. Now, on its face -- (Laughter) -- this is impossible on its face, I realize -- but it is absolutely true.
It was opening night, naturally.
I went with my friend Tim McGonigal, who sat on my left.
On my right was the girl in question.
She had long, curly black hair, a blue jean jacket.
I remember, she had some sort of injury to her ankle, an Ace bandage, and she had crutches.
She was very tall, I would say.
I was starting high school at the time. I would say she was a junior, but I had never seen her before. She didn't go to my school.
I didn't know her name, and I never will.
She was sitting with someone who I presume was her mother, and they were talking about the novel, "Dune."
They were both big fans, mother and daughter -- very unusual.
They were talking about how their favorite characters were the giant sandworms.
And then it got stranger.
That's when she turned to me and said, "Are you looking forward to seeing the movie?"
(Laughter) First of all, I was embarrassed because I had not read the novel "Dune" at that time.
I was merely a connoisseur of movies featuring desert planets, as I still am.
(Laughter) But it was also the tone of how she asked the question: apropos of nothing, like she didn't even care about the answer, as though she just wanted to talk to me.
I did not know what to say. I said, "Yes."
I did not even turn my head.
The movie began.
I need not remind you that this was David Lynch's version of "Dune," in which all of the characters were sexy and deformed at the same time.
(Laughter) There was a character called the Third-Stage Guild Navigator, which was a kind of giant, floating fetus-creature that lived in a giant tank with this orange mist of psychedelic spice swirling around him, allowing him to bend space and time.
He could never leave the tank or interact with the outside world.
He had become, in his isolation, so deformed and so sexy, that he had to talk through a kind of old-timey radio to the outside world, and could never touch them.
I mean, I liked him a lot better than the sandworms.
The sandworms were fine, but your favorite character?
Please.
When the movie ended, everyone seemed very happy to get up and get out of the theatre as soon as possible.
Except for the girl.
As I walked out, her pace slowed.
Perhaps it was the crutches, but it seemed -- (Laughter) -- it seemed as though she might want to talk to me again.
When I say it out loud, it sounds so ridiculous, but I can only come to the conclusion that it was what, in the alien abductee community, they call a "screen memory": a ridiculous false recollection designed by their brain to cover up some trauma -- say, of being kidnapped and flown off to a sex pyramid.
(Laughter) And so I sure am glad I did not slow down to talk to her.
I sure am glad I never saw her again.
Close encounter three: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1989.
In the mid-to-late '80s, the novelist Whitley Strieber wrote a book called "Communion," in which he described his own lifelong experiences being abducted by aliens.
And he also described the phenomenon known in this community as "lost time," where Whitley Strieber would suddenly become aware that he could not remember the previous ten minutes, or the previous ten hours, or the previous ten days.
And would come to the conclusion that that was when the aliens were taking him and giving him rectal probes.
(Laughter) This book became, naturally, an enormous best-seller.
This image by Ted Joseph was from that book, and was his, sort of, police sketch of what the creatures looked like that Whitley Strieber had described to him.
And it was so successful that they made it into a movie.
And in 1989, the way I remember it, I was in Philadelphia visiting my girlfriend, and we decided, apropos of nothing, to go see this movie.
And the way I remember it, the movie featured these details.
One: Whitley Strieber was played by Christopher Walken.
Two: the alien was played by a rubber puppet.
(Laughter) Three: there was a surprisingly long sequence of the film in which the rubber puppet gives Christopher Walken a rectal probe.
Four: this was being shown in a regular movie theater in Center City, Philadelphia.
Five: all of which is to say, they made a movie out of the book, "Communion," and it starred Christopher Walken.
Does something seem strange about this to you?
Something odd? Something off? Something wrong with this picture?
Think about it. Yes. The answer is: I had a girlfriend. What?
(Laughter) How did this happen? When did this happen?
I remember walking out of the theater and becoming suddenly aware of this fact, as we walked hand in hand, and pondering these very same questions.
And to this day, I have no answer for you.
Close encounter four: the Algarve, Portugal, 1991.
Some years later, I and this woman -- we'll call her "Catherine Fletcher" -- (Laughter) -- went traveling through the south of Portugal together.
We stayed in old, crumbling, walled cities, in tiny little hotels, and we would climb up to the roof and drink Vinho Verde and watch the sun set and play checkers.
What? Did we do this? Really? Does anyone do this?
We went to some topless beaches.
Excuse me? No, not in my life.
For what it's worth, we went to Sagres, which was considered, at the time, to be the end of the world.
And there I was chased by a pack of feral dogs on the dock, and the lead dog bit me on the ass, requiring me to go to a strange Portuguese clinic and receive an ass shot.
Make of that what you will.
(Laughter) Our last day in Portugal, we were in the district capital of Faro, and Catherine decided that she wanted to go to the beach one last time.
Now, Faro is a bustling little city, and to get to the beach, she explained, you would have to take a bus and then a boat.
And did I want to come with?
But I was exhausted and dog-bitten, and so I said, "No."
I remember what she looked like before she left.
The freckles had grown and multiplied on her face and shoulders, clustering into a kind of a tan.
A tan, we were both tan -- is this true?
Her eyes were extra bright and extra blue, as a result.
She was smiling.
She was a single woman about to go alone into a country, not even speaking the language, to travel alone by bus and boat to go to a beach she did not know or had never seen.
I loved her, and then she went out into that strange, alien land.
It took me some time to come to my senses.
I had my own "lost time" moment, where I woke up and suddenly realized it was very late in the day, almost dinnertime, and she had not come back.
Nervous, I went down to the street to look for her.
Now, I did not speak Portuguese.
I did not know where the beach was.
I could not call her on a cell phone because this was 1991, and the aliens had not given us that technology yet.
(Laughter) I realized that the day would only have two possible outcomes: either Catherine would come back to the hotel, or she would never come back to the hotel.
And so I sat down to wait.
I did not watch the skies, but the very end of the street where the buses and cars and pedestrians and little scooters were moving along.
And I watched those constellations shift, hoping that they would part and I would see her face.
It was at that moment, in that very small town of 30,000 or so, that I truly appreciated the vastness of the universe and the searching we might do in it.
And that's when the Liberians came along.
Five young men -- all laughing, happy, traveling together, coming back to this hotel where they were staying.
One of them was named Joseph, and he asked me what was I doing, and I explained.
And he said, "Don't worry." He was sure that Catherine would be safe.
But he did not seem so very sure, for he sat down to wait with me.
And for the next two hours, they all waited with me: taking turns, going up to their room, coming back, telling me jokes, distracting me.
Two hours, they gave me a message.
We are not alone.
And then, in the middle of a sentence, at the very birth of twilight, I turned and looked down the street.
The stars aligned, and she came back.
She was smiling. She did not understand why I was so worried.
Neither did the Liberians, although there was a huge amount of relief in their laughter as they clapped us on the back, and went back up to their room and left us alone in the street, holding hands.
An event like this leaves a scar on the memory, much like a piece of alien technology that has been inserted into your buttocks by a "Portuguese doctor."
(Laughter) And even now, a decade and a half later, even now that we are married, I look for her still, whenever she is not in the room.
And even though, I think you'll agree, it is probable that during the time she was away, she was kidnapped and replaced by an alien clone, I love her and wait for her still.
Thank you for your kind attention.
(Applause)
We live in a world increasingly tyrannized by the screen, by our phones, by our tablets, by our televisions and our computers.
We can have any experience that we want, but feel nothing.
We can have as many friends as we want, but have nobody to shake hands with.
I want to take you to a different kind of world, the world of the imagination, where, using this most powerful tool that we have, we can transform both our physical surroundings, but in doing so, we can change forever how we feel and how we feel about the people that we share the planet with.
My company, Artichoke, which I cofounded in 2006, was set up to create moments.
We all have moments in our lives, and when we're on our deathbeds, we're not going to remember the daily commute to work on the number 38 bus or our struggle to find a parking space every day when we go to the shop.
We're going to remember those moments when our kid took their first step or when we got picked for the football team or when we fell in love.
So Artichoke exists to create moving, ephemeral moments that transform the physical world using the imagination of the artist to show us what is possible.
We create beauty amongst ruins.
We reexamine our history.
We create moments to which everyone is invited, either to witness or to take part.
It all started for me way back in the 1990s, when I was appointed as festival director in the tiny British city of Salisbury.
You'll probably have heard of it.
Here's the Salisbury Cathedral, and here's the nearby Stonehenge Monument, which is world-famous.
Salisbury is a city that's been dominated for hundreds of years by the Church, the Conservative Party and the army.
It's a place where people really love to observe the rules.
So picture me on my first year in the city, cycling the wrong way down a one-way street, late.
I'm always late.
It's a wonder I've even turned up today.
(Laughter) A little old lady on the sidewalk helpfully shouted at me, "My dear, you're going the wrong way!"
Charmingly -- I thought -- I said, "Yeah, I know."
"I hope you die!" she screamed.
(Laughter) And I realized that this was a place where I was in trouble.
And yet, a year later, persuasion, negotiation -- everything I could deploy -- saw me producing the work.
Not a classical concert in a church or a poetry reading, but the work of a French street theater company who were telling the story of Faust, "Mephistomania," on stilts, complete with handheld pyrotechnics.
The day after, the same little old lady stopped me in the street and said, "Were you responsible for last night?"
I backed away.
(Laughter) "Yes."
"When I heard about it," she said, "I knew it wasn't for me.
But Helen, my dear, it was."
So what had happened?
Curiosity had triumphed over suspicion, and delight had banished anxiety.
So I wondered how one could transfer these ideas to a larger stage and started on a journey to do the same kind of thing to London.
Imagine: it's a world city.
Like all our cities, it's dedicated to toil, trade and traffic.
It's a machine to get you to work on time and back, and we're all complicit in wanting the routines to be fixed and for everybody to be able to know what's going to happen next.
And yet, what if this amazing city could be turned into a stage, a platform for something so unimaginable that would somehow transform people's lives?
We do these things often in Britain.
I'm sure you do them wherever you're from.
Here's Horse Guards Parade.
And here's something that we do often. It's always about winning things.
It's about the marathon or winning a war or a triumphant cricket team coming home.
We close the streets. Everybody claps.
But for theater? Not possible.
Except a story told by a French company: a saga about a little girl and a giant elephant that came to visit for four days.
And all I had to do was persuade the public authorities that shutting the city for four days was something completely normal.
(Laughter) No traffic, just people enjoying themselves, coming out to marvel and witness this extraordinary artistic endeavor by the French theater company Royal de Luxe.
It was a seven-year journey, with me saying to a group of men -- almost always men -- sitting in a room, "Eh, it's like a fairy story with a little girl and this giant elephant, and they come to town for four days and everybody gets to come and watch and play."
And they would go, "Why would we do this?
Is it for something?
Is it celebrating a presidential visit?
Is it the Entente Cordiale between France and England?
Is it for charity? Are you trying to raise money?"
And I'd say, "None of these things."
And they'd say, "Why would we do this?"
But after four years, this magic trick, this extraordinary thing happened.
I was sitting in the same meeting I'd been to for four years, saying, "Please, please, may I?"
Instead of which, I didn't say, "Please."
I said, "This thing that we've been talking about for such a long time, it's happening on these dates, and I really need you to help me."
This magic thing happened.
Everybody in the room somehow decided that somebody else had said yes.
(Laughter) (Applause) They decided that they were not being asked to take responsibility, or maybe the bus planning manager was being asked to take responsibility for planning the bus diversions, and the council officer was being asked to close the roads, and the transport for London people were being asked to sort out the Underground.
All these people were only being asked to do the thing that they could do that would help us.
Nobody was being asked to take responsibility.
And I, in my innocence, thought, "Well, I'll take responsibility," for what turned out to be a million people on the street.
It was our first show.
(Applause) It was our first show, and it changed the nature of the appreciation of culture, not in a gallery, not in a theater, not in an opera house, but live and on the streets, transforming public space for the broadest possible audience, people who would never buy a ticket to see anything.
So there we were.
We'd finished, and we've continued to produce work of this kind.
As you can see, the company's work is astonishing, but what's also astonishing is the fact that permission was granted.
And you don't see any security.
And this was nine months after terrible terrorist bombings that had ripped London apart.
So I began to wonder whether it was possible to do this kind of stuff in even more complicated circumstances.
We turned our attention to Northern Ireland, the North of Ireland, depending on your point of view.
This is a map of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, the island to the left.
For generations, it's been a place of conflict, the largely Catholic republic in the south and the largely Protestant loyalist community -- hundreds of years of conflict, British troops on the streets for over 30 years.
And now, although there is a peace process, this is today in this city, called Londonderry if you're a loyalist, called Derry if you're a Catholic.
But everybody calls it home.
And I began to wonder whether there was a way in which the community tribalism could be addressed through art and the imagination.
This is what the communities do, every summer, each community.
This is a bonfire filled with effigies and insignia from the people that they hate on the other side.
This is the same from the loyalist community.
And every summer, they burn them.
They're right in the center of town.
So we turned to here, to the Nevada desert, to Burning Man, where people also do bonfires, but with a completely different set of values.
Here you see the work of David Best and his extraordinary temples, which are built during the Burning Man event and then incinerated on the Sunday.
So we invited him and his community to come, and we recruited from both sides of the political and religious divide: young people, unemployed people, people who would never normally come across each other or speak to each other.
And out of their extraordinary work rose a temple to rival the two cathedrals that exist in the town, one Catholic and one Protestant.
But this was a temple to no religion, for everyone, for no community, but for everyone.
And we put it in this place where everyone told me nobody would come.
It was too dangerous. It sat between two communities.
I just kept saying, "But it's got such a great view."
(Laughter) And again, that same old question: Why wouldn't we do this?
What you see in the picture is the beginning of 426 primary school children who were walked up the hill by the head teacher, who didn't want them to lose this opportunity.
And just as happens in the Nevada desert, though in slightly different temperatures, the people of this community, 65,000 of them, turned out to write their grief, their pain, their hope, their hopes for the future, their love.
Because in the end, this is only about love.
They live in a post-conflict society: lots of post-traumatic stress, high suicide.
And yet, for this brief moment -- and it would be ridiculous to assume that it was more than that -- somebody like Kevin -- a Catholic whose father was shot when he was nine, upstairs in bed -- Kevin came to work as a volunteer.
And he was the first person to embrace the elderly Protestant lady who came through the door on the day we opened the temple to the public.
It rose up. It sat there for five days.
And then we chose -- from our little tiny band of nonsectarian builders, who had given us their lives for this period of months to make this extraordinary thing -- we chose from them the people who would incinerate it.
And here you see the moment when, witnessed by 15,000 people who turned out on a dark, cold, March evening, the moment when they decided to put their enmity behind them, to inhabit this shared space, where everybody had an opportunity to say the things that had been unsayable, to say out loud, "You hurt me and my family, but I forgive you."
And together, they watched as members of their community let go of this thing that was so beautiful, but was as hard to let go of as those thoughts and feelings that had gone into making it.
(Music) Thank you.
(Applause)
So in the run-up to the 2016 election, I was, like most of us, watching the rise in discord and vitriol and nastiness in our public spaces.
It was this crazy uptick in polarization.
It was both disheartening and distressing.
And so I started thinking, with a fellow journalist, Jeremy Hay, about how we might practice our craft differently.
How we might go to the heart of divides, to places of conflict, like journalists always have, but then, once there, do something really different.
We knew we wanted to take the core tools of our craft -- careful vetting of information, diligent research, curiosity, a commitment to serving the public good -- to serving our democracy -- and do something new.
And so we mapped out this process, what we call dialogue journalism, for going to the heart of social and political divides, and then, once there, building journalism-supported conversations between people on opposite sides of polarizing issues.
But how actually to do this in a world that's so divided, so deeply divided -- when we live in a world in which cousins and aunts and uncles can't talk to one another, when we often live in separate and distinct news ecosystems, and when we reflexively and habitually malign and dismiss those with whom we disagree?
But we wanted to try.
And so right after the 2016 election, in that time between the election and the inauguration, we partnered with the Alabama Media Group to do something really different.
We brought 25 Trump supporters from Alabama together in conversation with 25 Clinton supporters from California.
And we brought them together in a closed, moderated Facebook group that we kept open for a month.
What we wanted to do was to give them a place to engage with genuine curiosity and openness.
And we wanted to support them in building relationships, not just with each other but with us as journalists.
And then we wanted to supply facts and information -- facts and information that they could actually receive and process and use to undergird their conversations.
And so as a prelude to this conversation, the first step in what we call dialogue journalism, we asked what they thought the other side thought of them.
So when we asked the Trump supporters from Alabama what they thought the Clinton supporters in California thought of them, this is some of what they said.
"They think we are religious Bible thumpers."
"That we're backwards and hickish, and stupid."
"They think that we all have Confederate flags in our yards, that we're racist and sexist and uneducated."
"They think we're barefoot and pregnant, with dirt driveways."
"And they think we're all prissy butts and that we walk around in hoop skirts with cotton fields in the background."
And then we asked that same question of the Californians: "What do you think the Alabamians think about you?"
And they said this: "That we're crazy, liberal Californians."
"That we're not patriotic."
"We're snobby and we're elitist."
"We're godless and we're permissive with our children."
"And that we're focused on our careers, not our family."
"That we're elitist, pie-in-the-sky intellectuals, rich people, Whole Foods-eating, very out of touch."
So by asking questions like this at the start of every conversation and by identifying and sharing stereotypes, we find that people -- people on all sides -- begin to see the simplistic and often mean-spirited caricatures they carry.
And in that -- after that, we can move into a process of genuine conversation.
So in the two years since that launch -- California/Alabama Project -- we've gone on to host dialogues and partnerships with media organizations across the country.
And they've been about some of our most contentious issues: guns, immigration, race, education.
And what we found, remarkably, is that real dialogue is in fact possible.
And that when given a chance and structure around doing so, many, not all, but many of our fellow citizens are eager to engage with the other.
Too often journalists have sharpened divides in the name of drama or readership or in service to our own views.
And too often we've gone to each side quoting a partisan voice on one side and a partisan voice on the other with a telling anecdotal lead and a pithy final quote, all of which readers are keen to mine for bias.
But our dialogue-based process has a slower pace and a different center.
And our work is guided by the principle that dialogue across difference is essential to a functioning democracy, and that journalism and journalists have a multifaceted role to play in supporting that.
So how do we work?
At every stage, we're as transparent as possible about our methods and our motives.
At every stage, we take time to answer people's questions -- explain why we're doing what we're doing.
We tell people that it's not a trap: no one's there to tell you you're stupid, no one's there to tell you your experience doesn't matter.
And we always ask for a really different sort of behavior, a repatterning away from the reflexive name-calling, so entrenched in our discourse that most of us, on all sides, don't even notice it anymore.
So people often come into our conversations a bit angrily.
They say things like, "How can you believe X?"
and "How can you read Y?"
and "Can you believe that this happened?"
But generally, in this miracle that delights us every time, people begin to introduce themselves.
And they begin to explain who they are and where they come from, and they begin to ask questions of one another.
And slowly, over time, people circle back again and again to difficult topics, each time with a little more empathy, a little more nuance, a little more curiosity.
And our journalists and moderators work really hard to support this because it's not a debate, it's not a battle, it's not a Sunday morning talk show.
It's not the flinging of talking points.
It's not the stacking of memes and gifs or articles with headlines that prove a point.
And it's not about scoring political victories with question traps.
So what we've learned is that our state of discord is bad for everyone.
It is a deeply unhappy state of being.
And people tell us this again and again.
They say they appreciate the chance to engage respectfully, with curiosity and with openness, and that they're glad and relieved for a chance to put down their arms.
And so we do our work in direct challenge to the political climate in our country right now, and we do it knowing that it is difficult, challenging work to hold and support people in opposing backgrounds in conversation.
And we do it knowing democracy depends on our ability to address our shared problems together.
And we do this work by putting community at the heart of our journalistic process, by putting our egos to the side to listen first, to listen deeply, to listen around and through our own biases, our own habits of thought, and to support others in doing the same.
And we do this work knowing that journalism as an institution is struggling, and that it has always had a role to play and will continue to have a role to play in supporting the exchange of ideas and views.
For many of the participants in our groups, there are lasting reverberations.
Many people have become Facebook friends and in-real-life friends too, across political lines.
After we closed that first Trump/Clinton project, about two-thirds of the women went on to form their own Facebook group and they chose a moderator from each state and they continue to talk about difficult and challenging issues.
People tell us again and again that they're grateful for the opportunity to be a part of this work, grateful to know that people on the other side aren't crazy, grateful that they've had a chance to connect with people they wouldn't have otherwise talked to.
A lot of what we've seen and learned, despite the fact that we call ourselves Spaceship Media, is not at all rocket science.
If you call people names, if you label them, if you insult them, they are not inclined to listen to you.
Snark doesn't help, shame doesn't help, condescension doesn't help.
Genuine communication takes practice and effort and restraint and self-awareness.
There isn't an algorithm to solve where we are.
Because real human connection is in fact real human connection.
So lead with curiosity, emphasize discussion not debate, get out of your silo, because real connection across difference ...
this is a salve that our democracy sorely needs.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, 2014 was a big year for me.
Do you ever have that, just like a big year, like a banner year?
For me, it went like this: October 3, I lost my second pregnancy.
And then October 8, my dad died of cancer.
And then on November 25, my husband Aaron died after three years with stage-four glioblastoma, which is just a fancy word for brain cancer.
So, I'm fun.
(Laughter) People love to invite me out all the time.
Packed social life.
Usually, when I talk about this period of my life, the reaction I get is essentially: (Sighs) "I can't -- I can't imagine."
But I do think you can.
I think you can.
And I think that you should because, someday, it's going to happen to you.
Maybe not these specific losses in this specific order or at this speed, but like I said, I'm very fun and the research that I have seen will stun you: everyone you love has a 100 percent chance of dying.
(Laughter) And that's why you came to TED.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, since all of this loss happened, I've made it a career to talk about death and loss, not just my own, because it's pretty easy to recap, but the losses and tragedies that other people have experienced.
It's a niche, I have to say.
(Laughter) It's a small niche, and I wish I made more money, but ...
(Laughter) I've written some very uplifting books, host a very uplifting podcast, I started a little nonprofit.
I'm just trying to do what I can to make more people comfortable with the uncomfortable, and grief is so uncomfortable.
It's so uncomfortable, especially if it's someone else's grief.
So part of that work is this group that I started with my friend Moe, who is also a widow; we call it the Hot Young Widows Club.
(Laughter) And it's real, we have membership cards and T-shirts.
And when your person dies, your husband, wife, girlfriend, boyfriend, literally don't care if you were married, your friends and your family are just going to look around through friends of friends of friends of friends until they find someone who's gone through something similar, and then they'll push you towards each other so you can talk amongst yourselves and not get your sad on other people.
(Laughter) So that's what we do.
It's just a series of small groups, where men, women, gay, straight, married, partnered, can talk about their dead person, and say the things that the other people in their lives aren't ready or willing to hear yet.
Huge range of conversations.
Like, "My husband died two weeks ago, I can't stop thinking about sex, is that normal?"
Yeah.
"What if it's one of the Property Brothers?"
Less normal, but I'll accept it.
(Laughter) Things like, "Look, when I'm out in public and I see old people holding hands, couples who have clearly been together for decades, and then I look at them and I imagine all of the things they've been through together, the good things, the bad things, the arguments they've had over who should take out the trash ...
I just find my heart filled with rage."
(Laughter) And that example is personal to me.
Most of the conversations that we have in the group can and will just stay amongst ourselves, but there are things that we talk about that the rest of the world -- the world that is grief-adjacent but not yet grief-stricken -- could really benefit from hearing.
And if you can't tell, I'm only interested in / capable of unscientific studies, so what I did was go to The Hot Young Widows Club and say, "Hello, friends, remember when your person died?" They did.
"Do you remember all the things people said to you?"
"Oh, yeah."
"Which ones did you hate the most?"
I got a lot of comments, lot of answers, people say a lot of things, but two rose to the top pretty quickly.
"Moving on."
Now, since 2014, I will tell you I have remarried a very handsome man named Matthew, we have four children in our blended family, we live in the suburbs of Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
We have a rescue dog.
(Laughter) I drive a minivan, like the kind where doors open and I don't even touch them.
(Laughter) Like, by any "mezhure," life is good.
I've also never said "mezhure," I've never once said it that way.
(Laughter) I don't know where that came from.
(Laughter) I've never heard anyone else say it that way.
It looks like it should be said that way, and that's why the English language is trash, so ...
(Laughter) So impressed with anyone who, like, speaks it in addition to a language that makes sense -- good job.
(Laughter) But by any measure ...
(Laughter) By any measure, life is really, really good, but I haven't "moved on."
I haven't moved on, and I hate that phrase so much, and I understand why other people do.
Because what it says is that Aaron's life and death and love are just moments that I can leave behind me -- and that I probably should.
And when I talk about Aaron, I slip so easily into the present tense, and I've always thought that made me weird.
And then I noticed that everybody does it.
And it's not because we are in denial or because we're forgetful, it's because the people we love, who we've lost, are still so present for us.
So, when I say, "Oh, Aaron is ..."
It's because Aaron still is.
And it's not in the way that he was before, which was much better, and it's not in the way that churchy people try to tell me that he would be.
It's just that he's indelible, and so he is present for me.
Here, he's present for me in the work that I do, in the child that we had together, in these three other children I'm raising, who never met him, who share none of his DNA, but who are only in my life because I had Aaron and because I lost Aaron.
He's present in my marriage to Matthew, because Aaron's life and love and death made me the person that Matthew wanted to marry.
So I've not moved on from Aaron, I've moved forward with him.
(Applause) We spread Aaron's ashes in his favorite river in Minnesota, and when the bag was empty -- because when you're cremated, you fit into a plastic bag -- there were still ashes stuck to my fingers.
And I could have just put my hands in the water and rinsed them, but instead, I licked my hands clean, because I was so afraid of losing more than I had already lost, and I was so desperate to make sure that he would always be a part of me.
But of course he would be.
Because when you watch your person fill himself with poison for three years, just so he can stay alive a little bit longer with you, that stays with you.
When you watch him fade from the healthy person he was the night you met to nothing, that stays with you.
When you watch your son, who isn't even two years old yet, walk up to his father's bed on the last day of his life, like he knows what's coming in a few hours, and say, "I love you. All done. Bye, bye."
That stays with you.
Just like when you fall in love, finally, like really fall in love with someone who gets you and sees you and you even see, "Oh, my God, I've been wrong this entire time.
Love is not a contest or a reality show -- it's so quiet, it's this invisible thread of calm that connects the two of us even when everything is chaos, when things are falling apart, even when he's gone."
That stays with you.
We used to do this thing -- because my hands are always freezing and he's so warm, where I would take my ice-cold hands and shove them up his shirt ...
press them against his hot bod.
(Laughter) And he hated it so much, (Laughter) but he loved me, and after he died, I laid in bed with Aaron and I put my hands underneath him and I felt his warmth.
And I can't even tell you if my hands were cold, but I can tell you that I knew it was the last time I would ever do that.
And that that memory is always going to be sad.
That memory will always hurt.
Even when I'm 600 years old and I'm just a hologram.
(Laughter) Just like the memory of meeting him is always going to make me laugh.
Grief doesn't happen in this vacuum, it happens alongside of and mixed in with all of these other emotions.
So, I met Matthew, my current husband -- who doesn't love that title, (Laughter) but it's so accurate.
(Laughter) I met Matthew, and ...
there was this audible sigh of relief among the people who love me, like, "It's over!
She did it.
She got a happy ending, we can all go home.
And we did good."
And that narrative is so appealing even to me, and I thought maybe I had gotten that, too, but I didn't.
I got another chapter.
And it's such a good chapter -- I love you, honey -- it's such a good chapter.
But especially at the beginning, it was like an alternate universe, or one of those old "choose your own adventure" books from the '80s where there are two parallel plot lines.
So I opened my heart to Matthew, and my brain was like, "Would you like to think about Aaron?
Like, the past, the present, future, just get in there," and I did.
And all of a sudden, those two plots were unfurling at once, and falling in love with Matthew really helped me realize the enormity of what I lost when Aaron died.
And just as importantly, it helped me realize that my love for Aaron and my grief for Aaron, and my love for Matthew, are not opposing forces.
They are just strands to the same thread.
They're the same stuff.
I'm ... what would my parents say?
I'm not special.
(Laughter) They had four kids, they were like ... frankly.
(Laughter) But I'm not, I'm not special.
I know that, I'm fully aware that all day, every day, all around the world, terrible things are happening.
All the time.
Like I said, fun person.
But terrible things are happening, people are experiencing deeply formative and traumatic losses every day.
And as part of my job, this weird podcast that I have, I sometimes talk to people about the worst thing that's ever happened to them.
And sometimes, that's the loss of someone they love, sometimes days ago or weeks ago, years ago, even decades ago.
And these people that I interview, they haven't closed themselves around this loss and made it the center of their lives.
They've lived, their worlds have kept spinning.
But they're talking to me, a total stranger, about the person they love who has died, because these are the experiences that mark us and make us just as much as the joyful ones.
And just as permanently.
Long after you get your last sympathy card or your last hot dish.
Like, we don't look at the people around us experiencing life's joys and wonders and tell them to "move on," do we?
We don't send a card that's like, "Congratulations on your beautiful baby," and then, five years later, think like, "Another birthday party? Get over it."
(Laughter) Yeah, we get it, he's five.
(Laughter) Wow.
(Laughter) But grief is kind of one of those things, like, falling in love or having a baby or watching "The Wire" on HBO, where you don't get it until you get it, until you do it.
And once you do it, once it's your love or your baby, once it's your grief and your front row at the funeral, you get it.
You understand what you're experiencing is not a moment in time, it's not a bone that will reset, but that you've been touched by something chronic.
Something incurable.
It's not fatal, but sometimes grief feels like it could be.
And if we can't prevent it in one another, what can we do?
What can we do other than try to remind one another that some things can't be fixed, and not all wounds are meant to heal?
We need each other to remember, to help each other remember, that grief is this multitasking emotion.
That you can and will be sad, and happy; you'll be grieving, and able to love in the same year or week, the same breath.
We need to remember that a grieving person is going to laugh again and smile again.
If they're lucky, they'll even find love again.
But yes, absolutely, they're going to move forward.
But that doesn't mean that they've moved on.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You might be wondering why I'm wearing sunglasses, and one answer to that is, because I'm here to talk about glamour.
So, we all think we know what glamour is. Here it is.
It's glamorous movie stars, like Marlene Dietrich.
And it comes in a male form, too -- very glamorous.
Not only can he shoot, drive, drink -- you know, he drinks wine, there actually is a little wine in there -- and of course, always wears a tuxedo.
But I think that glamour actually has a much broader meaning -- one that is true for the movie stars and the fictional characters, but also comes in other forms.
A magazine?
Well, it's certainly not this one.
This is the least glamorous magazine on the newsstand -- it's all about sex tips.
Sex tips are not glamorous.
And Drew Barrymore, for all her wonderful charm, is not glamorous either.
But there is a glamour of industry.
This is Margaret Bourke-White's -- one of her pictures she did.
Fantastic, glamorous pictures of steel mills and paper mills and all kinds of glamorous industrial places.
And there's the mythic glamour of the garage entrepreneur.
This is the Hewlett-Packard garage.
We know everyone who starts a business in a garage ends up founding Hewlett-Packard.
There's the glamour of physics.
What could be more glamorous than understanding the entire universe, grand unification? And, by the way, it helps if you're Brian Greene -- he has other kinds of glamour.
And there is, of course, this glamour.
This is very, very glamorous: the glamour of outer space -- and not the alien-style glamour, but the nice, clean, early '60s version.
So what do we mean by glamour?
Well, one thing you can do if you want to know what glamour means is you can look in the dictionary.
And it actually helps a lot more if you look in a very old dictionary, in this case the 1913 dictionary.
Because for centuries, glamour had a very particular meaning, and the word was actually used differently from the way we think of it.
You had "a" glamour.
It wasn't glamour as a quality -- you "cast a glamour."
Glamour was a literal magic spell.
Not a metaphorical one, the way we use it today, but a literal magic spell associated with witches and gypsies and to some extent, Celtic magic.
And over the years, around the turn of the 20th century, it started to take on this other kind of deception -- this definition for any artificial interest in, or association with, an object through which it appears delusively magnified or glorified.
But still, glamour is an illusion.
Glamour is a magic spell.
And there's something dangerous about glamour throughout most of history. When the witches cast a magic spell on you, it was not in your self-interest -- it was to get you to act against your interest.
Well of course, in the 20th century, glamour came to have this different meaning associated with Hollywood.
And this is Hedy Lamarr.
Hedy Lamarr said, "Anyone can look glamorous, all you have to do is sit there and look stupid." (Laughter) But in fact, with all due respect to Hedy -- about whom we'll hear more later -- there's a lot more to it.
There was a tremendous amount of technical achievement associated with creating this Hollywood glamour.
There were scores of retouchers and lighting experts and make-up experts.
You can go to the museum of Hollywood history in Hollywood and see Max Factor's special rooms that he painted different colors depending on the complexion of the star he was going to make up.
So you've got this highly stylized portrait of something that was not entirely of this earth -- it was a portrait of a star.
And actually, we see glamorized photos of stars all the time -- they call them false color.
Glamour is a form of falsification, but falsification to achieve a particular purpose.
It may be to illuminate the star; it may be to sell a film.
And it involves a great deal of technique.
It's not -- glamour is not something -- you don't wake up in the morning glamorous. I don't care who you are.
Even Nicole Kidman doesn't wake up in the morning glamorous.
There is a process of "idealization, glorification and dramatization," and it's not just the case for people.
Glamour doesn't have to be people.
Architectural photography -- Julius Schulman, who has talked about transfiguration, took this fabulous, famous picture of the Kauffman House.
Architectural photography is extremely glamorous.
It puts you into this special, special world.
This is Alex Ross's comic book art, which appears to be extremely realistic, as part of his style is he gives you a kind of realism in his comic art.
Except that light doesn't work this way in the real world.
When you stack people in rows, the ones in the background look smaller than the ones in the foreground -- but not in the world of glamour.
What glamour is all about -- I took this from a blurb in the table of contents of New York magazine, which was telling us that glamour is back -- glamour is all about transcending the everyday.
And I think that that's starting to get at what the core that combines all sorts of glamour is.
This is Filippino Lippi's 1543 portrait of Saint Apollonia.
And I don't know who she is either, but this is the [16th] century equivalent of a supermodel.
It's a very glamorous portrait.
Why is it glamorous?
It's glamorous, first, because she is beautiful -- but that does not make you glamorous, that only makes you beautiful.
She is graceful, she is mysterious and she is transcendent, and those are the central qualities of glamour.
You don't see her eyes; they're looking downward.
She's not looking away from you exactly, but you have to mentally imagine her world.
She's encouraging you to contemplate this higher world to which she belongs, where she can be completely tranquil while holding the iron instruments of her death by torture.
Mel Gibson's "Passion Of The Christ" -- not glamorous.
That's glamour: that's Michelangelo's "Pieta," where Mary is the same age as Jesus and they're both awfully happy and pleasant.
Glamour invites us to live in a different world.
It has to simultaneously be mysterious, a little bit distant -- that's why, often in these glamour shots, the person is not looking at the audience, it's why sunglasses are glamorous -- but also not so far above us that we can't identify with the person.
In some sense, there has to be something like us.
So as I say, in religious art, you know, God is not glamorous.
God cannot be glamorous because God is omnipotent, omniscient -- too far above us.
And yet you will see in religious art, saints or the Virgin Mary will often be portrayed -- not always -- in glamorous forms.
As I said earlier, glamour does not have to be about people, but it has to have this transcendent quality.
What is it about Superman?
Aside from Alex Ross's style, which is very glamorous, one thing about Superman is he makes you believe that a man can fly.
Glamour is all about transcending this world and getting to an idealized, perfect place.
And this is one reason that modes of transportation tend to be extremely glamorous.
The less experience we have with them, the more glamorous they are.
So you can do a glamorized picture of a car, but you can't do a glamorized picture of traffic.
You can do a glamorized picture of an airplane, but not the inside.
The notion is that it's going to transport you, and the story is not about, you know, the guy in front of you in the airplane, who has this nasty little kid, or the big cough.
The story is about where you're arriving, or thinking about where you're arriving.
And this sense of being transported is one reason that we have glamour styling.
This sort of streamlining styling is not just glamorous because we associate it with movies of that period, but because, in it's streamlining, it transports us from the everyday.
The same thing -- arches are very glamorous.
Arches with stained glass -- even more glamorous.
Staircases that curve away from you are glamorous.
I happen to find that particular staircase picture very glamorous because, to me, it captures the whole promise of the academic contemplative life -- but maybe that's because I went to Princeton.
Anyway, skylines are super glamorous, city streets -- not so glamorous.
You know, when you get, actually to this town it has reality.
The horizon, the open road, is very, very glamorous.
There are few things more glamorous than the horizon -- except, possibly, multiple horizons.
Of course, here you don't feel the cold, or the heat -- you just see the possibilities.
In order to pull glamour off, you need this Renaissance quality of sprezzatura, which is a term coined by Castiglione in his book, "The Book Of The Courtier."
There's the not-glamorous version of what it looks like today, after a few centuries.
And sprezzatura is the art that conceals art.
It makes things look effortless.
You don't think about how Nicole Kidman is maneuvering that dress -- she just looks completely natural.
And I remember reading, after the Lara Croft movies, how Angelina Jolie would go home completely black and blue.
Of course, they covered that with make-up, because Lara Croft did all those same stunts -- but she doesn't get black and blue, because she has sprezzatura.
"To conceal all art and make whatever is done or said appear to be without effort": And this is one of the critical aspects of glamour.
Glamour is about editing.
How do you create the sense of transcendence, the sense of evoking a perfect world?
The sense of, you know, life could be better, I could join this -- I could be a perfect person, I could join this perfect world.
We don't tell you all the grubby details.
Now, this was kindly lent to me by Jeff Bezos, from last year.
This is underneath Jeff's desk.
This is what the real world of computers, lamps, electrical appliances of all kinds, looks like.
But if you look in a catalog -- particularly a catalog of modern, beautiful objects for your home -- it looks like this.
There are no cords.
Look next time you get these catalogs in your mail -- you can usually figure out where they hid the cord.
But there's always this illusion that if you buy this lamp, you will live in a world without cords. (Laughter) And the same thing is true of, if you buy this laptop or you buy this computer -- and even in these wireless eras, you don't get to live in the world without cords.
You have to have mystery and you have to have grace.
And there she is -- Grace.
This is the most glamorous picture, I think, ever.
Part of the thing is that, in "Rear Window," the question is, is she too glamorous to live in his world?
And the answer is no, but of course it's really just a movie.
Here's Hedy Lamarr again.
And, you know, this kind of head covering is extremely glamorous because, like sunglasses, it conceals and reveals at the same time.
Translucence is glamorous -- that's why all these people wear pearls.
It's why barware is glamorous. Glamour is translucent -- not transparent, not opaque.
It invites us into the world but it doesn't give us a completely clear picture.
And I think if Grace Kelly is the most glamorous person, maybe a spiral staircase with glass block may be the most glamorous interior shot, because a spiral staircase is incredibly glamorous.
It has that sense of going up and away, and yet you never think about how you would really trip if you were -- particularly going down.
And of course glass block has that sense of translucence.
So, this session's supposed to be about pure pleasure but glamour's really partly about meaning.
All individuals and all cultures have ideals that cannot possibly be realized in reality.
They have contradictions, they uphold principles that are incommensurable with each other -- whatever it is -- and yet these ideals give meaning and purpose to our lives as cultures and as individuals.
And the way we deal with that is we displace them -- we put them into a golden world, an imagined world, an age of heroes, the world to come.
And in the life of an individual, we often associate that with some object.
The white picket fence, the perfect house.
The perfect kitchen -- no bills on the counter in the perfect kitchen.
You know, you buy that Viking range, this is what your kitchen will look like.
The perfect love life -- symbolized by the perfect necklace, the perfect diamond ring.
The perfect getaway in your perfect car.
This is an interior design firm that is literally called Utopia.
The perfect office -- again, no cords, as far as I can tell.
And certainly, no, it doesn't look a thing like my office.
I mean, there's no paper on the desk.
We want this golden world.
And some people get rich enough, and if they have their ideals -- in a sort of domestic sense, they get to acquire their perfect world.
Dean Koontz built this fabulous home theater, which is -- I don't think accidentally -- in Art Deco style.
That symbolizes this sense of being safe and at home.
This is not always good, because what is your perfect world?
What is your ideal, and also, what has been edited out?
Is it something important?
"The Matrix" is a movie that is all about glamour.
I could do a whole talk on "The Matrix" and glamour.
It was criticized for glamorizing violence, because, look -- sunglasses and those long coats, and, of course, they could walk up walls and do all these kinds of things that are impossible in the real world.
This is another Margaret Bourke-White photo.
This is from Soviet Union. Attractive.
I mean, look how happy the people are, and good-looking too.
You know, we're marching toward Utopia.
I'm not a fan of PETA, but I think this is a great ad.
Because what they're doing is they're saying, your coat's not so glamorous, what's been edited out is something important.
But actually, what's even more important than remembering what's been edited out is thinking, are the ideals good?
Because glamour can be very totalitarian and deceptive.
And it's not just a matter of glamorizing cleaning your floor.
This is from "Triumph Of The Will" -- brilliant editing to cut together things.
There's a glamour shot.
National Socialism is all about glamour.
It was a very aesthetic ideology.
It was all about cleaning up Germany, and the West, and the world, and ridding it of anything unglamorous.
So glamour can be dangerous.
I think glamour has a genuine appeal, has a genuine value.
I'm not against glamour.
But there's a kind of wonder in the stuff that gets edited away in the cords of life.
And there is both a way to avoid the dangers of glamour and a way to broaden your appreciation of it.
And that's to take Isaac Mizrahi's advice and confront the manipulation of it all, and sort of admit that manipulation is something that we enjoy, but also enjoy how it happens.
And here's Hedy Lamarr.
She's very glamorous but, you know, she invented spread-spectrum technology.
So she's even more glamorous if you know that she really wasn't stupid, even though she thought she could look stupid.
David Hockney talks about how the appreciation of this very glamorous painting is heightened if you think about the fact that it takes two weeks to paint this splash, which only took a fraction of a second to happen.
There is a book out in the bookstore -- it's called "Symphony In Steel," and it's about the stuff that's hidden under the skin of the Disney Center.
And that has a fascination.
It's not necessarily glamorous, but unveiling the glamour has an appeal.
There's a wonderful book called "Crowns" that's all these glamour pictures of black women in their church hats.
And there's a quote from one of these women, and she talks about, "As a little girl, I'd admire women at church with beautiful hats.
They looked like beautiful dolls, like they'd just stepped out of a magazine.
But I also knew how hard they worked all week.
Sometimes under those hats there's a lot of joy and a lot of sorrow."
And, actually, you get more appreciation for glamour when you realize what went into creating it.
Thank you.
Hello, brains!
I say that to you because, if you think about it, it wasn't really you that decided to come here today.
It was your brain.
And whether you decided to walk, or drive, take a taxi, or ride a bike, that decision was made by your brain.
Behavior, all behavior, is affected by the brain.
This is a story about my brain.
So, I was a smart kid.
By 18 months, I was speaking in full sentences.
By third grade, I was scoring post-high school on standardized tests.
I had, as all my teachers agreed, so much potential.
I was also struggling.
I didn't have many, any, friends outside of books.
I was easily overwhelmed. I spaced out in class.
I lost things constantly.
And trying to get my brain to focus on anything I wasn't excited about was like trying to nail jello to the wall.
But I was smart, so nobody was worried.
It wasn't until middle school, when I was responsible for getting myself to classes on time and remembering to bring my own homework, that being smart wasn't enough anymore, and my grades started to suffer.
My mom took me to the doctor and, after a comprehensive evaluation, I was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADHD.
If you're not familiar with ADHD, it has three primary characteristics: inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity.
Some people with ADHD have more of the inattentive presentation.
Those are the daydreamers, the space cadets.
Some have more of the hyperactive-impulsive presentation.
Those are the kids that usually get diagnosed early.
(Laughter) But the most common presentation is a combination of both.
(Laughter) My doctor and my parents decided that, given my shiny, new diagnosis, maybe stimulant medication would succeed where spankings and lectures had failed.
So I tried it, and it worked.
The first time I took my medication, it was like putting on glasses and realizing I could see without squinting.
I could focus.
And without changing anything, my GPA went up a full point.
Honestly, it was kind of miraculous.
By 14, I had friends that liked me.
By 15, I had published my first poem.
I got a boyfriend.
By 17, I knew I wanted to be a journalist.
My local college had a program that would guarantee admission to USC.
They had a really great journalism program.
So, I signed up at my local college and I started taking classes.
I moved in with my boyfriend.
Things were going great, until they weren't.
I started having trouble making it to class on time.
I aced a statistics course, but I forgot to sign up in time, so I never got the credit.
I took classes so I could help my boyfriend with his career, but I completely lost sight of mine.
I never made it to USC.
By 21, I dropped out of college and moved back home.
Over the next ten years, I started and quit, or was fired from, 15 jobs.
I ruined my credit.
I got married, and was divorced within a year.
At this point, I was 32, and I had no idea what I was doing with my life, besides reading self-help books that didn't seem to be helping.
What happened to all that potential?
Was I not trying? No! I worked harder than anyone I knew.
I didn't even have time for friends.
I was that busy.
I had potential, though.
So, my failure was clearly my fault.
I just hadn't done what I need to do to reach it, and, honestly, I was tired of trying, putting more effort into life than everyone else and falling farther and farther behind.
At this point, I could have given up on myself, I could have decided that everyone who'd thought I had potential was wrong.
But I didn't, because I knew that it was my behavior that had gotten me here, and behavior is affected by the brain, and my brain has ADHD.
Looking at my behavior, I knew: even with medication, even as an adult, my ADHD was still interfering with my life, and what I needed to know was how and why, and, more importantly, what could I do about it.
I started to do some research, and I found a lot of great information.
I found a lot of bad information too, but that's another talk.
But there's good information out there.
Websites, podcasts, talks, by researchers and medical professionals; books that would have been way more helpful than the self-help books I'd been using that were clearly written for normal - well, there's no normal - neurotypical brains.
A lot of what I found, though, was either super technical or seemed like it was written for parents and teachers trying to deal with ADHD kids.
There wasn't a lot that seemed intended for us, the people who have ADHD.
So, I started a YouTube channel.
I had no idea how to start a YouTube channel, but I started a YouTube channel.
I almost called it "How Not To ADHD," because that was about all I knew at the time.
But my boyfriend, Edward, talked me out of it.
It turns out lots of people need help understanding ADHD, including, maybe especially, those who actually have it.
I was no exception.
I thought ADHD was kind of the same for everybody.
I thought it was mostly about getting distracted.
I thought having ADHD was maybe the reason that I was failing at life.
And I thought I was what needed to change, in order to be successful.
I couldn't be successful and still be me.
Spoilers: I was wrong.
So, let's go back for a second, let's go back to what brought us here today: the brain.
Understanding the brain you're working with, it turns out, is kind of important, and that's true whether that brain is your employee's, your student's, your kid's, your significant other's, or your own.
ADHD affects between 5 and 8% of the global population, which means, statistically speaking, there's between 37 and 60 of us just in this room.
You can't tell who we are just by looking, but it's fun to watch you try.
(Laughter) So, at some point, you're going to meet someone with ADHD, work with them, give birth to them, or fall in love with them.
Chances are you already have.
And, at some point, you're going to ask yourself, "What is going on in their brain?!"
So, after two years of learning about ADHD and a lifetime of experience with it, after having the honor of connecting with researchers, and doctors, and ADHD experts, and tens of thousands of ADHD brains all over the world, what can I tell you to help you understand ADHD?
By the way, many of them helped with this talk.
First of all, it's real.
It's not bad parenting or lack of discipline.
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder.
It's currently the most well-researched mental condition, and there are actually measurable differences in the brain.
These differences are larger in children, but, for most people, they never go away.
In other words, adults have ADHD too.
While rates of ADHD diagnosis are increasing, it's not because of an increase in sugar or technology, or lack of spanking; it's not, any more than people drowning in swimming pools is because of Nicolas Cage.
Correlation does not equal causation.
Those are real numbers.
(Laughter) It's from both an increase in understanding that ADHD exists, that girls, adults, and gifted students can have it too, and ironically a lack of understanding that being hyper, misbehaving, or struggling in school does not mean you have ADHD.
ADHD is more serious than I realized.
The primary characteristics - inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity - don't sound all that serious, and I didn't think that they were, but, in real life, they translate to people getting into more accidents, being more likely to get fired, get divorced, significantly more likely to struggle with addiction.
I learned that ADHD is on a spectrum.
Raise your hand if you've ever lost your keys, or spaced out in the middle of a lecture.
If you're not raising your hand, I'm going to assume you spaced out in the middle of this one.
(Laughter) The thing is, while everyone experiences ADHD symptoms sometimes, an actual diagnosis is based on how many of those symptoms significantly and chronically impair multiple aspects of your life.
Just like you can get sad and not have depression, you can get distracted and not have ADHD.
And just like you can have mild depression or severe depression, ADHD can range from mild to severe.
I also learned ADHD is a terrible name for ADHD.
It creates a lot of confusion.
We don't have a deficit of attention!
What we have trouble with is regulating our attention.
As ADHD coach Brett Thornhill puts it, it's like your brain keeps switching between 30 different channels and somebody else has the remote.
Sometimes we have trouble focusing at all, and other times we get stuck on a channel and can't pull ourselves away, which in real life might seem we don't want to do homework because we'd rather play video games, and short, sometimes that's the case.
But the truth is there are plenty of times we want to able to focus, we try, and we just can't.
Current understanding is that this difficulty has to do with the way our brains produce and metabolize neurotransmitters, like dopamine and norepinephrine.
I learned ADHD is highly treatable.
Stimulant medication boosts these neurotransmitters, which is why it helps us focus.
It's very effective for around 80% of people with ADHD.
And I learned that medication isn't enough.
ADHD affects much more than our focus.
It impairs executive functions like planning, prioritizing, and our ability to sustain effort toward a goal.
It affects our ability to regulate our emotions, our behavior, our sleep.
It's not one program in our brain that works differently; it's the whole operating system.
It can affect every aspect of our lives.
And there are a ton of strategies out there that can help.
Cognitive behavioral therapy, coaching, even meditation or regular exercise can help make a huge difference understanding your brain.
I knew I had trouble focusing, and I knew my medication helped with that.
What I didn't know was that getting overwhelmed all the time had to do with poor working memory, and that making lists helps; or that the reason I ran late all the time wasn't because I didn't care, it's because ADHD'ers have a skewed sense of time, and that using a timer could teach me how long things actually take.
Mostly, I expected to learn what I actually learned: that ADHD is real; addressing it is important; and medication is not enough.
What I didn't expect to learn: that I wasn't alone; I had an ADHD tribe; what a difference it would make to connect with it.
There are people with ADHD in every country, every culture across the globe.
Yes, even in France.
(Laughter) And this tribe is awesome.
Comparing myself to people with neurotypical brains, I felt really bad about myself.
Why couldn't I keep my house clean or finish a project in time, instead of waiting till the very last second?
But seeing the positives in fellow ADHD brains helped me recognize and appreciate my own strengths, ones I couldn't see when I was just staring at my weaknesses, which is what I'd been doing for decades.
But ADHD brains have a lot to offer the world.
We tend to be generous, funny, creative.
ADHD'ers are 300% more likely to start their own business.
We not only think outside the box; we're often not even aware that there is a box.
(Laughter) We may struggle when our brains aren't engaged, but ADHD brains are great at tackling tasks that are urgent, working with ideas that are new, wrestling with problems that are challenging, and dedicating themselves to projects that are of personal interest.
This YouTube career I'd stumbled into was all of those things.
At 32, I was divorced, miserable, and had no idea what I was doing with my life.
At 33, I'd started my own business, and was connecting with ADHD experts.
By now, at 34, I have a team of volunteers helping with the channel.
I'm engaged to this amazing man who helps me produce the channel, works right alongside with me, is doing the slides right now - and, as we discovered, also has ADHD.
(Laughter) I'm working on reaching out to schools so that kids don't have to wait until they're 32 to learn about their brains.
And I'm doing my very first TEDx talk here with you today.
(Cheers) (Applause) But wait! There's more! Wait.
(Applause) That did sound like the end of the speech. I'm sorry, it's not.
(Laughter) I'm happier and more successful than I've ever been in my life.
So, what happened? How did I reach my potential?
Three things: one, I learned about my brain, my ADHD brain, both on my own and by connecting with others who have it.
If you judge a fish by its ability to climb a tree, it will live its whole life believing it is stupid, unless it happens to chat with another fish and realizes fish aren't great at climbing trees, and that's okay, there's plenty of ocean.
Two, in learning about my brain, I found and stumbled into a job that engages it.
If you spend all your time trying to get a fish to able to climb a tree, you'll never see how far it can swim.
It turns out I can be me and still be successful.
I just had to find my ocean.
Three, I learned strategies for challenges I still face.
I have no fish analogy for this one, I'm sorry.
(Laughter) I guess I learned how to swim.
Once you know what your brain's challenges are, you can find solutions to them.
Once you look past the stereotypes and assumptions about people with ADHD, and dig deeper, you learn what ADHD actually is.
It's not people who won't stop fidgeting, or getting distracted.
It is brains that are chronically underaroused, trying to get the basic level of stimulation all brains need.
It's not about procrastinating or not caring.
It's having executive function deficits that make it hard to get started.
And it's not people being lazy or not trying enough.
It's kids and adults struggling to succeed with a brain that doesn't always want to cooperate in a society that wasn't built for them.
Society is our user's manual.
We learn how our brains and bodies work by watching those around us.
And, when yours works differently, it can feel like you're broken.
So, what I'm trying to do is reach out to these people wherever they are in the world, and tell them, "You are not weird. You are not stupid.
You do not need to try harder. You are not a failed version of normal.
You are different, you are beautiful, and you are not alone."
If you don't ADHD yourself, chances are you know somebody who does.
They're your employee, your boss, your friend, they're in this room.
I hope this talk helps you understand them better.
If you do have ADHD, welcome to the tribe.
(Applause) (Cheers)
This session is on natural wonders, and the bigger conference is on the pursuit of happiness.
I want to try to combine them all, because to me, healing is really the ultimate natural wonder.
Your body has a remarkable capacity to begin healing itself, and much more quickly than people had once realized, if you simply stop doing what's causing the problem.
And so, really, so much of what we do in medicine and life in general is focused on mopping up the floor without also turning off the faucet.
I love doing this work, because it really gives many people new hope and new choices that they didn't have before, and it allows us to talk about things that -- not just diet, but that happiness is not -- we're talking about the pursuit of happiness, but when you really look at all the spiritual traditions, what Aldous Huxley called the "perennial wisdom," when you get past the names and forms and rituals that divide people, it's really about -- our nature is to be happy; our nature is to be peaceful, our nature is to be healthy.
And so happiness is not something you get, health is generally not something that you get, but rather, all of these different practices -- you know, the ancient swamis and rabbis and priests and monks and nuns didn't develop these techniques to just manage stress or lower your blood pressure or unclog your arteries, even though it can do all those things.
They're powerful tools for transformation, for quieting down our mind and bodies to allow us to experience what it feels like to be happy, to be peaceful, to be joyful and to realize that it's not something that you pursue and get, but rather, it's something that you have already, until you disturb it.
I studied yoga for many years with a teacher named Swami Satchidananda.
People would say, "What are you, a Hindu?"
(Laughter) It's about identifying what's causing us to disturb our innate health and happiness and then to allow that natural healing to occur.
To me, that's the real natural wonder.
So, within that larger context, we can talk about diet, stress management -- which are really these spiritual practices -- moderate exercise, smoking cessation, support groups and community, which I'll talk more about, and some vitamins and supplements.
When people think about the diet I recommend, they think it's really strict.
For reversing disease, that's what it takes.
But if you're just trying to be healthy, you have a spectrum of choices.
To the degree that you can move in a healthy direction, you're going to live longer, feel better, lose weight, and so on.
And in our studies, what we've been able to do is to use very expensive, high-tech, state-of-the-art measures to prove how powerful these very simple and low-tech and low-cost -- and in many ways, ancient -- interventions can be.
We first began by looking at heart disease.
When I began doing this work 26 or 27 years ago, it was thought that once you have heart disease, it can only get worse.
What we found was, instead of getting worse and worse, in many cases, it could get better and better, and much more quickly than people had once realized.
This is a representative patient who, at the time, was 73, told he needed to have a bypass, decided to do this instead.
We used quantitative arteriography, showing the narrowing.
This is one of the main arteries that feeds the heart, and you can see the narrowing here.
A year later, it's not as clogged; normally, it goes the other direction.
These minor changes in blockages caused a 300 percent improvement in blood flow, and using cardiac positron-emission tomography, or PET, scans -- blue and black is no blood flow, orange and white is maximal -- huge differences can occur without drugs, without surgery.
Clinically, he couldn't walk across the street without getting severe chest pain.
Within a month, like most people, he was pain-free, and within a year, climbing more than 100 floors a day on a StairMaster.
This is not unusual, and it's part of what enables people to maintain these kinds of changes, because it makes a big difference in their quality of life.
If you looked at all the arteries in all the patients, they got worse and worse from one year to five years in the comparison group.
This is the natural history of heart disease.
But it's really not natural; we found it could get better and better, and much more quickly than people thought.
It wasn't a function of how old or sick they were, but of how much they changed.
The oldest patients improved as much as the young ones.
I got this Christmas card a few years ago from patients in one of our programs.
The younger brother is 86; the older one is 95.
They wanted to show me how much more flexible they were.
The following year they sent this, which I thought was funny.
(Laughter) You just never know.
And what we found was that 99 percent of the patients stopped or reversed the progression of their heart disease.
Now, I thought if we just did good science, that would change medical practice.
But that was naive.
It's important, but not enough, because we doctors do what we get paid to do and trained to do what we get paid to do, so if we change insurance, then we change medical practice and medical education.
Insurance will cover the bypass and angioplasty but won't, until recently, cover diet and lifestyle.
So we began, through our nonprofit institute, training hospitals around the country, and we found that most people could avoid surgery.
And not only was it medically effective, it was also cost-effective.
The insurance companies found that they began to save almost 30,000 dollars a patient, and Medicare is now in the middle of doing a demonstration project, paying for 1,800 people to go through the program in the sites we train.
The fortuneteller says, "I give smokers a discount, because there's not as much to tell."
(Laughter) I like this slide, because it's a chance to talk about what really motivates people to change and what doesn't.
What doesn't work is fear of dying, and that's what's normally used.
Everybody who smokes knows it's not good for you.
Still, 30 percent of Americans smoke, 80 percent in some parts of the world.
Well, because it helps them get through the day.
I'll talk more about this, but the real epidemic isn't just heart disease or obesity or smoking, it's loneliness and depression.
They're always there for me, and nobody else is.
You're going to take away my 20 friends? What are you going to give me?"
Or they eat when they get depressed or use alcohol to numb the pain or work too hard or watch too much TV.
There are lots of ways we have of avoiding and numbing and bypassing pain, but the point of all of this is to deal with the cause of the problem.
The pain is not the problem, it's the symptom.
And telling people they're going to die is too scary to think about, or that they'll get emphysema or a heart attack is too scary, and they don't want to think about it, so they don't.
The most effective anti-smoking ad was this one.
And the headline is "Impotent," it's not "Emphysema."
What was the biggest-selling drug of all time, when it was introduced a few years ago?
Viagra, right? Why? Because a lot of guys need it.
It's not like you say, "Joe, I'm having erectile dysfunction. How about you?"
And yet, look at the number of prescriptions that are being sold.
It's not so much psychological, it's vascular, and nicotine makes your arteries constrict.
So does cocaine, so does a high-fat diet, so does emotional stress.
So the very behaviors that we think of as being so sexy in our culture are the very ones that leave so many people feeling tired, lethargic, depressed and impotent.
But when you change those behaviors, your brain gets more blood, you think more clearly, have more energy, your heart gets more blood, as I've shown you.
Your sexual function improves.
This is a study: a high-fat meal, within one or two hours, blood flow is measurably less.
And you've all experienced this at Thanksgiving.
When you eat a big fatty meal, how do you feel?
You feel kind of sleepy afterwards.
Many of you have kids, and you know that's a big change in your lifestyle.
People are not afraid to make big changes in lifestyle if they're worth it.
And the paradox is that when you make big changes, you get big benefits, and you feel so much better so quickly.
For many people, those are choices worth making -- not to live longer, but to live better.
I want to talk a little bit about the obesity epidemic, because it really is a problem.
Two-thirds of adults are overweight or obese, and diabetes in kids and 30-year-olds has increased 70 percent in the last 10 years.
And just to show you this, this is from the CDC.
These are not election returns; these are the percentage of people who are overweight.
And if you see from '85 to '86 to '87, '88, '89, '90, '91 -- you get a new category, 15 to 20 percent; '92, '93, '94, '95, '96, '97 -- you get a new category; '98, '99, 2000 and 2001.
Mississippi, more than 25 percent of people are overweight.
Why is this? Well, this is one way to lose weight that works very well -- (Laughter) but it doesn't last, which is the problem.
(Laughter) Now, there's no mystery in how you lose weight; you either burn more calories by exercise or you eat fewer calories.
Now, one way to eat fewer calories is to eat less food, which is why you can lose weight on any diet if you eat less food, or if you restrict entire categories of foods.
The other way is to change the type of food.
And fat has nine calories per gram, whereas protein and carbs only have four.
So when you eat less fat, you eat fewer calories without having to eat less food.
So you can eat the same amount of food, but you're getting fewer calories because the food is less dense in calories.
And it's the volume of food that affects satiety, rather than the type.
I don't like talking about the Atkins diet, but I get asked about it, so thought I'd spend a few minutes on it.
The myth that you hear is, Americans have been told to eat less fat, the percent of calories from fat is down, Americans are fatter than ever, therefore fat doesn't make you fat.
It's a half-truth.
So the percentage is lower, but the actual amount is higher, so the goal is to reduce both.
Dr. Atkins and I debated each other many times before he died, and we agreed that Americans eat too many simple carbs, the "bad carbs."
And these are things like -- (Laughter) sugar, white flour, white rice, alcohol.
And you get a double whammy: you get all these calories that don't fill you up because you've removed the fiber, and they get absorbed quickly so your blood sugar zooms up.
Your pancreas makes insulin to bring it back down, which is good, but insulin accelerates the conversion of calories into fat.
So the goal is not to go to pork rinds, bacon and sausages -- these are not health foods -- but to go from "bad carbs" to "good carbs."
Fruits, vegetables, whole wheat flour, brown rice, in their natural forms, are rich in fiber.
The fiber fills you up before you get too many calories and it slows the absorption, so you don't get that rapid rise in blood sugar.
And you get all the disease-protective substances.
It's not just what you exclude from your diet, but also what you include that's protective.
Just as all carbs are not bad for you, all fats are not bad; there are good fats.
These are predominantly what are called omega-3 fatty acids.
You find them, for example, in fish oil.
Bad fats are things like trans-fatty acids in processed food and saturated fats, which we find in meat.
If you remember nothing else from this talk: three grams a day of fish oil can reduce the risk of heart attack and sudden death by 50 to 80 percent.
They come in one-gram capsules; more than that just gives you extra fat you don't need.
It also helps reduce the risk of the most common cancers, like breast, prostate and colon.
The problem with the Atkins diet is, everyone knows people who've lost weight on it, but you can lose weight on amphetamines and fen-phen; there are lots of ways of losing weight that aren't good for you.
You want to do it in a way that enhances your health, not one that harms it.
The problem is, it's based on this half-truth: Americans eat too many simple carbs, so if you eat fewer, you'll lose weight, and even more weight if you eat whole foods and less fat, and you'll enhance your health rather than harming it.
He says, "I've got good news.
While your cholesterol level has remained the same, the research findings have changed."
(Laughter) Now what happens to your heart when you go on an Atkins diet?
The red is good; at the beginning and a year later.
This is from a study in a peer-reviewed journal called "Angiology."
There's more red after a year on a diet like I would recommend, there's less red, less blood flow after a year on an Atkins-type diet.
So, yes, you can lose weight, but your heart isn't happy.
Now one of the studies funded by the Atkins Center found that 70 percent of the people were constipated, 65 percent had bad breath, 54 percent had headaches -- this is not a healthy way to eat.
So you might start to lose weight and start to attract people towards you, but when they get too close, it's going to be a problem.
(Laughter) And more seriously, there are case reports now of 16-year-old girls who died after a few weeks on the Atkins diet, of bone disease, kidney disease, and so on.
And that's how your body excretes waste -- through your breath, bowels and perspiration.
So when you go on these kinds of diet, they begin to smell bad.
An optimal diet is low in fat, low in the bad carbs, high in the good carbs and enough of the good fats.
And then, again, it's a spectrum: when you move in this direction, you're going to lose weight, you'll feel better, and you'll gain health.
There are ecological reasons for eating lower on the food chain too, whether it's the deforestation in the Amazon or making more protein available to the four billion people who live on a dollar a day, not to mention whatever ethical concerns people have.
So there are lots of reasons for eating this way that go beyond just your health.
Now, we're about to publish the first study looking at the effects of this program on prostate cancer, in collaboration with Sloan Kettering and UCSF.
We took 90 men who had biopsy-proven prostate cancer, who had elected, for reasons unrelated to the study, not to have surgery.
We could randomly divide them into two groups, and then we could have one group that is a nonintervention control group to compare to, which you can't do with, say, breast cancer, because everyone gets treated.
We found that after a year, none of the experimental group patients who made these lifestyle changes needed treatment, while six of the control group patients needed surgery or radiation.
When we looked at their PSA levels, which is a marker for prostate cancer, they got worse in the control group but got better in the experimental group.
And the differences were highly significant.
I wondered -- was there any relationship between how much people changed their diet and lifestyle, whichever group they were in, and the changes in PSA?
And sure enough, we found a dose-response relationship, just like we did in the arterial blockages in our cardiac studies.
And in order for the PSA to go down, they had to make big changes.
I then wondered if they're just changing their PSA, but it's not really affecting the tumor growth.
They added it to a standard line of prostate tumor cells growing in tissue culture, and it inhibited the growth seven times more in the experimental group than in the control group -- 70 versus 9 percent.
Finally, I wondered if there's any relationship between how much people changed and how much it inhibited their tumor growth, whichever group they were in.
And this really got me excited because again, we found the same pattern: the more people change, the more it affected the growth of their tumors.
Finally, we did MRI and MR spectroscopy scans on some of these patients.
The tumor activity is shown in red in this patient, and you can see clearly it's better a year later, along with the PSA going down.
If it's true for prostate cancer, it'll almost certainly be true for breast cancer.
And whether or not you have conventional treatment, in addition, if you make these changes, it may help reduce the risk of recurrence.
The last thing I want to talk about, apropos of the issue of the pursuit of happiness, is that study after study has shown that people who are lonely and depressed -- and depression is the other real epidemic in our culture -- are many times more likely to get sick and die prematurely, in part because, as we talked about, they're more likely to smoke, overeat, drink too much, work too hard, and so on.
But also, through mechanisms that we don't fully understand, people who are lonely and depressed are many times -- three to five to ten times in some studies -- more likely to get sick and die prematurely.
And depression is treatable. We need to do something about that.
Now on the other hand, anything that promotes intimacy is healing.
It can be sexual intimacy -- I happen to think healing energy and erotic energy are just different forms of the same thing.
Friendship, altruism, compassion, service -- all the perennial truths that we talked about that are part of all religion and all cultures, once you stop trying to see the differences -- these are the things that are in our own self-interest, because they free us from our suffering and our disease.
And it's, in a sense, the most selfish thing that we can do.
Just to look at one study, done by David Spiegel at Stanford.
He took women with metastatic breast cancer, randomly divided them into two groups.
One group met for an hour and a half once a week in a support group.
It was a nurturing, loving environment, where they were encouraged to let down their emotional defenses and talk about how awful it is to have breast cancer with people who understood because they were going through it too.
They met once a week for a year.
And that was the only difference between the groups.
It was a randomized control study published in "The Lancet."
Other studies have shown this as well.
So these simple things that create intimacy are really healing.
Even the word "healing" comes from the root "to make whole."
The word "yoga" comes from the Sanskrit, meaning "union," "to yoke, to bring together."
The last slide I want to show you is from -- again, this swami that I studied with for so many years.
I did a combined oncology and cardiology grand rounds at the University of Virginia medical school a couple years ago.
And at the end of it, somebody said, "Hey, Swami, what's the difference between wellness and illness?"
So he went up on the board and wrote the word "illness" and circled the first letter, then wrote the word "wellness," and circled the first two letters.
To me, it's just shorthand for what we're talking about: that anything that creates a sense of connection and community and love is really healing.
Thank you.
The talented young herbalist named Xu Xian was in trouble.
It should have been a victorious moment he had just opened his very own medicine shop.
But he bought his supplies from his former employer, and the resentful man sold him rotten herbs.
As Xu Xian wondered what to do with this useless inventory, patients flooded into his shop.
A plague had stricken the city, and he had nothing to treat them.
Just as he was starting to panic, his wife, Bai Su Zhen, produced a recipe to use the rotten herbs as medicine.
Her remedy cured all the plague-afflicted citizens immediately.
Xu Xians former boss even had to buy back some of the rotten herbs to treat his own family.
Shortly after, a monk named Fa Hai approached Xu Xian, warning him that there was a demon in his house.
The demon, he said, was Bai Su Zhen.
Xu Xian laughed.
His kindhearted, resourceful wife was not a demon.
Fa Hai insisted.
He told Xu Xian to serve his wife realgar wine on the 5th day of the 5th month, when demons powers are weakest.
If she wasnt a demon, he explained, it wouldnt hurt her.
Xu Xian dismissed the monk politely, with no intention of serving Bai Su Zhen the wine.
But as the day approached, he decided to try it.
As soon as the wine touched Bai Su Zhens lips, she ran to the bedroom, claiming she wasnt feeling well.
Xu Xian prepared some medicine and went to check on her.
But instead of his wife, he found a giant white serpent with a bloody forked tongue in the bed.
He collapsed, killed by the shock.
When Bai Su Zhen opened her eyes, she realized immediately what must have happened.
The truth was that Bai Su Zhen was an immortal snake with formidable magical powers.
She had used her powers to take a human form and improve her and her husbands fortunes.
Her magic couldnt revive Xu Xian, but she had one more idea to save him: an herb that could grant longevity and even bring the dead back to life, guarded by the Old Man of the South Pole in the forbidden peaks of the Kun Lun Mountains.
She rode to the mountains on a cloud, then continued on foot passed gateways and arches until she reached one marked beyond mortals hanging over a silver bridge.
On the other side, two of the Old Mans disciples guarded the herb.
Bai Su Zhen disguised herself as a monk and told them shed come to invite the Old Man to a gathering of the gods.
While they relayed her message, she plucked some leaves from the herb and ran.
The servants realized they had been tricked and chased her.
Bai Su Zhen coughed up a magic ball and threw it at one.
As the other closed in on her, she put the herb under her tongue for safekeeping, but its magic forced both of them into their true forms.
As the cranes long beak clamped around her, the Old Man appeared.
Why, he asked, would she risk her life to steal his herb when she was already immortal?
Bai Su Zhen explained her love for Xu Xian.
Even if he didnt want to be with her now that he knew she was a demon, she was determined to bring him back to life.
The two had a karmic connection dating back more than a thousand years.
When Bai Su Zhen was a small snake, a beggar was about to kill her, but a kind passerby rescued her.
Her rescuer was Xu Xian in a past life.
Touched by her willingness to risk her life for him, the Old Man permitted her to leave the mountain with the immortal herb.
Bai Su Zhen returned home to revive Xu Xian.
When he opened his eyes, the terrified look frozen on his face became a smile.
Demon or not, he was still happy to see his wife.
Little do they know it, but these six creatures are each about to experience a very unusual death.
One-by-one, they will fall prey to the remarkable, predatory antics of...
a carnivorous plant.
Around the world there are more than 600 plant species that supplement a regular diet of sunlight, water, and soil with insects, microbes, or even frogs and rats.
Scientists believe that carnivory in plants evolved separately at least six times on our planet, suggesting that this flesh-munching adaptation holds a major benefit for plants.
Carnivorous plants tend to grow in places with highly acidic soil, which is poor in crucial nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium.
In these hostile conditions, plants that are able to lure, trap, and digest prey have an advantage over those that rely on soil for their nutrients.
Take this inhospitable bog, where pitcher plants reign supreme.
Drawn to the pitchers vivid colors and alluring scent, the fly closes in and slurps its nectar.
But this pitcher species has an ingredient called coniine in its nectar, a powerful narcotic to insects.
As the coniine takes effect, the fly grows sluggish, stumbles, and falls down the funnel into a pool of liquid at the base, where he drowns.
Enzymes and bacteria in the liquid slowly break his body down into microscopic particles the pitcher plant can consume through its leaves.
Occasionally, larger prey also tumbles into the fatal funnel of the pitcher plant.
The second victim faces off with the sticky sundew plant.
The sundews tiny leaves are equipped with a viscous secretion called mucilage.
The ant is swiftly trapped in this goo.
As she struggles, enzymes begin to digest her body.
Special tentacles sense her movement and curl around her, clenching her in their suffocating grip.
Once she asphyxiates, which can happen in under an hour, the tentacles unfurl again to snare their next victim.
Two down, four to go.
The next target meets his end underground, in the coils of the corkscrew plant.
He enters the roots through a tiny slit in search of food.
But inside, he quickly loses his way through the tangled labyrinth.
A forest of curved hairs prevents his escape, guiding him into a central chamber with flesh-digesting enzymes and deadly low levels of oxygen.
In the murky depths of a nearby pond, a tadpole unwittingly swims into the path of the bladderwort, the speediest of all carnivorous plants.
She treads on the bladderworts trigger, and in milliseconds, a trapdoor swings open and sucks her in.
Trapped half in and half out, she struggles to free herself while the part of her body inside the plant gets digested.
Over the next few hours, her writhing sets the trap off repeatedly, each time bringing her deeper into the plant to be digested alive bit by bit.
Meanwhile, this beetle is bewitched by sweet-smelling nectar.
The scent draws him closer and closer until he lands on the leaves of the worlds most infamous carnivorous plant.
His landing triggers tiny hairs on the surface of the leaves, and the jaws of the venus fly trap snap shut around him.
The spikes interlock to seal his fate.
Once closed, the leaves act like an external stomach that digests the beetles soft tissues.
When they open again a few days later, only the dry husk of his exoskeleton remains.
The mayfly is the last creature standing.
As she approaches the butterwort plant, she heads for the flowers that wave high above the plants globs of adhesive goo.
She alights on the petals, drinks the nectar, and takes off unscathed.
These long flower stalks keep certain insects away from the carnivores traps a way of separating pollinators from food.
Off the mayfly buzzes to live a long and fruitful life oh.
I want to tell you a story about stories.
And I want to tell you this story because I think we need to remember that sometimes the stories we tell each other are more than just tales or entertainment or narratives.
They're also vehicles for sowing inspiration and ideas across our societies and across time.
The story I'm about to tell you is about how one of the most advanced technological achievements of the modern era has its roots in stories, and how some of the most important transformations yet to come might also.
The story begins over 300 years ago, when Galileo Galilei first learned of the recent Dutch invention that took two pieces of shaped glass and put them in a long tube and thereby extended human sight farther than ever before.
When Galileo turned his new telescope to the heavens and to the Moon in particular, he discovered something incredible.
These are pages from Galileo's book "Sidereus Nuncius," published in 1610.
And in them, he revealed to the world what he had discovered.
And what he discovered was that the Moon was not just a celestial object wandering across the night sky, but rather, it was a world, a world with high, sunlit mountains and dark "mare," the Latin word for seas.
And once this new world and the Moon had been discovered, people immediately began to think about how to travel there.
And just as importantly, they began to write stories about how that might happen and what those voyages might be like.
One of the first people to do so was actually the Bishop of Hereford, a man named Francis Godwin.
Godwin wrote a story about a Spanish explorer, Domingo Gonsales, who ended up marooned on the island of St. Helena in the middle of the Atlantic, and there, in an effort to get home, developed a machine, an invention, to harness the power of the local wild geese to allow him to fly -- and eventually to embark on a voyage to the Moon.
Godwin's book, "The Man in the Moone, or a Discourse of a Voyage Thither," was only published posthumously and anonymously in 1638, likely on account of the number of controversial ideas that it contained, including an endorsement of the Copernican view of the universe that put the Sun at the center of the Solar System, as well as a pre-Newtonian concept of gravity that had the idea that the weight of an object would decrease with increasing distance from Earth.
And that's to say nothing of his idea of a goose machine that could go to the Moon.
(Laughter) And while this idea of a voyage to the Moon by goose machine might not seem particularly insightful or technically creative to us today, what's important is that Godwin described getting to the Moon not by a dream or by magic, as Johannes Kepler had written about, but rather, through human invention.
And it was this idea that we could build machines that could travel into the heavens, that would plant its seed in minds across the generations.
The idea was next taken up by his contemporary, John Wilkins, then just a young student at Oxford, but later, one of the founders of the Royal Society.
John Wilkins took the idea of space travel in Godwin's text seriously and wrote not just another story but a nonfiction philosophical treatise, entitled, "Discovery of the New World in the Moon, or, a Discourse Tending to Prove that 'tis Probable There May Be Another Habitable World in that Planet."
And note, by the way, that word "habitable."
That idea in itself would have been a powerful incentive for people thinking about how to build machines that could go there.
In his books, Wilkins seriously considered a number of technical methods for spaceflight, and it remains to this day the earliest known nonfiction account of how we might travel to the Moon.
Other stories would soon follow, most notably by Cyrano de Bergerac, with his "Lunar Tales."
By the mid-17th century, the idea of people building machines that could travel to the heavens was growing in complexity and technical nuance.
And yet, in the late 17th century, this intellectual progress effectively ceased.
People still told stories about getting to the Moon, but they relied on the old ideas or, once again, on dreams or on magic.
Why?
Well, because the discovery of the laws of gravity by Newton and the invention of the vacuum pump by Robert Hooke and Robert Boyle meant that people now understood that a condition of vacuum existed between the planets, and consequentially between the Earth and the Moon.
And they had no way of overcoming this, no way of thinking about overcoming this.
And so, for well over a century, the idea of a voyage to the Moon made very little intellectual progress until the rise of the Industrial Revolution and the development of steam engines and boilers and most importantly, pressure vessels.
And these gave people the tools to think about how they could build a capsule that could resist the vacuum of space.
So it was in this context, in 1835, that the next great story of spaceflight was written, by Edgar Allan Poe.
Now, today we think of Poe in terms of gothic poems and telltale hearts and ravens.
But he considered himself a technical thinker.
He grew up in Baltimore, the first American city with gas street lighting, and he was fascinated by the technological revolution that he saw going on all around him.
He considered his own greatest work not to be one of his gothic tales but rather his epic prose poem "Eureka," in which he expounded his own personal view of the cosmographical nature of the universe.
In his stories, he would describe in fantastical technical detail machines and contraptions, and nowhere was he more influential in this than in his short story, "The Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall."
It's a story of an unemployed bellows maker in Rotterdam, who, depressed and tired of life -- this is Poe, after all -- and deeply in debt, he decides to build a hermetically enclosed balloon-borne carriage that is launched into the air by dynamite and from there, floats through the vacuum of space all the way to the lunar surface.
And importantly, he did not develop this story alone, for in the appendix to his tale, he explicitly acknowledged Godwin's "A Man in the Moone" from over 200 years earlier as an influence, calling it "a singular and somewhat ingenious little book."
And although this idea of a balloon-borne voyage to the Moon may seem not much more technically sophisticated than the goose machine, in fact, Poe was sufficiently detailed in the description of the construction of the device and in terms of the orbital dynamics of the voyage that it could be diagrammed in the very first spaceflight encyclopedia as a mission in the 1920s.
And it was this attention to detail, or to "verisimilitude," as he called it, that would influence the next great story: Jules Verne's "From the Earth to the Moon," written in 1865.
And it's a story that has a remarkable legacy and a remarkable similarity to the real voyages to the Moon that would take place over a hundred years later.
Because in the story, the first voyage to the Moon takes place from Florida, with three people on board, in a trip that takes three days -- exactly the parameters that would prevail during the Apollo program itself.
And in an explicit tribute to Poe's influence on him, Verne situated the group responsible for this feat in the book in Baltimore, at the Baltimore Gun Club, with its members shouting, "Cheers for Edgar Poe!"
as they began to lay out their plans for their conquest of the Moon.
And just as Verne was influenced by Poe, so, too, would Verne's own story go on to influence and inspire the first generation of rocket scientists.
The two great pioneers of liquid fuel rocketry in Russia and in Germany, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky and Hermann Oberth, both traced their own commitment to the field of spaceflight to their reading "From the Earth to the Moon" as teenagers, and then subsequently committing themselves to trying to make that story a reality.
And Verne's story was not the only one in the 19th century with a long arm of influence.
On the other side of the Atlantic, H.G. Wells's "War of the Worlds" directly inspired a young man in Massachusetts, Robert Goddard.
And it was after reading "War of the Worlds" that Goddard wrote in his diary, one day in the late 1890s, of resting while trimming a cherry tree on his family's farm and having a vision of a spacecraft taking off from the valley below and ascending into the heavens.
And he decided then and there that he would commit the rest of his life to the development of the spacecraft that he saw in his mind's eye.
And he did exactly that.
Throughout his career, he would celebrate that day as his anniversary day, his cherry tree day, and he would regularly read and reread the works of Verne and of Wells in order to renew his inspiration and his commitment over the decades of labor and effort that would be required to realize the first part of his dream: the flight of a liquid fuel rocket, which he finally achieved in 1926.
So it was while reading "From the Earth to the Moon" and "The War of the Worlds" that the first pioneers of astronautics were inspired to dedicate their lives to solving the problems of spaceflight.
And it was their treatises and their works in turn that inspired the first technical communities and the first projects of spaceflight, thus creating a direct chain of influence that goes from Godwin to Poe to Verne to the Apollo program and to the present-day communities of spaceflight.
So why I have told you all this?
Is it just because I think it's cool, or because I'm just weirdly fascinated by stories of 17th- and 19th-century science fiction?
It is, admittedly, partly that.
But I also think that these stories remind us of the cultural processes driving spaceflight and even technological innovation more broadly.
As an economist working at NASA, I spend time thinking about the economic origins of our movement out into the cosmos.
And when you look before the investments of billionaire tech entrepreneurs and before the Cold War Space Race, and even before the military investments in liquid fuel rocketry, the economic origins of spaceflight are found in stories and in ideas.
It was in these stories that the first concepts for spaceflight were articulated.
And it was through these stories that the narrative of a future for humanity in space began to propagate from mind to mind, eventually creating an intergenerational intellectual community that would iterate on the ideas for spacecraft until such a time as they could finally be built.
This process has now been going on for over 300 years, and the result is a culture of spaceflight.
It's a culture that involves thousands of people over hundreds of years.
Because for hundreds of years, some of us have looked at the stars and longed to go.
And because for hundreds of years, some of us have dedicated our labors to the development of the concepts and systems required to make those voyages possible.
I also wanted to tell you about Godwin, Poe and Verne because I think their stories also tell us of the importance of the stories that we tell each other about the future more generally.
Because these stories don't just transmit information or ideas.
They can also nurture passions, passions that can lead us to dedicate our lives to the realization of important projects.
Which means that these stories can and do influence social and technological forces centuries into the future.
I think we need to realize this and remember it when we tell our stories.
We need to work hard to write stories that don't just show us the possible dystopian paths we may take for a fear that the more dystopian stories we tell each other, the more we plant seeds for possible dystopian futures.
Instead we need to tell stories that plant the seeds, if not necessarily for utopias, then at least for great new projects of technological, societal and institutional transformation.
And if we think of this idea that the stories we tell each other can transform the future is fanciful or impossible, then I think we need to remember the example of this, our voyage to the Moon, an idea from the 17th century that propagated culturally for over 300 years until it could finally be realized.
So, we need to write new stories, stories that, 300 years in the future, people will be able to look back upon and remark how they inspired us to new heights and to new shores, how they showed us new paths and new possibilities, and how they shaped our world for the better.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You hear that this is the era of environment -- or biology, or information technology ...
Well, it's the era of a lot of different things that we're in right now. But one thing for sure: it's the era of change. There's more change going on than ever has occurred in the history of human life on earth.
And you all sort of know it, but it's hard to get it so that you really understand it.
And I've tried to put together something that's a good start for this.
I've tried to show in this -- though the color doesn't come out -- that what I'm concerned with is the little 50-year time bubble that you are in. You tend to be interested in a generation past, a generation future -- your parents, your kids, things you can change over the next few decades -- and this 50-year time bubble you kind of move along in. And in that 50 years, if you look at the population curve, you find the population of humans on the earth more than doubles and we're up three-and-a-half times since I was born. When you have a new baby, by the time that kid gets out of high school more people will be added than existed on earth when I was born.
This is unprecedented, and it's big.
Where it goes in the future is questioned. So that's the human part.
Now, the human part related to animals: look at the left side of that.
What I call the human portion -- humans and their livestock and pets -- versus the natural portion -- all the other wild animals and just -- these are vertebrates and all the birds, etc., in the land and air, not in the water. How does it balance?
Certainly, 10,000 years ago, the civilization's beginning, the human portion was less than one tenth of one percent. Let's look at it now.
You follow this curve and you see the whiter spot in the middle -- that's your 50-year time bubble. Humans, livestock and pets are now 97 percent of that integrated total mass on earth and all wild nature is three percent. We have won. The next generation doesn't even have to worry about this game -- it is over.
And the biggest problem came in the last 25 years: it went from 25 percent up to that 97 percent.
And this really is a sobering picture upon realizing that we, humans, are in charge of life on earth; we're like the capricious Gods of old Greek myths, kind of playing with life -- and not a great deal of wisdom injected into it.
Now, the third curve is information technology.
This is Moore's Law plotted here, which relates to density of information, but it has been pretty good for showing a lot of other things about information technology -- computers, their use, Internet, etc. And what's important is it just goes straight up through the top of the curve, and has no real limits to it. Now try and contrast these.
This is the size of the earth going through that same -- (Laughter) -- frame. And to make it really clear, I've put all four on one graph.
There's no need to see the little detailed words on it.
That first one is humans-versus-nature; we've won, there's no more gain. Human population.
And so if you're looking for growth industries to get into, that's not a good one -- protecting natural creatures. Human population is going up; it's going to continue for quite a while.
Good business in obstetricians, morticians, and farming, housing, etc. -- they all deal with human bodies, which require being fed, transported, housed and so on. And the information technology, which connects to our brains, has no limit -- now, that is a wonderful field to be in. You're looking for growth opportunity?
It's just going up through the roof.
And then, the size of the Earth. Somehow making these all compatible with the Earth looks like a pretty bad industry to be involved with.
So, that's the stage out of all this. I find, for reasons I don't understand, I really do have a goal.
And the goal is that the world be desirable and sustainable when my kids reach my age -- and I think that's -- in other words, the next generation. I think that's a goal that we probably all share.
I think it's a hopeless goal. Technologically, it's achievable; economically, it's achievable; politically, it means sort of the habits, institutions of people -- it's impossible.
The institutions of the past with all their inertia are just irrelevant for the future, except they're there and we have to deal with them. I spend about 15 percent of my time trying to save the world, the other 85 percent, the usual -- and whatever else we devote ourselves to.
And in that 15 percent, the main focus is on human mind, thinking skills, somehow trying to unleash kids from the straightjacket of school, which is putting information and dogma into them, get them so they really think, ask tough questions, argue about serious subjects, don't believe everything that's in the book, think broadly or creative. They can be.
Our school systems are very flawed and do not reward you for the things that are important in life or for the survival of civilization; they reward you for a lot of learning and sopping up stuff.
We can't go into that today because there isn't time -- it's a broad subject. One thing for sure, in the future there is an essential feature -- necessary, but not sufficient -- which is doing more with less. We've got to be doing things with more efficiency using less energy, less material.
Your great-great grandparents got by on muscle power, and yet we all think there's this huge power that's essential for our lifestyle. And with all the wonderful technology we have we can do things that are much more efficient: conserve, recycle, etc.
Let me just rush very quickly through things that we've done.
Human-powered airplane -- Gossamer Condor sort of started me in this direction in 1976 and 77, winning the Kremer prize in aviation history, followed by the Albatross. And we began making various odd planes and creatures.
Here's a giant flying replica of a pterosaur that has no tail.
Trying to have it fly straight is like trying to shoot an arrow with the feathered end forward. It was a tough job, and boy it made me have a lot of respect for nature.
This was the full size of the original creature.
We did things on land, in the air, on water -- vehicles of all different kinds, usually with some electronics or electric power systems in them. I find they're all the same, whether its land, air or water.
I'll be focusing on the air here. This is a solar-powered airplane -- 165 miles carrying a person from France to England as a symbol that solar power is going to be an important part of our future. Then we did the solar car for General Motors -- the Sunracer -- that won the race in Australia.
We got a lot of people thinking about electric cars, what you could do with them. A few years later, when we suggested to GM that now is the time and we could do a thing called the Impact, they sponsored it, and here's the Impact that we developed with them on their programs. This is the demonstrator. And they put huge effort into turning it into a commercial product.
With that preamble, let's show the first two-minute videotape, which shows a little airplane for surveillance and moving to a giant airplane.
Narrator: A tiny airplane, the AV Pointer serves for surveillance -- in effect, a pair of roving eyeglasses. A cutting-edge example of where miniaturization can lead if the operator is remote from the vehicle. It is convenient to carry, assemble and launch by hand. Battery-powered, it is silent and rarely noticed.
It sends high-resolution video pictures back to the operator.
With onboard GPS, it can navigate autonomously, and it is rugged enough to self-land without damage.
The modern sailplane is superbly efficient.
Some can glide as flat as 60 feet forward for every foot of descent.
They are powered only by the energy they can extract from the atmosphere -- an atmosphere nature stirs up by solar energy.
Humans and soaring birds have found nature to be generous in providing replenishable energy. Sailplanes have flown over 1,000 miles, and the altitude record is over 50,000 feet.
(Music) The Solar Challenger was made to serve as a symbol that photovoltaic cells can produce real power and will be part of the world's energy future.
In 1981, it flew 163 miles from Paris to England, solely on the power of sunbeams, and established a basis for the Pathfinder.
(Music) The message from all these vehicles is that ideas and technology can be harnessed to produce remarkable gains in doing more with less -- gains that can help us attain a desirable balance between technology and nature. The stakes are high as we speed toward a challenging future.
Buckminster Fuller said it clearly: "there are no passengers on spaceship Earth, only crew. We, the crew, can and must do more with less -- much less."
Paul MacCready: If we could have the second video, the one-minute, put in as quickly as you can, which -- this will show the Pathfinder airplane in some flights this past year in Hawaii, and will show a sequence of some of the beauty behind it after it had just flown to 71,530 feet -- higher than any propeller airplane has ever flown.
It's amazing: just on the puny power of the sun -- by having a super lightweight plane, you're able to get it up there.
It's part of a long-term program NASA sponsored.
And we worked very closely with the whole thing being a team effort, and with wonderful results like that flight.
And we're working on a bigger plane -- 220-foot span -- and an intermediate-size, one with a regenerative fuel cell that can store excess energy during the day, feed it back at night, and stay up 65,000 feet for months at a time.
(Music) Ray Morgan's voice will come in here.
There he's the project manager. Anything they do is certainly a team effort. He ran this program. Here's ...
some things he showed as a celebration at the very end.
Ray Morgan: We'd just ended a seven-month deployment of Hawaii.
For those who live on the mainland, it was tough being away from home.
The friendly support, the quiet confidence, congenial hospitality shown by our Hawaiian and military hosts -- (Music) this is starting -- made the experience enjoyable and unforgettable.
PM: We have real-time IR scans going out through the Internet while the plane is flying. And it's exploring without polluting the stratosphere. That's its goal: the stratosphere, the blanket that really controls the radiation of the earth and permits life on earth to be the success that it is -- probing that is very important. And also we consider it as a sort of poor man's stationary satellite, because it can stay right overhead for months at a time, 2,000 times closer than the real GFC synchronous satellite.
We couldn't bring one here to fly it and show you.
But now let's look at the other end.
In the video you saw that nine-pound or eight-pound Pointer airplane surveillance drone that Keenan has developed and just done a remarkable job. Where some have servos that have gotten down to, oh, 18 or 25 grams, his weigh one-third of a gram. And what he's going to bring out here is a surveillance drone that weighs about 2 ounces -- that includes the video camera, the batteries that run it, the telemetry, the receiver and so on. And we'll fly it, we hope, with the same success that we had last night when we did the practice.
So Matt Keenan, just any time you're -- all right -- ready to let her go. But first, we're going to make sure that it's appearing on the screen, so you see what it sees.
You can imagine yourself being a mouse or fly inside of it, looking out of its camera.
Matt Keenan: It's switched on.
PM: But now we're trying to get the video. There we go.
MK: Can you bring up the house lights?
PM: Yeah, the house lights and we'll see you all better and be able to fly the plane better.
MK: All right, we'll try to do a few laps around and bring it back in.
Here we go.
(Applause) PM: The video worked right for the first few and I don't know why it -- there it goes.
Oh, that was only a minute, but I think you'd be safe to have that near the end of the flight, perhaps.
We get to do the classic.
All right.
If this hits you, it will not hurt you.
(Laughter) OK.
(Applause) Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause) But now, as they say in infomercials, we have something much better for you, which we're working on: planes that are only six inches -- 15 centimeters -- in size.
And Matt's plane was on the cover of Popular Science last month, showing what this can lead to. And in a while, something this size will have GPS and a video camera in it. We've had one of these fly nine miles through the air at 35 miles an hour with just a little battery in it.
But there's a lot of technology going.
There are just milestones along the way of some remarkable things.
This one doesn't have the video in it, but you get a little feel from what it can do.
OK, here we go.
(Laughter) MK: Sorry.
OK.
(Applause) PM: If you can pass it down when you're done. Yeah, I think -- I lost a little orientation; I looked up into this light.
It hit the building. And the building was poorly placed, actually.
(Laughter) But you're beginning to see what can be done.
We're working on projects now -- even wing-flapping things the size of hawk moths -- DARPA contracts, working with Caltech, UCLA.
Where all this leads, I don't know. Is it practical? I don't know.
But like any basic research, when you're really forced to do things that are way beyond existing technology, you can get there with micro-technology, nanotechnology.
You can do amazing things when you realize what nature has been doing all along. As you get to these small scales, you realize we have a lot to learn from nature -- not with 747s -- but when you get down to the nature's realm, nature has 200 million years of experience.
It never makes a mistake. Because if you make a mistake, you don't leave any progeny.
We should have nothing but success stories from nature, for you or for birds, and we're learning a lot from its fascinating subjects.
In concluding, I want to get back to the big picture and I have just two final slides to try and put it in perspective.
The first I'll just read. At last, I put in three sentences and had it say what I wanted.
Over billions of years on a unique sphere, chance has painted a thin covering of life -- complex, improbable, wonderful and fragile. Suddenly, we humans -- a recently arrived species, no longer subject to the checks and balances inherent in nature -- have grown in population, technology and intelligence to a position of terrible power. We now wield the paintbrush.
And that's serious: we're not very bright. We're short on wisdom; we're high on technology. Where's it going to lead?
Well, inspired by the sentences, I decided to wield the paintbrush.
Every 25 years I do a picture. Here's the one -- tries to show that the world isn't getting any bigger.
Sort of a timeline, very non-linear scale, nature rates and trilobites and dinosaurs, and eventually we saw some humans with caves ... Birds were flying overhead, after pterosaurs.
And then we get to the civilization above the little TV set with a gun on it. Then traffic jams, and power systems, and some dots for digital. Where it's going to lead -- I have no idea.
And so I just put robotic and natural cockroaches out there, but you can fill in whatever you want. This is not a forecast.
This is a warning, and we have to think seriously about it.
And that time when this is happening is not 100 years or 500 years.
Things are going on this decade, next decade; it's a very short time that we have to decide what we are going to do.
And if we can get some agreement on where we want the world to be -- desirable, sustainable when your kids reach your age -- I think we actually can reach it. Now, I said this was a warning, not a forecast. That was before -- I painted this before we started in on making robotic versions of hawk moths and cockroaches, and now I'm beginning to wonder seriously -- was this more of a forecast than I wanted?
I personally think the surviving intelligent life form on earth is not going to be carbon-based; it's going to be silicon-based.
And so where it all goes, I don't know.
The one final bit of sparkle we'll put in at the very end here is an utterly impractical flight vehicle, which is a little ornithopter wing-flapping device that -- rubber-band powered -- that we'll show you.
MK: 32 gram. Sorry, one gram.
PM: Last night we gave it a few too many turns and it tried to bash the roof out also. It's about a gram.
The tube there's hollow, about paper-thin.
And if this lands on you, I assure you it will not hurt you.
But if you reach out to grab it or hold it, you will destroy it.
So, be gentle, just act like a wooden Indian or something.
And when it comes down -- and we'll see how it goes.
We consider this to be sort of the spirit of TED.
(Applause) And you wonder, is it practical? And it turns out if I had not been -- (Laughter) (Applause) Unfortunately, we have some light bulb changes.
We can probably get it down, but it's possible it's gone up to a greater destiny up there -- (Laughter) -- than it ever had. And I wanted to make -- (Applause) just -- (Applause) But I want to make just two points. One is, you think it's frivolous; there's nothing to it. And yet if I had not been making ornithopters like that, a little bit cruder, in 1939 -- a long, long time ago -- there wouldn't have been a Gossamer Condor, there wouldn't have been an Albatross, a Solar Challenger, there wouldn't be an Impact car, there wouldn't be a mandate on zero-emission vehicles in California.
A lot of these things -- or similar -- would have happened some time, probably a decade later. I didn't realize at the time I was doing inquiry-based, hands-on things with teams, like they're trying to get in education systems.
So I think that, as a symbol, it's important.
And I believe that also is important. You can think of it as a sort of a symbol for learning and TED that somehow gets you thinking of technology and nature, and puts it all together in things that are -- that make this conference, I think, more important than any that's taken place in this country in this decade.
Thank you. (Applause)
First Kiss Her mouth fell into my mouth like a summer snow, like a 5th season, like a fresh Eden, like Eden when Eve made God whimper with the liquid tilt of her hips her kiss hurt like that I mean, it was as if shed mixed the sweat of an angel with the taste of a tangerine, I swear. My mouth had been a helmet forever greased with secrets, my mouth a dead-end street a little bit lit by teethmy heart, a clam slammed shut at the bottom of a dark, but her mouth pulled up like a baby-blue Cadillac packed with canaries driven by a toucanI swear those lips said bright wings when we kissed, wild and preciseas if she were teaching a seahorse to speak her mouth so careful, chumming the first vowel from my throat until my brain was a piano banged loud, hammered like that it was like, I swear her tongue was Saturns 7th moon hot like that, hot and cold and circling, circling, turning me into a glad planet sun on one side, night pouring her slow hand over the other: one fire flying the kite of another.
Her kiss, I swearif the Great Mother rushed open the moon like a gift and you were there to feel your shadow finally unhooked from your wrist.
Thatd be it, but even sweeter like a riot of peg-legged priests on pogo-sticks, up and up, this way and this, not falling but on and on like that, badly behaved but holyI swear! That kiss: both lips utterly committed to the world like a Peace Corps, like a free store, forever and always a new cityno locks, no walls, just doorslike that, I swear, like that.
Well, it's great to be here.
We've heard a lot about the promise of technology, and the peril.
I've been quite interested in both.
If we could convert 0.03 percent of the sunlight that falls on the earth into energy, we could meet all of our projected needs for 2030.
We can't do that today because solar panels are heavy, expensive and very inefficient.
There are nano-engineered designs, which at least have been analyzed theoretically, that show the potential to be very lightweight, very inexpensive, very efficient, and we'd be able to actually provide all of our energy needs in this renewable way.
Nano-engineered fuel cells could provide the energy where it's needed.
That's a key trend, which is decentralization, moving from centralized nuclear power plants and liquid natural gas tankers to decentralized resources that are environmentally more friendly, a lot more efficient and capable and safe from disruption.
Bono spoke very eloquently, that we have the tools, for the first time, to address age-old problems of disease and poverty.
Most regions of the world are moving in that direction.
In 1990, in East Asia and the Pacific region, there were 500 million people living in poverty -- that number now is under 200 million.
The World Bank projects by 2011, it will be under 20 million, which is a reduction of 95 percent.
I did enjoy Bono's comment linking Haight-Ashbury to Silicon Valley.
Being from the Massachusetts high-tech community myself, I'd point out that we were hippies also in the 1960s, although we hung around Harvard Square.
But we do have the potential to overcome disease and poverty, and I'm going to talk about those issues, if we have the will.
Kevin Kelly talked about the acceleration of technology.
That's been a strong interest of mine, and a theme that I've developed for some 30 years.
I realized that my technologies had to make sense when I finished a project.
That invariably, the world was a different place when I would introduce a technology.
And, I noticed that most inventions fail, not because the R&amp;D department can't get it to work -- if you look at most business plans, they will actually succeed if given the opportunity to build what they say they're going to build -- and 90 percent of those projects or more will fail, because the timing is wrong -- not all the enabling factors will be in place when they're needed.
So I began to be an ardent student of technology trends, and track where technology would be at different points in time, and began to build the mathematical models of that.
It's kind of taken on a life of its own.
I've got a group of 10 people that work with me to gather data on key measures of technology in many different areas, and we build models.
And you'll hear people say, well, we can't predict the future.
And if you ask me, will the price of Google be higher or lower than it is today three years from now, that's very hard to say.
Will WiMax CDMA G3 be the wireless standard three years from now? That's hard to say.
But if you ask me, what will it cost for one MIPS of computing in 2010, or the cost to sequence a base pair of DNA in 2012, or the cost of sending a megabyte of data wirelessly in 2014, it turns out that those are very predictable.
There are remarkably smooth exponential curves that govern price performance, capacity, bandwidth.
And I'm going to show you a small sample of this, but there's really a theoretical reason why technology develops in an exponential fashion.
And a lot of people, when they think about the future, think about it linearly.
They think they're going to continue to develop a problem or address a problem using today's tools, at today's pace of progress, and fail to take into consideration this exponential growth.
The Genome Project was a controversial project in 1990.
We had our best Ph.D. students, our most advanced equipment around the world, we got 1/10,000th of the project done, so how're we going to get this done in 15 years?
And 10 years into the project, the skeptics were still going strong -- says, "You're two-thirds through this project, and you've managed to only sequence a very tiny percentage of the whole genome."
But it's the nature of exponential growth that once it reaches the knee of the curve, it explodes.
Most of the project was done in the last few years of the project.
It took us 15 years to sequence HIV -- we sequenced SARS in 31 days.
So we are gaining the potential to overcome these problems.
I'm going to show you just a few examples of how pervasive this phenomena is.
The actual paradigm-shift rate, the rate of adopting new ideas, is doubling every decade, according to our models.
These are all logarithmic graphs, so as you go up the levels it represents, generally multiplying by factor of 10 or 100.
It took us half a century to adopt the telephone, the first virtual-reality technology.
Cell phones were adopted in about eight years.
If you put different communication technologies on this logarithmic graph, television, radio, telephone were adopted in decades.
Recent technologies -- like the PC, the web, cell phones -- were under a decade.
Now this is an interesting chart, and this really gets at the fundamental reason why an evolutionary process -- and both biology and technology are evolutionary processes -- accelerate.
They work through interaction -- they create a capability, and then it uses that capability to bring on the next stage.
So the first step in biological evolution, the evolution of DNA -- actually it was RNA came first -- took billions of years, but then evolution used that information-processing backbone to bring on the next stage.
So the Cambrian Explosion, when all the body plans of the animals were evolved, took only 10 million years. It was 200 times faster.
And then evolution used those body plans to evolve higher cognitive functions, and biological evolution kept accelerating.
It's an inherent nature of an evolutionary process.
So Homo sapiens, the first technology-creating species, the species that combined a cognitive function with an opposable appendage -- and by the way, chimpanzees don't really have a very good opposable thumb -- so we could actually manipulate our environment with a power grip and fine motor coordination, and use our mental models to actually change the world and bring on technology.
But anyway, the evolution of our species took hundreds of thousands of years, and then working through interaction, evolution used, essentially, the technology-creating species to bring on the next stage, which were the first steps in technological evolution.
And the first step took tens of thousands of years -- stone tools, fire, the wheel -- kept accelerating.
We always used then the latest generation of technology to create the next generation.
Printing press took a century to be adopted; the first computers were designed pen-on-paper -- now we use computers.
And we've had a continual acceleration of this process.
Now by the way, if you look at this on a linear graph, it looks like everything has just happened, but some observer says, "Well, Kurzweil just put points on this graph that fall on that straight line."
So, I took 15 different lists from key thinkers, like the Encyclopedia Britannica, the Museum of Natural History, Carl Sagan's Cosmic Calendar on the same -- and these people were not trying to make my point; these were just lists in reference works, and I think that's what they thought the key events were in biological evolution and technological evolution.
And again, it forms the same straight line. You have a little bit of thickening in the line because people do have disagreements, what the key points are, there's differences of opinion when agriculture started, or how long the Cambrian Explosion took.
But you see a very clear trend.
There's a basic, profound acceleration of this evolutionary process.
Information technologies double their capacity, price performance, bandwidth, every year.
And that's a very profound explosion of exponential growth.
A personal experience, when I was at MIT -- computer taking up about the size of this room, less powerful than the computer in your cell phone.
But Moore's Law, which is very often identified with this exponential growth, is just one example of many, because it's basically a property of the evolutionary process of technology.
I put 49 famous computers on this logarithmic graph -- by the way, a straight line on a logarithmic graph is exponential growth -- that's another exponential.
It took us three years to double our price performance of computing in 1900, two years in the middle; we're now doubling it every one year.
And that's exponential growth through five different paradigms.
Moore's Law was just the last part of that, where we were shrinking transistors on an integrated circuit, but we had electro-mechanical calculators, relay-based computers that cracked the German Enigma Code, vacuum tubes in the 1950s predicted the election of Eisenhower, discreet transistors used in the first space flights and then Moore's Law.
Every time one paradigm ran out of steam, another paradigm came out of left field to continue the exponential growth.
They were shrinking vacuum tubes, making them smaller and smaller.
That hit a wall. They couldn't shrink them and keep the vacuum.
Whole different paradigm -- transistors came out of the woodwork.
In fact, when we see the end of the line for a particular paradigm, it creates research pressure to create the next paradigm.
And because we've been predicting the end of Moore's Law for quite a long time -- the first prediction said 2002, until now it says 2022.
But by the teen years, the features of transistors will be a few atoms in width, and we won't be able to shrink them any more.
That'll be the end of Moore's Law, but it won't be the end of the exponential growth of computing, because chips are flat.
We live in a three-dimensional world; we might as well use the third dimension.
We will go into the third dimension and there's been tremendous progress, just in the last few years, of getting three-dimensional, self-organizing molecular circuits to work.
We'll have those ready well before Moore's Law runs out of steam.
Supercomputers -- same thing.
Processor performance on Intel chips, the average price of a transistor -- 1968, you could buy one transistor for a dollar.
You could buy 10 million in 2002.
It's pretty remarkable how smooth an exponential process that is.
I mean, you'd think this is the result of some tabletop experiment, but this is the result of worldwide chaotic behavior -- countries accusing each other of dumping products, IPOs, bankruptcies, marketing programs.
You would think it would be a very erratic process, and you have a very smooth outcome of this chaotic process.
Just as we can't predict what one molecule in a gas will do -- it's hopeless to predict a single molecule -- yet we can predict the properties of the whole gas, using thermodynamics, very accurately.
It's the same thing here. We can't predict any particular project, but the result of this whole worldwide, chaotic, unpredictable activity of competition and the evolutionary process of technology is very predictable.
And we can predict these trends far into the future.
Unlike Gertrude Stein's roses, it's not the case that a transistor is a transistor.
As we make them smaller and less expensive, the electrons have less distance to travel.
They're faster, so you've got exponential growth in the speed of transistors, so the cost of a cycle of one transistor has been coming down with a halving rate of 1.1 years.
You add other forms of innovation and processor design, you get a doubling of price performance of computing every one year.
And that's basically deflation -- 50 percent deflation.
And it's not just computers. I mean, it's true of DNA sequencing; it's true of brain scanning; it's true of the World Wide Web. I mean, anything that we can quantify, we have hundreds of different measurements of different, information-related measurements -- capacity, adoption rates -- and they basically double every 12, 13, 15 months, depending on what you're looking at.
In terms of price performance, that's a 40 to 50 percent deflation rate.
And economists have actually started worrying about that.
We had deflation during the Depression, but that was collapse of the money supply, collapse of consumer confidence, a completely different phenomena.
This is due to greater productivity, but the economist says, "But there's no way you're going to be able to keep up with that.
If you have 50 percent deflation, people may increase their volume 30, 40 percent, but they won't keep up with it."
But what we're actually seeing is that we actually more than keep up with it.
We've had 28 percent per year compounded growth in dollars in information technology over the last 50 years.
I mean, people didn't build iPods for 10,000 dollars 10 years ago.
As the price performance makes new applications feasible, new applications come to the market.
And this is a very widespread phenomena.
Magnetic data storage -- that's not Moore's Law, it's shrinking magnetic spots, different engineers, different companies, same exponential process.
A key revolution is that we're understanding our own biology in these information terms.
We're understanding the software programs that make our body run.
These were evolved in very different times -- we'd like to actually change those programs.
One little software program, called the fat insulin receptor gene, basically says, "Hold onto every calorie, because the next hunting season may not work out so well."
That was in the interests of the species tens of thousands of years ago.
We'd like to actually turn that program off.
They tried that in animals, and these mice ate ravenously and remained slim and got the health benefits of being slim.
They didn't get diabetes; they didn't get heart disease; they lived 20 percent longer; they got the health benefits of caloric restriction without the restriction.
Four or five pharmaceutical companies have noticed this, felt that would be interesting drug for the human market, and that's just one of the 30,000 genes that affect our biochemistry.
We were evolved in an era where it wasn't in the interests of people at the age of most people at this conference, like myself, to live much longer, because we were using up the precious resources which were better deployed towards the children and those caring for them.
So, life -- long lifespans -- like, that is to say, much more than 30 -- weren't selected for, but we are learning to actually manipulate and change these software programs through the biotechnology revolution.
For example, we can inhibit genes now with RNA interference.
There are exciting new forms of gene therapy that overcome the problem of placing the genetic material in the right place on the chromosome.
There's actually a -- for the first time now, something going to human trials, that actually cures pulmonary hypertension -- a fatal disease -- using gene therapy.
So we'll have not just designer babies, but designer baby boomers.
And this technology is also accelerating.
It cost 10 dollars per base pair in 1990, then a penny in 2000.
It's now under a 10th of a cent.
The amount of genetic data -- basically this shows that smooth exponential growth doubled every year, enabling the genome project to be completed.
Another major revolution: the communications revolution.
The price performance, bandwidth, capacity of communications measured many different ways; wired, wireless is growing exponentially.
The Internet has been doubling in power and continues to, measured many different ways.
This is based on the number of hosts.
Miniaturization -- we're shrinking the size of technology at an exponential rate, both wired and wireless.
These are some designs from Eric Drexler's book -- which we're now showing are feasible with super-computing simulations, where actually there are scientists building molecule-scale robots.
One has one that actually walks with a surprisingly human-like gait, that's built out of molecules.
There are little machines doing things in experimental bases.
The most exciting opportunity is actually to go inside the human body and perform therapeutic and diagnostic functions.
And this is less futuristic than it may sound.
These things have already been done in animals.
There's one nano-engineered device that cures type 1 diabetes. It's blood cell-sized.
They put tens of thousands of these in the blood cell -- they tried this in rats -- it lets insulin out in a controlled fashion, and actually cures type 1 diabetes.
What you're watching is a design of a robotic red blood cell, and it does bring up the issue that our biology is actually very sub-optimal, even though it's remarkable in its intricacy.
Once we understand its principles of operation, and the pace with which we are reverse-engineering biology is accelerating, we can actually design these things to be thousands of times more capable.
An analysis of this respirocyte, designed by Rob Freitas, indicates if you replace 10 percent of your red blood cells with these robotic versions, you could do an Olympic sprint for 15 minutes without taking a breath.
You could sit at the bottom of your pool for four hours -- so, "Honey, I'm in the pool," will take on a whole new meaning.
It will be interesting to see what we do in our Olympic trials.
Presumably we'll ban them, but then we'll have the specter of teenagers in their high schools gyms routinely out-performing the Olympic athletes.
Freitas has a design for a robotic white blood cell.
These are 2020-circa scenarios, but they're not as futuristic as it may sound.
There are four major conferences on building blood cell-sized devices; there are many experiments in animals.
There's actually one going into human trial, so this is feasible technology.
If we come back to our exponential growth of computing, 1,000 dollars of computing is now somewhere between an insect and a mouse brain.
It will intersect human intelligence in terms of capacity in the 2020s, but that'll be the hardware side of the equation.
Where will we get the software?
Well, it turns out we can see inside the human brain, and in fact not surprisingly, the spatial and temporal resolution of brain scanning is doubling every year.
And with the new generation of scanning tools, for the first time we can actually see individual inter-neural fibers and see them processing and signaling in real time -- but then the question is, OK, we can get this data now, but can we understand it?
Doug Hofstadter wonders, well, maybe our intelligence just isn't great enough to understand our intelligence, and if we were smarter, well, then our brains would be that much more complicated, and we'd never catch up to it.
It turns out that we can understand it.
This is a block diagram of a model and simulation of the human auditory cortex that actually works quite well -- in applying psychoacoustic tests, gets very similar results to human auditory perception.
There's another simulation of the cerebellum -- that's more than half the neurons in the brain -- again, works very similarly to human skill formation.
This is at an early stage, but you can show with the exponential growth of the amount of information about the brain and the exponential improvement in the resolution of brain scanning, we will succeed in reverse-engineering the human brain by the 2020s.
We've already had very good models and simulation of about 15 regions out of the several hundred.
All of this is driving exponentially growing economic progress.
We've had productivity go from 30 dollars to 150 dollars per hour of labor in the last 50 years.
E-commerce has been growing exponentially. It's now a trillion dollars.
You might wonder, well, wasn't there a boom and a bust?
That was strictly a capital-markets phenomena.
Wall Street noticed that this was a revolutionary technology, which it was, but then six months later, when it hadn't revolutionized all business models, they figured, well, that was wrong, and then we had this bust.
All right, this is a technology that we put together using some of the technologies we're involved in.
This will be a routine feature in a cell phone.
It would be able to translate from one language to another.
So let me just end with a couple of scenarios.
By 2010 computers will disappear.
They'll be so small, they'll be embedded in our clothing, in our environment.
Images will be written directly to our retina, providing full-immersion virtual reality, augmented real reality. We'll be interacting with virtual personalities.
But if we go to 2029, we really have the full maturity of these trends, and you have to appreciate how many turns of the screw in terms of generations of technology, which are getting faster and faster, we'll have at that point.
I mean, we will have two-to-the-25th-power greater price performance, capacity and bandwidth of these technologies, which is pretty phenomenal.
It'll be millions of times more powerful than it is today.
We'll have completed the reverse-engineering of the human brain, 1,000 dollars of computing will be far more powerful than the human brain in terms of basic raw capacity.
Computers will combine the subtle pan-recognition powers of human intelligence with ways in which machines are already superior, in terms of doing analytic thinking, remembering billions of facts accurately.
Machines can share their knowledge very quickly.
But it's not just an alien invasion of intelligent machines.
We are going to merge with our technology.
These nano-bots I mentioned will first be used for medical and health applications: cleaning up the environment, providing powerful fuel cells and widely distributed decentralized solar panels and so on in the environment.
But they'll also go inside our brain, interact with our biological neurons.
We've demonstrated the key principles of being able to do this.
So, for example, full-immersion virtual reality from within the nervous system, the nano-bots shut down the signals coming from your real senses, replace them with the signals that your brain would be receiving if you were in the virtual environment, and then it'll feel like you're in that virtual environment.
You can go there with other people, have any kind of experience with anyone involving all of the senses.
"Experience beamers," I call them, will put their whole flow of sensory experiences in the neurological correlates of their emotions out on the Internet.
You can plug in and experience what it's like to be someone else.
But most importantly, it'll be a tremendous expansion of human intelligence through this direct merger with our technology, which in some sense we're doing already.
We routinely do intellectual feats that would be impossible without our technology.
Human life expectancy is expanding. It was 37 in 1800, and with this sort of biotechnology, nano-technology revolutions, this will move up very rapidly in the years ahead.
My main message is that progress in technology is exponential, not linear.
Many -- even scientists -- assume a linear model, so they'll say, "Oh, it'll be hundreds of years before we have self-replicating nano-technology assembly or artificial intelligence."
If you really look at the power of exponential growth, you'll see that these things are pretty soon at hand.
And information technology is increasingly encompassing all of our lives, from our music to our manufacturing to our biology to our energy to materials.
We'll be able to manufacture almost anything we need in the 2020s, from information, in very inexpensive raw materials, using nano-technology.
These are very powerful technologies.
They both empower our promise and our peril.
So we have to have the will to apply them to the right problems.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
You're lifting weights.
The first time feels easy, but each lift takes more and more effort until you cant continue.
Inside your arms, the muscles responsible for the lifting have become unable to contract.
Why do our muscles get fatigued?
We often blame lactic acid or running out of energy, but these factors alone dont account for muscle fatigue.
Theres another major contributor: the muscles ability to respond to signals from the brain.
To understand the roots of muscle fatigue, it helps to know how a muscle contracts in response to a signal from a nerve.
These signals travel from the brain to the muscles in a fraction of a second via long, thin cells called motor neurons.
The motor neuron and the muscle cell are separated by a tiny gap, and the exchange of particles across this gap enables the contraction.
On one side of the gap, the motor neuron contains a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine.
On the other side, charged particles, or ions, line the muscle cells membrane: potassium on the inside, and sodium on the outside.
In response to a signal from the brain, the motor neuron releases acetylcholine, which triggers pores on the muscle cell membrane to open.
Sodium flows in, and potassium flows out.
The flux of these charged particles is a crucial step for muscle contraction: the change in charge creates an electrical signal called an action potential that spreads through the muscle cell, stimulating the release of calcium thats stored inside it.
This flood of calcium causes the muscle to contract by enabling proteins buried in the muscle fibers to lock together and ratchet towards each other, pulling the muscle tight.
The energy used to power the contraction comes from a molecule called ATP.
ATP also helps pump the ions back across the membrane afterward, resetting the balance of sodium and potassium on either side.
This whole process repeats every time a muscle contracts.
With each contraction, energy in the form of ATP gets used up, waste products like lactic acid are generated, and some ions drift away from the muscles cell membrane, leaving a smaller and smaller group behind.
Though muscle cells use up ATP as they contract repeatedly, they are always making more, so most of the time even heavily fatigued muscles still have not depleted this energy source.
And though many waste products are acidic, fatigued muscles still maintain pH within normal limits, indicating that the tissue is effectively clearing these wastes.
But eventually, over the course of repeated contractions there may not be sufficient concentrations of potassium, sodium or calcium ions immediately available near the muscle cell membrane to reset the system properly.
So even if the brain sends a signal, the muscle cell cant generate the action potential necessary to contract.
Even when ions like sodium, potassium or calcium are depleted in or around the muscle cell, these ions are plentiful elsewhere in the body.
With a little time, they will flow back to the areas where theyre needed, sometimes with the help of active sodium and potassium pumps.
So if you pause and rest, muscle fatigue will subside as these ions replenish throughout the muscle.
The more regularly you exercise, the longer it takes for muscle fatigue to set in each time.
Thats because the stronger you are, the fewer times this cycle of nerve signal from the brain to contraction in the muscle has to be repeated to lift a certain amount of weight.
Fewer cycles means slower ion depletion, so as your physical fitness improves, you can exercise for longer at the same intensity.
Many muscles grow with exercise, and larger muscles also have bigger stores of ATP and a higher capacity to clear waste, pushing fatigue even farther into the future.
In the 1600s the Dutch East India Company employed hundreds of ships to trade gold, porcelain, spices, and silks around the globe.
But running this massive operation wasnt cheap.
In order to fund their expensive voyages, the company turned to private citizens individuals who could invest money to support the trip in exchange for a share of the ships profits.
This practice allowed the company to afford even grander voyages, increasing profits for both themselves and their savvy investors.
Selling these shares in coffee houses and shipping ports across the continent, the Dutch East India Company unknowingly invented the worlds first stock market.
Since then, companies have been collecting funds from willing investors to support all kinds of businesses.
And today, the stock market has schools, careers, and even whole television channels dedicated to understanding it.
But the modern stock market is significantly more complicated than its original incarnation.
So how do companies and investors use the market today?
Lets imagine a new coffee company that decides to launch on the market.
First, the company will advertise itself to big investors.
If they think the company is a good idea, they get the first crack at investing, and then sponsor the companys initial public offering, or IPO.
This launches the company onto the official public market, where any company or individual who believes the business could be profitable might buy a stock.
Buying stocks makes those investors partial owners in the business.
Their investment helps the company to grow, and as it becomes more successful, more buyers may see potential and start buying stocks.
As demand for those stocks increases, so does their price, increasing the cost for prospective buyers, and raising the value of the company's stocks people already own.
For the company, this increased interest helps fund new initiatives, and also boosts its overall market value by showing how many people are willing to invest in their idea.
However, if for some reason a company starts to seem less profitable the reverse can also happen.
If investors think their stock value is going to decline, theyll sell their stocks with the hopes of making a profit before the company loses more value.
As stocks are sold and demand for the stock goes down, the stock price falls, and with it, the companys market value.
This can leave investors with big losses unless the company starts to look profitable again.
This see-saw of supply and demand is influenced by many factors.
Companies are under the unavoidable influence of market forces such as the fluctuating price of materials, changes in production technology, and the shifting costs of labor.
Investors may be worried about changes in leadership, bad publicity, or larger factors like new laws and trade policies.
And of course, plenty of investors are simply ready to sell valuable stocks and pursue personal interests.
All these variables cause day-to-day noise in the market, which can make companies appear more or less successful.
And in the stock market, appearing to lose value often leads to losing investors, and in turn, losing actual value.
Human confidence in the market has the power to trigger everything from economic booms to financial crises.
And this difficult-to-track variable is why most professionals promote reliable long term investing over trying to make quick cash.
However, experts are constantly building tools in efforts to increase their chances of success in this highly unpredictable system.
But the stock market is not just for the rich and powerful.
With the dawn of the Internet, everyday investors can buy stocks in many of the exact same ways a large investor would.
And as more people educate themselves about this complex system they too can trade stocks, support the businesses they believe in, and pursue their financial goals.
The first step is getting invested.
So what if there were a highly obvious problem right in front of you?
One that everyone was talking about, one that affected you directly.
Would you do everything within your power to fix things before they got worse?
Don't be so sure.
We are all much more likely than any of us would like to admit to miss what's right in front of our eyes.
And in fact, we're sometimes most likely to turn away from things precisely because of the threat that they represent to us, in business, life and the world.
So I want to give you an example from my world, economic policy.
So when Alan Greenspan was head of the Federal Reserve, his entire job was to watch out for problems in the US economy and to make sure that they didn't spin out of control.
So, after 2006, when real estate prices peaked, more and more and more respected leaders and institutions started to sound the alarm bells about risky lending and dangerous market bubbles.
As you know, in 2008 it all came tumbling down.
Banks collapsed, global stock markets lost nearly half their value, millions and millions of people lost their homes to foreclosure.
And at the bottom, nearly one in 10 Americans was out of work.
So after things calmed down a little bit, Greenspan and many others came out with a postmortem and said, "Nobody could have predicted that crisis."
They called it "a black swan."
Something that was unimaginable, unforeseeable and completely improbable.
A total surprise.
Except it wasn't always such a surprise.
For example, my Manhattan apartment nearly doubled in value in less than four years.
I saw the writing on the wall and I sold it.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, a lot of other people also saw the warning, spoke out publicly and they were ignored.
So we didn't know exactly what the crisis was going to look like, not the exact parameters, but we could all tell that the thing coming at us was as dangerous, visible and predictable as a giant gray rhino charging right at us.
The black swan lends itself to the idea that we don't have power over our futures.
And unfortunately, the less control that we think we have, the more likely we are to downplay it or ignore it entirely.
And this dangerous dynamic masks another problem: that most of the problems that we're facing are so probable and obvious, they're things that we can see, but we still don't do anything about.
So I created the gray rhino metaphor to meet what I felt was an urgent need.
To help us to take a fresh look, with the same passion that people had for the black swan, but this time, for the things that were highly obvious, highly probable, but still neglected.
Those are the gray rhinos.
Once you start looking for gray rhinos, you see them in the headlines every day.
And so what I see in the headlines is another big gray rhino, a new highly probable financial crisis.
And I wonder if we've learned anything in the last 10 years.
So if you listen to Washington or Wall Street, you could almost be forgiven for thinking that only smooth sailing laid ahead.
But in China, where I spend a lot of time, the conversation is totally different.
The entire economic team, all the way up to president Xi Jinping himself, talk very specifically and clearly about financial risks as gray rhinos, and how they can tame them.
Now, to be sure, China and the US have very, very different systems of government, which affects what they're able to do or not.
And many of the root causes for their economic problems are totally different.
But it's no secret that both countries have problems with debt, with inequality and with economic productivity.
So how come the conversations are so different?
You could actually ask this question, not just about countries, but about just about everyone.
The auto companies that put safety first and the ones that don't bother to recall their shoddy cars until after people die.
The grandparents who, in preparing for the inevitable -- the ones who have the eulogy written, the menu for the funeral lunch.
(Laughter) My grandparents did.
(Laughter) And everything but the final date chiseled into the gravestone.
But then you have the grandparents on the other side, who don't put their final affairs in order, who don't get rid of all the junk they've been hoarding for decades and decades and leave their kids to deal with it.
So what makes the difference between one side and the other?
Why do some people see things and deal with them, and the other ones just look away?
So the first one has to do with culture, society, the people around you.
If you think that someone around you is going to help pick you up when you fall, you're much more likely to see a danger as being smaller.
And that allows us to take good chances, not just the bad ones.
For example, like risking criticism when you talk about the danger that nobody wants you to talk about.
Or taking the opportunities that are kind of scary, so in their own way are gray rhinos.
So the US has a very individualist culture -- go it alone.
And paradoxically, this makes many Americans much less open to change and taking good risks.
In China, by contrast, people believe that the government is going to keep problems from happening, which might not always be what happens, but people believe it.
They believe they can rely on their families, so that makes them more likely to take certain risks.
Like buying Beijing real estate, or like being more open about the fact that they need to change direction, and in fact, the pace of change in China is absolutely amazing.
Second of all, how much do you know about a situation, how much are you willing to learn?
And are you willing to see things even when it's not what you want?
So many of us are so unlikely to pay attention to the things that we just want to black out, we don't like them.
But we have the opportunity and the ability to correct those blind spots.
I spend a lot of time talking with people of all walks of life about the gray rhinos in their life and their attitudes.
And you might think that the people who are more afraid of risk, who are more sensitive to them, would be the ones who would be less open to change.
But the opposite is actually true.
I've found that the people who are wiling to recognize the problems around them and make plans are the ones who are able to tolerate more risk, good risk, and deal with the bad risk.
And it's because as we seek information, we increase our power to do something about the things that we're afraid of.
And that brings me to my third point.
How much control do you feel that you have over the gray rhinos in your life?
One of the reasons we don't act is that we often feel too helpless.
Think of climate change, it can feel so big, that not a single one of us could make a difference.
So some people go about life denying it.
Other people blame everyone except themselves.
Like my friend who says he's not ever going to give up his SUV until they stop building coal plants in China.
But we have an opportunity to change.
No two of us are the same.
Every single one of us has the opportunity to change our attitudes, our own and those of people around us.
So today, I want to invite all of you to join me in helping to spark an open and honest conversation with the people around you, about the gray rhinos in our world, and be brutally honest about how well we're dealing with them.
I hear so many times in the States, "Well, of course we should deal with obvious problems, but if you don't see what's in front of you, you're either dumb or ignorant."
That's what they say, and I could not disagree more.
If you don't see what's in front of you, you're not dumb, you're not ignorant, you're human.
And once we all recognize that shared vulnerability, that gives us the power to open our eyes, to see what's in front of us and to act before we get trampled.
(Applause)
When I look in the mirror today, I see a justice and education scholar at Columbia University, a youth mentor, an activist and a future New York state senator.
(Cheering) I see all of that and a man who spent a quarter of his life in state prison -- six years, to be exact, starting as a teenager on Rikers Island for an act that nearly cost a man his life.
But what got me from there to here wasn't the punishment I faced as a teenager in adult prison or the harshness of our legal system.
Instead, it was a learning environment of a classroom that introduced me to something I didn't think was possible for me or our justice system as a whole.
A few weeks before my release on parole, a counselor encouraged me to enroll in a new college course being offered in the prison.
It was called Inside Criminal Justice.
That seems pretty straightforward, though, right?
Well, it turns out, the class would be made up of eight incarcerated men and eight assistant district attorneys.
Columbia University psychology professor Geraldine Downey and Manhattan Assistant DA Lucy Lang co-taught the course, and it was the first of its kind.
I can honestly say this wasn't how I imagined starting college.
My mind was blown from day one.
I assumed all the prosecutors in the room would be white.
But I remember walking into the room on the first day of class and seeing three black prosecutors and thinking to myself, "Wow, being a black prosecutor -- that's a thing!"
(Laughter) By the end of the first session, I was all in.
In fact, a few weeks after my release, I found myself doing something I prayed I wouldn't.
I walked right back into prison.
But thankfully, this time it was just as a student, to join my fellow classmates.
And this time, I got to go home when class was over.
In the next session, we talked about what had brought each of us to this point of our lives and into the classroom together.
I eventually got comfortable enough to reveal my truth to everyone in the room about where I came from.
I talked about how my sisters and I watched our mother suffer years of abuse at the hands of our stepfather, escaping, only to find ourselves living in a shelter.
I talked about how I swore an oath to my family to keep them safe.
I even explained how I didn't feel like a teenager at 13, but more like a soldier on a mission.
And like any soldier, this meant carrying an emotional burden on my shoulders, and I hate to say it, but a gun on my waist.
And just a few days after my 17th birthday, that mission completely failed.
As my sister and I were walking to the laundromat, a crowd stopped in front of us.
Two girls out of nowhere attacked my sister.
Still confused about what was happening, I tried to pull one girl away, and just as I did, I felt something brush across my face.
With my adrenaline rushing, I didn't realize a man had leaped out of the crowd and cut me.
As I felt warm blood ooze down my face, and watching him raise his knife toward me again, I turned to defend myself and pulled that gun from my waistband and squeezed the trigger.
Thankfully, he didn't lose his life that day.
My hands shaking and heart racing, I was paralyzed in fear.
From that moment, I felt regret that would never leave me.
I learned later on they attacked my sister in a case of mistaken identity, thinking she was someone else.
It was terrifying, but clear that I wasn't trained, nor was I qualified, to be the soldier that I thought I needed to be.
But in my neighborhood, I only felt safe carrying a weapon.
Now, back in the classroom, after hearing my story, the prosecutors could tell I never wanted to hurt anyone.
I just wanted us to make it home.
I could literally see the gradual change in each of their faces as they heard story after story from the other incarcerated men in the room.
Stories that have trapped many of us within the vicious cycle of incarceration, that most haven't been able to break free of.
And sure -- there are people who commit terrible crimes.
But the stories of these individuals' lives before they commit those acts were the kinds of stories these prosecutors had never heard.
And when it was their turn to speak -- the prosecutors -- I was surprised, too.
They weren't emotionless drones or robocops, preprogrammed to send people to prison.
They were sons and daughters, brothers and sisters.
But most of all, they were good students.
They were ambitious and motivated.
And they believed that they could use the power of law to protect people.
They were on a mission that I could definitely understand.
Midway through the course, Nick, a fellow incarcerated student, poured out his concern that the prosecutors were tiptoeing around the racial bias and discrimination within our criminal justice system.
Now, if you've ever been to prison, you would know it's impossible to talk about justice reform without talking about race.
So we silently cheered for Nick and were eager to hear the prosecutors' response.
And no, I don't remember who spoke first, but when Chauncey Parker, a senior prosecutor, agreed with Nick and said he was committed to ending the mass incarceration of people of color, I believed him.
And I knew we were headed in the right direction.
We now started to move as a team.
We started exploring new possibilities and uncovering truths about our justice system and how real change happens for us.
For me, it wasn't the mandatory programs inside of the prison.
Instead, it was listening to the advice of elders -- men who have been sentenced to spend the rest of their lives in prison.
These men helped me reframe my mindset around manhood.
And they instilled in me all of their aspirations and goals, in the hopes that I would never return to prison, and that I would serve as their ambassador to the free world.
As I talked, I could see the lights turning on for one prosecutor, who said something I thought was obvious: that I had transformed despite my incarceration and not because of it.
It was clear these prosecutors hadn't thought much about what happens to us after they win a conviction.
But through the simple process of sitting in a classroom, these lawyers started to see that keeping us locked up didn't benefit our community or us.
Toward the end of the course, the prosecutors were excited, as we talked about our plans for life after being released.
But they hadn't realized how rough it was actually going to be.
I can literally still see the shock on one of the junior ADA's face when it hit her: the temporary ID given to us with our freedom displayed that we were just released from prison.
She hadn't imagined how many barriers this would create for us as we reenter society.
But I could also see her genuine empathy for the choice we had to make between coming home to a bed in a shelter or a couch in a relative's overcrowded apartment.
What we learned in the class worked its way into concrete policy recommendations.
We presented our proposals to the state Department of Corrections commissioner and to the Manhattan DA, at our graduation in a packed Columbia auditorium.
As a team, I couldn't have imagined a more memorable way to conclude our eight weeks together.
And just 10 months after coming home from prison, I again found myself in a strange room, invited by the commissioner of NYPD to share my perspective at a policing summit.
And while speaking, I recognized a familiar face in the audience.
It was the attorney who prosecuted my case.
Seeing him, I thought about our days in the courtroom seven years earlier, as I listened to him recommend a long prison sentence, as if my young life was meaningless and had no potential.
But this time, the circumstances were different.
I shook off my thoughts and walked over to shake his hand.
He looked happy to see me.
Surprised, but happy.
He acknowledged how proud he was about being in that room with me, and we began a conversation about working together to improve the conditions of our community.
And so today, I carry all of these experiences with me, as I develop the Justice Ambassadors Youth Council at Columbia University, bringing young New Yorkers -- some who have already spent time locked up and others who are still enrolled in high school -- together with city officials.
And in this classroom, everyone will brainstorm ideas about improving the lives of our city's most vulnerable youth before they get tried within the criminal justice system.
This is possible if we do the work.
Our society and justice system has convinced us that we can lock up our problems and punish our way out of social challenges.
But that's not real.
Imagine with me for a second a future where no one can become a prosecutor, a judge, a cop or even a parole officer without first sitting in a classroom to learn from and connect with the very people whose lives will be in their hands.
I'm doing my part to promote the power of conversations and the need for collaborations.
It is through education that we will arrive at a truth that is inclusive and unites us all in the pursuit of justice.
For me, it was a brand-new conversation and a new kind of classroom that showed me how both my mindset and our criminal justice system could be transformed.
They say the truth shall set you free.
But I believe it's education and communication.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I first arrived in beautiful Zimbabwe, it was difficult to understand that 35 percent of the population is HIV positive.
It really wasn't until I was invited to the homes of people that I started to understand the human toll of the epidemic.
For instance, this is Herbert with his grandmother.
When I first met him, he was sitting on his grandmother's lap.
He has been orphaned, as both of his parents died of AIDS, and his grandmother took care of him until he too died of AIDS.
He liked to sit on her lap because he said that it was painful for him to lie in his own bed.
When she got up to make tea, she placed him in my own lap and I had never felt a child that was that emaciated.
Before I left, I actually asked him if I could get him something.
I thought he would ask for a toy, or candy, and he asked me for slippers, because he said that his feet were cold.
This is Joyce who's -- in this picture -- 21.
Single mother, HIV positive.
I photographed her before and after the birth of her beautiful baby girl, Issa.
And I was last week walking on Lafayette Street in Manhattan and got a call from a woman who I didn't know, but she called to tell me that Joyce had passed away at the age of 23.
Joyce's mother is now taking care of her daughter, like so many other Zimbabwean children who've been orphaned by the epidemic.
So a few of the stories.
With every picture, there are individuals who have full lives and stories that deserve to be told.
All these pictures are from Zimbabwe.
Chris Anderson: Kirsten, will you just take one minute, just to tell your own story of how you got to Africa?
Kirsten Ashburn: Mmm, gosh.
CA: Just -- KA: Actually, I was working at the time, doing production for a fashion photographer.
And I was constantly reading the New York Times, and stunned by the statistics, the numbers.
It was just frightening.
So I quit my job and decided that that's the subject that I wanted to tackle.
And I first actually went to Botswana, where I spent a month -- this is in December 2000 -- then went to Zimbabwe for a month and a half, and then went back again this March 2002 for another month and a half in Zimbabwe.
CA: That's an amazing story, thank you.
KB: Thanks for letting me show these.
A rabbit attempts to play a church organ, while a knight fights a giant snail and a naked man blows a trumpet with his rear end.
Painted with squirrel-hair brushes on vellum or parchment by monks, nuns, and urban craftspeople, these bizarre images populate the margins of the most prized books from the Middle Ages.
Their illustrations often tell a second story as rich as the text itself.
Some images appear in many different illuminated manuscripts, and often reinforce the religious content of the books they decorated.
For example, a porcupine picking up fruit on its spines could represent the devil stealing the fruits of faith-- or Christ taking up the sins of mankind.
Medieval lore stated that a hunter could only capture a unicorn when it lay its horn in the lap of a virgin, so a unicorn could symbolize either sexual temptation or Christ being captured by his enemies.
Rabbits, meanwhile, could represent humans lustful natures and could redeem themselves through attempts to make sacred music despite their failings.
All of these references would have been familiar to medieval Europeans from other art forms and oral tradition, though some have grown more mysterious over the centuries.
Today, no one can say for sure what the common motif of a knight fighting a snail means or why the knight so often appears to be losing.
The snail might be a symbol of the inevitability of death, which defeats even the strongest knights.
Or it could represent humility, and a knights need to vanquish his own pride.
Many illuminated manuscripts were copies of religious or classical texts, and the bookmakers incorporated their own ideas and opinions in illustrations.
The butt tuba, for example, was likely shorthand to express disapproval with-- or add an ironic spin to-- the action in the text.
Illuminations could also be used to make subversive political commentary.
The text of the "Smithfield Decretals" details the Churchs laws and punishments for lawbreakers.
But the margins show a fox being hanged by geese, a possible allusion to the common people turning on their powerful oppressors.
In the "Chronica Majora," Matthew Paris summarized a scandal of his day, in which the Welsh prince Griffin plummeted to his death from the tower of London.
Some believed the prince fell, Paris wrote, while others thought he was pushed.
He added his own take in the margins, which show the prince falling to his death while trying to escape on a rope made of bed-sheets.
Some margins told stories of a more personal nature.
"The Luttrell Psalter," a book of psalms and prayers commissioned by Sir Geoffrey Luttrell, shows a young woman having her hair done, while a young man catches a bird in a net.
The shaved patch on his head is growing out, indicating that he is a clergyman neglecting his duties.
This alludes to a family scandal where a young cleric ran away with Sir Geoffreys daughter Elizabeth.
The familys personal spiritual advisor likely painted it into the book to remind his clients of their failings and encourage their spiritual development.
Some artists even painted themselves into the manuscripts.
The opening image of Christine de Pisans collected works shows de Pisan presenting the book to the Queen of France.
The queen was so impressed by de Pisan's previous work that she commissioned her own copy.
Such royal patronage enabled her to establish her own publishing house in Paris.
The tradition of illuminated manuscripts lasted for over a thousand years.
The books were created by individuals or teams for uses as wide-ranging as private prayer aids, service books in churches, textbooks, and protective talismans to take into battle.
Across all this variation, those tricky little drawings in the margins are a unique window into the minds of medieval artists.
So, for the first time in America's modern history, we have five generations interacting at work.
The veterans, born between 1922 and 1943, are known as the Greatest Generation, the matures, the silents.
They're known for their self-sacrifice, respect for authority and work as its own reward.
The boomers came shortly after, born between 1944 and 1960.
This is a generation characterized by hard work.
In fact, we can thank this generation for the term "workaholic."
They appreciate competition, they love effective communication.
And they're thinking towards retirement, if they haven't retired already.
Generation X is known as the lost generation the latchkey generation, born between 1961 and 1980.
This is the smallest generation, sandwiched between boomers and the big millennials.
More parents were divorced in this generation than any generation prior.
They also were the first generation to tell us about work-life balance, and the first to really ask for that in the workplace.
And then millennials -- you know, the everybody-gets-a-ribbon generation -- born between 1981 and 2000.
Never knew a time where technology wasn't present in the home.
They're incredibly pragmatic, they're hopeful and they're determined.
They think they're going to change the world, in fact, I believe they're going to do it.
They might be a little bit idealistic sometimes, but in just the last several years, we've seen millennials overtake Generation X to be the most represented generation in the workforce.
In fact, more than one in three people in the United States labor force is a millennial.
And soon to join us there, Generation Z, born since 2000, our high school interns or soon to be high school graduates.
Now, if you open any internet browser, look at Amazon, search any of your favorite search engines, you might assume there's a literal war in the workplace, right?
We see blog topics like "Seventeen reasons why millennials are the worst generation."
And "Why baby boomers have ruined it for everybody."
Or "Bridging the great generational divide."
It's like turning into this "West Side Story," like, boomers come in one door, millennials come in another door, the lobby, they just fight with each other all day, complain, go home, do the same, come back to work, right?
Well, so what if I told you these generations may not exist?
I've been spending some time thinking about this and researching this, and fellow researchers and I aren't exactly sure that these generations are real.
And in fact, if we can agree that these groups even exist, we certainly don't agree who belongs in them.
And they span something like 20 years.
So at whatever point in history, a one-year-old and a 20-year-old are said to share the same value system, to want the same things at work, to have the same stereotypes working for and against them.
And in fact, different areas of the world define these generations differently.
So we can't even compare generations across various areas of the world.
And these stereotypes about each generation have, in a lot of ways, created this self-fulfilling prophecy, that people begin to act as if they're part of that generation because we've said out loud that generation is real.
I'm not so sure that it is.
And in fact, this idea of generations has become deeply embedded in United States culture.
When we talk generations, people know exactly what we're talking about.
In fact, people have a lot of thoughts and feelings about each of these generations.
And I'll tell you how I know this.
I did the thing that every red-blooded American and pre-tenure academic does when they have a question.
And this is what I learned.
Google is based on algorithms, and they provide you with commonly searched terms, or suggested hits, based on what other people are searching surrounding the same topic.
And it gave me a really good sense of what people think about each of these generations.
Take a look.
I learned that baby boomers are conservative, that Americans think they're stupid.
The worst generation, they're angry, apparently they're racist and they're so important.
Looking at Generation X, I learned Generation X is a cynical group, they're angry, they're known as the lost generation -- we know this; they're the smallest generation.
Apparently, they're stupid too.
(Laughter) And mostly, they're frustrated with baby boomers.
Alright, millennials, this is what I learned about us.
So, we're obsessed with food.
(Laughter) We're also stupid, ah!
We're lazy, we're sensitive, we're fired, we're also hated, and we think we're important.
And perhaps the most terrifying search result on the internet -- Generation Z is screwed.
(Laughter) OK, so, for five years, I've been talking to leaders and followers across a wide variety of organizations.
And this is what I've come to realize.
Generations haven't become part of the conversation -- generations have become the conversation at work.
What I've learned is that we're working under the assumption that those Google results are true.
And so, what I think is that organizations are now desperate to figure out how to "manage" the multigenerational workplace.
"Manage" it.
We manage all sorts of things.
We're preparing for this wave of millennials to come to work.
So we prepare for hurricanes, right?
We prepare to take the MCAT, we prepare for natural disasters.
Why are we preparing for 23-year-olds to come to work?
(Laughter) I've talked to these organizations, and I've heard amazing things that they're doing to create a workspace for everybody to get along and to have autonomy and to feel like they're thriving.
But I've also heard some really incredibly harebrained ideas about how to navigate the multigenerational workplace.
Are you ready?
This is what I saw.
I visited an organization, and they adopted this idea that if you can see it, you can be it.
A really important concept.
But I think they blew it.
The put pictures on the walls of the ideal multigenerational workplace, because if you can see it, you can be it.
(Laughter) Or like this one.
(Laughter) Like, I don't even want to work here.
(Laughter) You don't get to wear color here, apparently, and HR seriously has problems with people jumping in heels, I promise you that, OK?
I talked to an organization who recently decided against putting a ball pit in the break room because that's how you retain millennials.
We're 30, not three.
(Laughter) And in fact, I know a young, at the time, millennial, who was told that if she wanted people to take her seriously, just because she was a millennial, she would have to do this -- wear shoulder pads.
Yes.
People younger than her and older than her wouldn't take her seriously unless she wore shoulder pads.
Straight-out-of-the-80s, can't-even-buy-them-anywhere shoulder pads.
This young woman had two graduate degrees.
This young woman was me.
And this is the best we came up with?
How to navigate the multigenerational workplace ... is shoulder pads?
(Laughter) So, this is also what I've learned talking to organizations that employ a wide range of people of various ages.
We are so much more similar than we are different.
And we're hearing this consistently.
People want work that matters, they want flexibility, they want support, they want appreciation, they want better coffee.
But none of these things are tied to a generation.
Now, sure, we see small differences in what people want.
We know 20-year-olds and 60-year-olds go home and do different things.
They have different values.
At least when it comes to things happening outside of work.
But I think what's happened is that this focus on generational cohorts, these groups of people, has created a space where we just forgot that people are people.
And to know who they really are, who we really work with, we have to figure out how to better navigate this multigenerational workplace than ball pits.
Call me one of those idealist millennials, but I think we can get there.
And I don't think the idea is too terribly difficult.
What if we radically, simply, not easily, meet people where they are?
Individualize our approach.
I've never met a generation.
I've had a lot of conversations with people who happened to identify with a specific generational cohort.
I know that 80-year-olds text message and 23-year-olds crochet blankets.
None of these things are stereotypical of that generation, right?
Nilofer Merchant -- she's a thought leader in innovation -- she tells us we have to meet people in their onlyness, that is, that spot in the world where only we stand, as a function of our unique history, our experiences and our hopes.
But this requires flexibility and curiosity.
And what happens when we meet people in their onlyness, only the spot in the world that they stand, we learn that that boomer who is just acting "angry" at work all the time is scared.
Because he's worked every day since he was 16 years old, and on a Monday, sooner than he can imagine, he'll never go to work again.
He's got plans.
It's going to take like a week and a half to do all the things on that retirement list.
But then what?
What if we give a little bit of grace to the person that might be a little scared?
Or that Generation X-er who has four drop-offs, three kids, two hands, and is just trying to keep the wheels on the bus.
Sure, maybe she's a little aloof at work.
Maybe she's a little independent, maybe she's exhausted.
Or that millennial who asks for a raise after two months because they're "entitled?"
Well, maybe it's because that generation has more debt than any generation before them, coming out of college, and they just need the money to keep going, to pay rent.
And suddenly, when you meet people in their onlyness, that spot in the world only they stand, we're not talking about a generation anymore.
We're talking about Jim or Jen or Candice.
And so here's my challenge to us.
Pick a person, just one, and explore their onlyness.
And then learn.
And then in the moments where it's appropriate, teach.
And figure out what they bring to work that no one else can bring to work, because that's what makes work richer.
And then do it again.
And do it again.
And then some day, we're not working with generations anymore.
We're working with people.
And so to really understand the beauty of the multigenerational workplace, I think we just have to meet people where they are.
And that doesn't require that we unpack and live there with them.
But we might find, at least on occasion, it's a beautiful place to visit.
And so I think there's just no need to argue about which generation is the most angry or the most entitled or the most so obsessed with food.
We all come to the classroom, to work, back to our homes, a little bit tired and a little bit tattered sometimes.
Maybe let's just do our best to humbly meet people where they are, how they show up that day, generation and all.
And in those moments where it can feel a little bit like intergenerational warfare, I think we can at least all agree that shoulder pads aren't the solution.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
(Directing Bailey in English) Hello, everyone.
My name is Yuko Morita.
This is a facility dog, Bailey.
When you were a kid, were you afraid of getting shots?
When you were getting a flu shot at school, you probably asked your friends, 'Did it hurt? Did it hurt?' As you know, kids are very afraid of injections or having their blood drawn.
Hospitalised children have to have their blood drawn so many times.
Some kids need bone-marrow aspirations by drilling a thick needle into their spine.
This dog, Bailey has the magical power to make these kids say: 'If Bailey is with me, I would put up with it 100 more times'.
He is such a competent dog.
The Japanese medical level is said to be top-notch, for curing diseases.
But in Japan, while 'to be patient' has been considered a virtue, it is said that the quality of hospitalised life is poorly supported.
I used to work as a registered nurse at a children's hospital in Tokyo.
One day a mother of a hospitalised kid said, 'This is almost like being in jail'.
I was thinking that I was working very hard for the children, and I was very shocked to hear that.
In fact, kids in the hospital are not supposed to go out even for a walk.
They are not allowed to have their favourite foods.
They barely have fun.
Some kids stop smiling.
When I think back about it, it might as well be called a jail.
At that time, I was with an NPO called 'Shine On! Kids' and they offered to let me become a handler of a service dog.
The Non-Profit Organisation was founded to emotionally support kids and their families who are suffering from childhood cancer and other incurable diseases.
At that time, I only knew that a dog is taken to a children's hospital and the dog works as a member of the medical staff -- there were a number of facility dogs working in Europe and the US, yet obiously none in Japan; that was all I knew about facility dogs.
I thought 'If a service dog were working in this ward, the children's hospital life, once called a jail, would be way happier', and I was excited to think so.
Without hesitation I said, 'Yes, I would love to'.
There is no training institutions for facility dog program in Japan.
Both Bailey and I were trained at a Hawaiian training centre.
In a children's hospital in Hawaii, we also practiced following around our senior facility dog and their handler.
To my surprise, the service dog went into the ICU.
There was a child who had just gotten out of surgery with their head half-shaven, and a large scar on their head.
The kid was frowing painfully.
To my great concern, 'Is it really OK to go there in such a serious situation?' the facility dog went in there, and climbed on the bed right beside the kid laying with the tubes around them, and went to sleep alongside the kid.
Then the kid grew relaxed.
In spite of all the pain of moving, the kid hugged the dog and closed their eyes.
The kid looked so calm and easy.
At the sight of it, I thought WOW, that's cool! Being excited about making all the hospital wards full of smiles, I came back to Japan with Bailey.
However, facility dogs are totally unprecedented in Japan.
The Western mindset for dogs is totally different from that of Japan.
In Europe and the US, it's been quite normal to have dogs in the house as family members.
On the other hand, in Japan, we have a history of having them outside.
It is outrageous to have a dog inside the hospital ward: that was what Japanese hospitals thought.
Before us, sometimes there were dogs volunteered to visit hospitals in Japan.
But there was not a precedent of having a dog in hospital everyday, and considering dogs as a medical staff.
What was right in Hawaii was far from right in Japan.
We desperately looked for a hospital that could accept Bailey as a staff.
Then eventually we were accepted by the Shizuoka Children's Hospital.
But the reality was that people said; 'Can't the dog be replaced with a dog robot?' or 'To protect kids against infections, do not enter this ward'.
At first we could enter only one ward.
So one-day of rounds was finished in a few minutes.
We got to the workplace and an hour later, it was time to go home.
'I don't think Japanese culture is going to make people want to adopt a facility dog programme', I could only think in a negative way.
But in fact, children needed Bailey.
Five years have passed, and now we are accepted by almost all wards.
Bailey brings about positive differences to both kids and their families', -- that was what doctors and nurses started to notice.
There was a child who was visually impaired and was always screaming in panic when they had their blood collected.
But with Bailey by their side, they were distracted by petting Bailey on the head, the kid could go through blood tests without crying.
Another kid who wouldnt move at all due to pain after surgery suddenly got up just because they wanted to see Bailey.
That was a big surprise to the doctor.
A family, who are suddenly told that their child has cancer, will pretend as if nothing happening to prevent their kid from being nervous.
But people cannot suppress their feelings for good.
Sometimes it is important to cry.
With somebody who is human, they would feel a need 'to say something'.
But to Bailey, they never have to say anything if they do not want to.
I saw a mother in a hospital corridor, after hugging Bailey, crying as she wanted and with a relaxed expression, she went back to her kid's bed.
Bailey was a positive influence for their families, too.
Then I found there are three important bonds for a facility dog.
One is a bond between Bailey and the kids, another is Bailey and his handler, and the other is Bailey and the medical staff.
These are three important bonds with Bailey.
The first bond is: as Bailey works at the same hospital everyday, he sees the same children many times.
For children, just having a dog is not good enough.
Bailey, who comes to them everyday, really matters.
Only with Bailey who has bonds with the kids, can they be courageous enough to hang in there.
Even with a dog phobia, almost all kids will come to like Bailey eventually.
For kids, Bailey is a teammate with a tail who fight against their illness.
Bailey can even enter the surgical theatre with a child.
Even an adult is scared of getting an operation, right?
Wondering 'Does it hurt?', or feeling scared, they have to spend the terrifying time from the ward to the theatre.
But holding Bailey's leash, walking with him, children can guide Bailey smiling and walking to the theatre.
It is a privilege walk with everyone's favourite Bailey, without anyone else!
Some kids walk playfully around Bailey's fluffy tail as if they are cats.
Some kids say smiling, 'Bailey's wagging his tail means Good Luck'.
In this way, scary feelings turn to exciting feelings; which encourages kids to go to the theatre.
The second bond is: between a facility dog and their hander, who live together twenty-four seven.
We always spend holidays together too.
This is very important; just getting together while working and saying 'Bye-Bye' after five doesn't make any sense.
We sleep at night and Bailey sleeps with his head on my arm.
The bond between a facility dog and their handler is the basis on which a facility dog works professionally.
Only the bond with me can convince Bailey to trust me to work together.
But the truth is; you may think that a training dog will do anything I say, Bailey is a stubborn guy who goes only where he wants.
To a direction he doesn't to want to go, he does like this.
Can you see he is hanging on with all his might?
Planting his feet firmly on the ground, digging his nails into it, he never goes where he doesn't want to.
While walking on the street, I sometimes struggle with Bailey sitting there.
People passing by always say laughing, 'That's troublesome'.
But he has never refused to go to the hospital.
On the contrary, he sometimes refuses to go home, squatting there, going back into the hospital ward.
Dogs easily understand what people are thinking about them.
Because there are many people who love him, Bailey loves the hospital very much.
Both a dog and people are mutually affected; that is where the facility dog belongs.
This is why non-sentient toy dogs cannot make this happen.
A robot dog can not make this happen.
The third bond is between Bailey and the medical staff.
The handler of a facility dog is a medical staff.
The reason why only medical staff can be a handler of a facility dog is: that a facility dog's work includes not only healing mentally, but also curing physically.
Bailey and I sometimes take a part in the conversations where treatment courses of patients are decided.
I also figure out how our patient kids are and work out how to approach this patient.
I also write on the medical charts.
In this way, to be involved with specific purpose is what only facility dogs are capable of, and why a handler of a facility dog must be certified medical staff.
It has been five years since Bailey and I started working in Japan.
We have met thousands of children.
We once met a kid in the terminal phase of disease and the kid could not eat.
He wanted to but he couldn't eat; that was his situation.
Given a short span of time, both his family and nurses wished that he could enjoy whatever little amount of food he could.
Then there was a suggestion made Bailey attended at his dinner table.
With Bailey, the kid was happy to sit up smiling.
Saying, 'Bailey, look at me', though it was only a few mouthful, but he could managed to grab spaghetti into his mouth.
He could also enjoy ice cream, not being forced to do so, but willingly to do so.
Only the presence of Bailey bedside could make that level of change.
The bad impression of a hospital changed so much as to make children say, 'I want to be hospitalised to see Bailey'.
With Bailey, kids can double their fun.
With Bailey, kids can share tears and fears.
Most children are discharged from hospital safe and sound.
But sadly, some kids have to leave this world forever, and Bailey sometimes sleeps with them till just before their last moments.
We say 'You know, Bailey's with you', 'It's warm, isn't?' to kids.
The time goes on sadly but warmly.
We sometimes attend a funeral for children.
When parents have to close the lid of their own child's coffin, can you imagine how they feel?
In fact every family says 'We were really happy to have Bailey with us'.
They always say that.
'Before Bailey, the hospital stay had been just so heart-wrenching'.
'With Bailey our kid's life changed so much'.
These are what bereaved families said to us.
A family who lost their child will reflect on their child everyday, through their long span of life.
Remembering their child as 'a poor soul who went through so many painful operations; or remembering their child as 'a laughing kid sleeping with Bailey just before death; their feelings are completely different, aren't they?
We wish to make a small portion of happiness in their heartbreaking memory.
We wish the bereaved family remember as many smiles of their kid as possible.
The Facility Dog Programme is not an option, but necessity for hospital care, that's what I strongly feel about it.
Japan's medical care is said to be the highest in the world.
Not just curing disease, but also having an environment for healing disease more proactively is necessary, I think.
For patients, they can't have too much fun.
There are a lot of facility dogs in Europe and the US, but in Japan we have only two.
I would like to have facility dogs as a standard in Japanese hospitals and make Japanese hospitals a fun place to be in, even for patients who have medical conditions.
So many children who passed away are watching for us from heaven.
For those kids, I would like to make the Japanese medical front a place where I can be proud to say, 'Hey, it's a good hospital, isn't it?' (Applause)
This means, "I'm smiling."
So does that.
This means "mouse."
"Cat."
Here we have a story.
The start of the story, where this means guy, and that is a ponytail on a passer-by.
Here's where it happens.
These are when.
This is a cassette tape the girl puts into her cassette-tape player.
She wears it every day.
It's not considered vintage -- she just likes certain music to sound a certain way.
Look at her posture; it's remarkable.
That's because she dances.
Now he, the guy, takes all of this in, figuring, "Honestly, geez, what are my chances?"
(Laughter) And he could say, "Oh my God!"
or "I heart you!"
"I'm laughing out loud."
"I want to give you a hug."
But he comes up with that, you know.
He tells her, "I'd like to hand-paint your portrait on a coffee mug."
(Laughter) Put a crab inside it.
Add some water.
Seven different salts.
He means he's got this sudden notion to stand on dry land, but just panhandle at the ocean.
He says, "You look like a mermaid, but you walk like a waltz."
And the girl goes, "Wha'?"
So, the guy replies, "Yeah, I know, I know.
I think my heartbeat might be the Morse code for inappropriate.
At least, that's how it seems.
I'm like a junior varsity cheerleader sometimes -- for swearing, awkward silences, and very simple rhyme schemes.
Right now, talking to you, I'm not even really a guy.
I'm a monkey -- (Laughter) -- blowing kisses at a butterfly.
But I'm still suggesting you and I should meet.
First, soon, and then a lot.
I'm thinking the southwest corner of 5th and 42nd at noon tomorrow, but I'll stay until you show up, ponytail or not.
Hell, ponytail alone.
I got a pencil you can borrow.
You can put it in your phone."
But the girl does not budge, does not smile, does not frown.
She just says, "No thank you."
You know?
[ "i don't need 2 write it down." ] (Applause)
Youre on an airplane when you feel a sudden jolt.
Outside your window nothing seems to be happening, yet the plane continues to rattle you and your fellow passengers as it passes through turbulent air in the atmosphere.
Although it may not comfort you to hear it, this phenomenon is one of the prevailing mysteries of physics.
After more than a century of studying turbulence, weve only come up with a few answers for how it works and affects the world around us.
And yet, turbulence is ubiquitous, springing up in virtually any system that has moving fluids.
That includes the airflow in your respiratory tract.
The blood moving through your arteries.
And the coffee in your cup, as you stir it.
Clouds are governed by turbulence, as are waves crashing along the shore and the gusts of plasma in our sun.
Understanding precisely how this phenomenon works would have a bearing on so many aspects of our lives.
Heres what we do know.
Liquids and gases usually have two types of motion: a laminar flow, which is stable and smooth; and a turbulent flow, which is composed of seemingly unorganized swirls.
Imagine an incense stick.
The laminar flow of unruffled smoke at the base is steady and easy to predict.
Closer to the top, however, the smoke accelerates, becomes unstable, and the pattern of movement changes to something chaotic.
Thats turbulence in action, and turbulent flows have certain characteristics in common.
Firstly, turbulence is always chaotic.
Thats different from being random.
Rather, this means that turbulence is very sensitive to disruptions.
A little nudge one way or the other will eventually turn into completely different results.
That makes it nearly impossible to predict what will happen, even with a lot of information about the current state of a system.
Another important characteristic of turbulence is the different scales of motion that these flows display.
Turbulent flows have many differently-sized whirls called eddies, which are like vortices of different sizes and shapes.
All those differently-sized eddies interact with each other, breaking up to become smaller and smaller until all that movement is transformed into heat, in a process called the energy cascade."
So thats how we recognize turbulence but why does it happen?
In every flowing liquid or gas there are two opposing forces: inertia and viscosity.
Inertia is the tendency of fluids to keep moving, which causes instability.
Viscosity works against disruption, making the flow laminar instead.
In thick fluids such as honey, viscosity almost always wins.
Less viscous substances like water or air are more prone to inertia, which creates instabilities that develop into turbulence.
We measure where a flow falls on that spectrum with something called the Reynolds number, which is the ratio between a flows inertia and its viscosity.
The higher the Reynolds number, the more likely it is that turbulence will occur.
Honey being poured into a cup, for example, has a Reynolds number of about 1.
The same set up with water has a Reynolds number thats closer to 10,000.
The Reynolds number is useful for understanding simple scenarios, but its ineffective in many situations.
For example, the motion of the atmosphere is significantly influenced by factors including gravity and the earths rotation.
Or take relatively simple things like the drag on buildings and cars.
We can model those thanks to many experiments and empirical evidence.
But physicists want to be able to predict them through physical laws and equations as well as we can model the orbits of planets or electromagnetic fields.
Most scientists think that getting there will rely on statistics and increased computing power.
Extremely high-speed computer simulations of turbulent flows could help us identify patterns that could lead to a theory that organizes and unifies predictions across different situations.
Other scientists think that the phenomenon is so complex that such a full-fledged theory isnt ever going to be possible.
Hopefully well reach a breakthrough, because a true understanding of turbulence could have huge positive impacts.
That would include more efficient wind farms; the ability to better prepare for catastrophic weather events; or even the power to manipulate hurricanes away.
And, of course, smoother rides for millions of airline passengers.
Zach Kaplan: Keith and I lead a research team.
We investigate materials and technologies that have unexpected properties. Over the last three years, we found over 200 of these things, and so we looked back into our library and selected six we thought would be most surprising for TED.
Of these six, the first one that we're going to talk about is in the black envelope you're holding.
It comes from a company in Japan called GelTech. Now go ahead and open it up.
Keith Schacht: Now be sure and take the two pieces apart.
What's unexpected about this is that it's soft, but it's also a strong magnet.
Zach and I have always been fascinated observing unexpected things like this.
We spent a long time thinking about why this is, and it's just recently that we realized: it's when we see something unexpected, it changes our understanding of the way things work.
As you're seeing this gel magnet for the first time, if you assume that all magnets had to be hard, then seeing this surprised you and it changed your understanding of the way magnets could work.
ZK: Now, it's important to understand what the unexpected properties are.
But to really think about the implications of what this makes possible, we found that it helps to think about how it could be applied in the world.
So, a first idea is to use it on cabinet doors.
If you line the sides of the cabinets using the gel material -- if a cabinet slams shut it wouldn't make a loud noise, and in addition the magnets would draw the cabinets closed.
Imagine taking the same material, but putting it on the bottom of a sneaker.
You know, this way you could go to the container store and buy one of those metal sheets that they hang on the back of your door, in your closet, and you could literally stick your shoes up instead of using a shelf.
For me, I really love this idea.
(Laughter) If you come to my apartment and see my closet, I'm sure you'd figure out why: it's a mess.
KS: Seeing the unexpected properties and then seeing a couple of applications -- it helps you see why this is significant, what the potential is.
But we've found that the way we present our ideas it makes a big difference.
ZK: It was like six months ago that Keith and I were out in L.A., and we were at Starbucks having coffee with Roman Coppola.
He works on mostly music videos and commercials with his company, The Directors Bureau.
As we were talking, Roman told us that he's kind of an inventor on the side.
And we were showing him the same gel magnet that you're holding in your hand -- and you know, we shared the same ideas. And you could see it in his face: Roman starts to get really excited and he whips out this manila folder; he opens it up and Keith and I look in, and he starts showing us concepts that he's been working on.
These things just get him really excited. And so we're looking at these concepts, and we were just like, whoa, this guy's good.
Because the way that he presented the concept -- his approach was totally different than ours. He sold it to you as if it was for sale right now.
When we were going in the car back to the airport, we were thinking: why was this so powerful?
And as we thought about it more, we realized that it let you fill in all the details about the experience, just as if you saw it on TV. So, for TED we decided to take our favorite idea for the gel magnet and work with Roman and his team at the Directors Bureau to create a commercial for a product from the future.
Narrator: Do you have a need for speed?
Inventables Water Adventures dares you to launch yourself on a magnetically-levitating board down a waterslide so fast, so tall, that when you hit the bottom, it uses brakes to stop.
Aqua Rocket: coming this summer.
KS: Now, we showed the concept to a few people before this, and they asked us, when's it coming out?
So I just wanted to let you know, it's not actually coming out, just the concept is.
ZK: So now, when we dream up these concepts, it's important for us to make sure that they work from a technical standpoint.
So I just want to quickly explain how this would work.
This is the magnetically-levitating board that they mentioned in the commercial.
The gel that you're holding would be lining the bottom of the board.
Now this is important for two reasons.
One: the soft properties of the magnet that make it so that, if it were to hit the rider in the head, it wouldn't injure him.
In addition, you can see from the diagram on the right, the underpart of the slide would be an electromagnet.
So this would actually repel the rider a little bit as you're going down.
The force of the water rushing down, in addition to that repulsion force, would make this slide go faster than any slide on the market.
It's because of this that you need the magnetic braking system.
When you get to the very bottom of the slide -- (Laughter) -- the rider passes through an aluminum tube.
And I'm going to kick it to Keith to explain why that's important from a technical standpoint.
KS: So I'm sure all you engineers know that even though aluminum is a metal, it's not a magnetic material. But something unexpected happens when you drop a magnet down an aluminum tube.
So we set up a quick experiment here to show that to you.
(Laughter) Now, you see the magnet fell really slowly.
Now, I'm not going to get into the physics of it, but all you need to know is that the faster the magnet's falling, the greater the stopping force.
ZK: Now, our next technology is actually a 10-foot pole, and I have it right here in my pocket.
(Laughter) There're a few different versions of it.
(Laughter) KS: Some of them automatically unroll like this one.
They can be made to automatically roll up, or they can be made stable, like Zach's, to hold any position in between.
ZK: As we were talking to the vendor -- to try to learn about how you could apply these, or how they're being applied currently -- he was telling us that, in the military they use this one so soldiers can keep it on their chests -- very concealed -- and then, when they're out on the field, erect it as an antenna to clearly send signals back to the base.
In our brainstorms, we came up with the idea you could use it for a soccer goal: so at the end of the game, you just roll up the goal and put it in your gym bag.
(Laughter) KS: Now, the interesting thing about this is, you don't have to be an engineer to appreciate why a 10-foot pole that can fit in your pocket is so interesting.
(Laughter) So we decided to go out onto the streets of Chicago and ask a few people on the streets what they thought you could do with this.
Man: I clean my ceiling fans with that and I get the spider webs off my house -- I do it that way.
Woman: I'd make my very own walking stick.
Woman: I would create a ladder to use to get up on top of the tree.
Woman: An olive server.
Man: Some type of extension pole -- like what the painters use.
Woman: I would make a spear that, when you went deep sea diving, you could catch the fish really fast, and then roll it back up, and you could swim easier ... Yeah.
(Laughter) ZK: Now, for our next technology we're going to do a little demonstration, and so we need a volunteer from the audience.
You sir, come on up.
(Laughter) Come on up. Tell everybody your name.
Steve Jurvetson: Steve.
ZK: It's Steve. All right Steve, now, follow me.
We need you to stand right in front of the TED sign.
Right there. That's great.
And hold onto this. Good luck to you.
(Laughter) KS: No, not yet.
(Laughter) ZK: I'd just like to let you all know that this presentation has been brought to you by Target.
KS: Little bit -- that's perfect, just perfect.
Now, Zach, we're going to demonstrate a water gun fight from the future.
(Laughter) So here, come on up to the front. All right, so now if you'll see here -- no, no, it's OK.
So, describe to the audience the temperature of your shirt. Go ahead.
SJ: It's cold.
KS: Now the reason it's cold is that's it's not actually water loaded into these squirt guns -- it's a dry liquid developed by 3M.
It's perfectly clear, it's odorless, it's colorless.
It's so safe you could drink this stuff.
(Laughter) And the reason it feels cold is because it evaporates 25 times faster than water.
(Laughter) All right, well thanks for coming up.
(Laughter) ZK: Wait, wait, Steven -- before you go we filled this with the dry liquid so during the break you can shoot your friends.
SJ: Excellent, thank you.
KS: Thanks for coming up. Let's give him a big round of applause.
(Applause) So what's the significance of this dry liquid?
Early versions of the fluid were actually used on a Cray Supercomputer.
Now, the unexpected thing about this is that Zach could stand up on stage and drench a perfectly innocent member of the audience without any concern that we'd damage the electronics, that we'd get him wet, that we'd hurt the books or the computers. It works because it's non-conductive.
So you can see here, you can immerse a whole circuit board in this and it wouldn't cause any damage.
You can circulate it to draw the heat away.
But today it's most widely used in office buildings -- in the sprinkler system -- as a fire-suppression fluid.
Again, it's perfectly safe for people. It puts out the fires, doesn't hurt anything.
But our favorite idea for this was using it in a basketball game. So during halftime, it could rain down on the players, cool everyone down, and in a matter of minutes it would dry. Wouldn't hurt the court.
ZK: Our next technology comes to us from a company in Japan called Sekisui Chemical. One of their R&amp;D engineers was working on a way to make plastic stiffer.
While he was doing this, he noticed an unexpected thing.
We have a video to show you.
KS: So you see there, it didn't bounce back. Now, this was an unintended side effect of some experiments they were doing.
It's technically called, "shape-retaining property."
Now, think about your interactions with aluminum foil.
Shape-retaining is common in metal: you bend a piece of aluminum foil, and it holds its place. Contrast that with a plastic garbage can -- and you can push in the sides and it always bounces back.
ZK: For example, you could make a watch that wraps around your wrist, but doesn't use a buckle.
Taking it a little further, if you wove those strips together -- kind of like a little basket -- you could make a shape-retaining sheet, and then you could embed it in a cloth: so you could make a picnic sheet that wraps around the table, so that way on a windy day it wouldn't blow away.
For our next technology, it's hard to observe the unexpected property by itself, because it's an ink.
So, we've prepared a video to show it applied to paper.
KS: As this paper is bending, the resistance of the ink changes.
So with simple electronics, you can detect how much the page is being bent.
Now, to think about the potential for this, think of all the places ink is supplied: on business cards, on the back of cereal boxes, board games. Any place you use ink, you could change the way you interact with it.
ZK: So my favorite idea for this is to apply the ink to a book.
This could totally change the way that you interface with paper.
You see the dark line on the side and the top. As you turn the pages of the book, the book can actually detect what page you're on, based on the curvature of the pages.
In addition, if you were to fold in one of the corners, then you could program the book to actually email you the text on the page for your notes.
KS: For our last technology, we worked again with Roman and his team at the Directors Bureau to develop a commercial from the future to explain how it works.
Old Milk Carton: Oh yeah, it smells good.
Who are you?
New Milk Carton: I'm New Milk.
OMC: I used to smell like you.
Narrator: Fresh Watch, from Inventables Dairy Farms.
Packaging that changes color when your milk's gone off.
Don't let milk spoil your morning.
ZK: Now, this technology was developed by these two guys: Professor Ken Suslick and Neil Rakow, of the University of Illinois.
KS: Now the way it works: there's a matrix of color dyes.
And these dyes change color in response to odors.
So the smell of vanilla, that might change the four on the left to brown and the one on the right to yellow. This matrix can produce thousands of different color combinations to represent thousands of different smells.
But like in the milk commercial, if you know what odor you want to detect, then they can formulate a specific dye to detect just that odor.
ZK: Right. It was that that started a conversation with Professor Suslick and myself, and he was explaining to me the things that this is making possible, beyond just detecting spoiled food. It's really where the significance of it lies.
His company actually did a survey of firemen all across the country to try to learn, how are they currently testing the air when they respond to an emergency scene?
And he kind of comically explained that time after time, what the firemen would say is: they would rush to the scene of the crime; they would look around; if there were no dead policemen, it was OK to go.
(Laughter) I mean, this is a true story. They're using policemen as canaries.
(Laughter) But more seriously, they determined that you could develop a device that can smell better than the humans, and say if it's safe for the firemen.
In addition, he's spun off a company from the University called ChemSensing, where they're working on medical equipment.
So, a patient can come in and actually blow into their device.
By detecting the odor of particular bacteria, or viruses, or even lung cancer, the dots will change and they can use software to analyze the results.
This can radically improve the way that doctors diagnose patients.
Currently, they're using a method of trial and error, but this could tell you precisely what disease you have.
KS: So that was the six we had for you today, but I hope you're starting to see why we find these things so fascinating.
Because every one of these six changed our understanding of what was possible in the world. Prior to seeing this, we would have assumed: a 10-foot pole couldn't fit in your pocket; something as inexpensive as ink couldn't sense the way paper is being bent; every one of these things -- and we're constantly trying to find more.
ZK: This is something that Keith and I really enjoy doing.
I'm sure it's obvious to you now, but it was actually yesterday that I was reminded of why. I was having a conversation with Steve Jurvetson, over downstairs by the escalators, and he was telling me that when Chris sent out that little box, one of the items in it was the hydrophobic sand -- the sand that doesn't get wet. He said that he was playing with it with his son.
And you know, his son was mesmerized, because he would dunk it in the water, he would take it out and it was bone dry. A few weeks later, he said that his son was playing with a lock of his mother's hair, and he noticed that there were some drops of water on the hair.
And he took the thing and he looked up to Steve and he said, "Look, hydrophobic string."
(Laughter) I mean, after hearing that story -- that really summed it up for me.
Thank you very much.
KS: Thank you.
(Applause)
This is very strange for me, because Im not used to doing this: I usually stand on the other side of the light, and now I'm feeling the pressure I put other people into. And it's hard ...
The previous speaker has, I think, really painted a very good background as to the impulse behind my work and what drives me, and my sense of loss, and trying to find the answer to the big questions.
But this, for me, I mean, coming here to do this, feels like -- theres this sculptor that I like very much, Giacometti, who after many years of living in France -- and learning, you know, studying and working -- he returned home and he was asked, what did you produce?
What have you done with so many years of being away?
And he sort of, he showed a handful of figurines.
And obviously they were, "Is this what you spent years doing?
And we expected huge masterpieces!"
But what struck me is the understanding that in those little pieces was the culmination of a mans life, search, thought, everything -- just in a reduced, small version.
In a way, I feel like that.
I feel like Im coming home to talk about what Ive been away doing for 20 years.
And I will start with a brief taster of what Ive been about: a handful of films -- nothing much, two feature films and a handful of short films.
So, well go with the first piece.
(Video) Woman: "I destroy lives," mum said.
I love her, you know.
Shes not even my real mum.
My real mum and dad dumped me and fucked off back to Nigeria.
The devil is in me, Court.
Court: Sleep.
Woman: Have you ever been?
Court: Where?
Woman: Nigeria.
Court: Never.
My mum wanted to, couldnt afford it.
Woman: Wish I could.
I have this feeling Id be happy there.
Why does everyone get rid of me?
Court: I don't want to get rid of you.
Woman: You don't need me.
Youre just too blind to see it now.
Boy: What do you do all day?
Marcus: Read.
Boy: Don't you get bored?
And how come you ain't got a job anyway?
Marcus: I am retired.
Boy: So?
Marcus: So I've done my bit for Queen and country, now I work for myself.
Boy: No, now you sit around like a bum all day.
Marcus: Because I do what I like?
Boy: Look man, reading don't feed no one.
And it particularly don't feed your spliff habit.
Marcus: It feeds my mind and my soul.
Boy: Arguing with you is a waste of time, Marcus.
Marcus: Youre a rapper, am I right?
Boy: Yeah.
Marcus: A modern day poet.
Boy: Yeah, you could say that.
Marcus: So what do you talk about?
Boy: What's that supposed to mean?
Marcus: Simple. What do you rap about?
Boy: Reality, man.
Marcus: Whose reality?
Boy: My fuckin' reality.
Marcus: Tell me about your reality.
Boy: Racism, oppression, people like me not getting a break in life.
Marcus: So what solutions do you offer? I mean, the job of a poet is not just -- Boy: Man, fight the power! Simple: blow the motherfuckers out of the sky.
Marcus: With an AK-47?
Boy: Man, if I had one, too fuckin' right.
Marcus: And how many soldiers have you recruited to fight this war with you?
Boy: Oh, Marcus, you know what I mean.
Marcus: When a man resorts to profanities, its a sure sign of his inability to express himself.
Boy: See man, youre just taking the piss out of me now.
Marcus: The Panthers.
Boy: Panthers?
Ass kickin' guys who were fed up with all that white supremacist, powers-that-be bullshit, and just went in there and kicked everybody's arse.
Fuckin wicked, man. I saw the movie. Bad! What?
Director 1: I saw his last film.
puise, right?
Woman 1: Yes.
D1: Not to make a bad joke, but it was really puis.
Epuis -- tired, exhausted, fed up.
Director 2: Can you not shut up?
Now, you talk straight to me, whats wrong with my films?
Lets go.
W1: They suck.
Woman 2: They suck? What about yours?
What, what, what, what about, what?
What do you think about your movie?
D1: My movies, they are OK, fine.
They are better than making documentaries no one ever sees.
What the fuck are you talking about?
Did you ever move your fuckin' ass from Hollywood to go and film something real?
You make people fuckin' sleep.
Dream about bullshit.
(Applause) Newton Aduaka: Thank you. The first clip, really, is totally trying to capture what cinema is for me, and where I'm coming from in terms of cinema.
The first piece was, really, there's a young woman talking about Nigeria, that she has a feeling she'll be happy there.
These are the sentiments of someone that's been away from home.
And that was something that I went through, you know, and I'm still going through.
I've not been home for quite a while, for about five years now.
I've been away 20 years in total.
And so its really -- it's really how suddenly, you know, this was made in 1997, which is the time of Abacha -- the military dictatorship, the worst part of Nigerian history, this post-colonial history.
So, for this girl to have these dreams is simply how we preserve a sense of what home is.
How -- and it's sort of, perhaps romantic, but I think beautiful, because you just need something to hold on to, especially in a society where you feel alienated.
Which takes us to the next piece, where the young man talks about lack of opportunity: living as a black person in Europe, the glass ceiling that we all know about, that we all talk about, and his reality.
Again, this was my -- this was me talking about -- this was, again, the time of multiculturalism in the United Kingdom, and there was this buzzword -- and it was trying to say, what exactly does this multiculturalism mean in the real lives of people?
And what would a child -- what does a child like Jamie -- the young boy -- think, I mean, with all this anger that's built up inside of him?
What happens with that?
What, of course, happens with that is violence, which we see when we talk about the ghettos and we talk about, you know, South Central L.A. and this kind of stuff, and which eventually, when channeled, becomes, you know, evolves and manifests itself as riots -- like the one in France two years ago, where I live, which shocked everybody, because everyone thought, "Oh well, France is a liberal society."
But I lived in England for 18 years.
I've lived in France for about four, and I feel actually thrown back 20 years, living in France.
And then, the third piece. The third piece for me is the question: What is cinema to you? What do you do with cinema?
There's a young director, Hollywood director, with his friends -- fellow filmmakers -- talking about what cinema means.
I suppose that will take me to my last piece -- what cinema means for me.
My life started as a -- I started life in 1966, a few months before the Biafran, which lasted for three years and it was three years of war.
So that whole thing, that whole childhood echoes and takes me into the next piece.
(Video) Voice: Onicha, off to school with your brother.
Onicha: Yes, mama.
Commander: Soldiers, you are going to fight a battle, so you must get ready and willing to die.
You must get -- ?
Child Soldiers: Ready and willing to die.
C: Success, the change is only coming through the barrel of the gun.
CS: The barrel of the gun!
C: This is the gun.
CS: This is the gun.
C: This is an AK-47 rifle. This is your life.
This is your life. This is ... this is ... this is your life.
Ezra: They give us the special drugs. We call it bubbles.
Amphetamines.
Soldiers: Rain come, sun come, soldier man dey go.
I say rain come, sun come, soldier man dey go.
We went from one village to another -- three villages.
I dont remember how we got there.
Witness: We walked and walked for two days.
We didn't eat.
There was no food, just little rice.
Without food -- I was sick.
The injection made us not to have mind.
God will forgive us.
He knows we did not know. We did not know!
Committee Chairman: Do you remember January 6th, 1999?
Ezra: I dont remember.
Various Voices: You will die! You will die! (Screaming) Onicha: Ezra! (Ezra: Onicha! Onicha!) Various Voices:  We don't need no more trouble   No more trouble  They killed my mother.
The Mende sons of bastards.
(Shouting) Who is she?
Me.
Why you giving these to me?
So you can stop staring at me.
My story is a little bit complicated.
Im interested.
Mariam is pregnant.
You know what you are? A crocodile.
Big mouth. Short legs.
In front of Rufus you are Ezra the coward.
Hes not taking care of his troops.
Troop, pay your last honor. Salute.
Open your eyes, Ezra.
A blind man can see that the diamonds end up in his pocket.
 We don't need no more trouble  Get that idiot out!
I take you are preparing a major attack?
This must be the mine.
Your girl is here.
Well done, well done.
That is what you are here for, no?
You are planning to go back to fight are you?
 We don't need no more trouble   No more trouble   We don't need no more trouble   No more trouble.  Wake up! Everybody wake up. Road block!
 We don't need no more ...  Committee Chairman: We hope that, with your help and the help of others, that this commission will go a long way towards understanding the causes of the rebel war.
More than that, begin a healing process and finally to -- as an act of closure to a terrible period in this countrys history.
The beginning of hope.
Mr. Ezra Gelehun, please stand.
State your name and age for the commission.
Ezra: My name is Ezra Gelehun.
I am 15 or 16. I dont remember.
Ask my sister, she is the witch, she knows everything.
(Sister: 16.) CC: Mr. Gelehun, Id like to remind you youre not on trial here for any crimes you committed.
E: We were fighting for our freedom.
If killing in a war is a crime, then you have to charge every soldier in the world.
War is a crime, yes, but I did not start it.
You too are a retired General, not so?
CC: Yes, correct.
E: So you too must stand trial then.
Our government was corrupt.
Lack of education was their way to control power.
If I may ask, do you pay for school in your country?
CC: No, we dont.
E: You are richer than us.
But we pay for school.
Your country talks about democracy, but you support corrupt governments like my own.
Why? Because you want our diamond.
Ask if anyone in this room have ever seen real diamond before?
No.
CC: Mr. Gelehun, I'd like to remind you, you're not on trial here today.
You are not on trial.
E: Then let me go.
CC: I can't do that, son.
E: So you are a liar.
(Applause) NA: Thank you. Just very quickly to say that my point really here, is that while were making all these huge advancements, what we're doing, which for me, you know, I think we should -- Africa should move forward, but we should remember, so we do not go back here again.
Thank you.
Emeka Okafor: Thank you, Newton.
(Applause) One of the themes that comes through very strongly in the piece we just watched is this sense of the psychological trauma of the young that have to play this role of being child soldiers.
And considering where you are coming from, and when we consider the extent to which its not taken as seriously as it should be, what would you have to say about that?
NA: In the process of my research, I actually spent a bit of time in Sierra Leone researching this.
And I remember I met a lot of child soldiers -- ex-combatants, as they like to be called.
I met psychosocial workers who worked with them.
I met psychiatrists who spent time with them, aid workers, NGOs, the whole lot.
But I remember on the flight back on my last trip, I remember breaking down in tears and thinking to myself, if any kid in the West, in the western world, went through a day of what any of those kids have gone through, they will be in therapy for the rest of their natural lives.
So for me, the thought that we have all these children -- its a generation, we have a whole generation of children -- who have been put through so much psychological trauma or damage, and Africa has to live with that.
But Im just saying to factor that in, factor that in with all this great advancement, all this pronouncement of great achievement.
Thats really my thinking.
EO: Well, we thank you again for coming to the TED stage.
That was a very moving piece.
NA: Thank you.
EO: Thank you.
(Applause)
I think the future of this planet depends on humans, not technology, and we already have the knowledge -- were kind of at the endgame with knowledge.
But were nowhere near the endgame when it comes to our perception.
We still have one foot in the dark ages.
And when you listen to some of the presentations here -- and the extraordinary range of human capability, our understandings -- and then you contrast it with the fact we still call this planet, "Earth:" its pretty extraordinary -- we have one foot in the dark ages.
Just quickly: Aristotle, his thing was, "Its not flat, stupid, its round."
Galileo -- he had the Inquisition, so he had to be a little bit more polite -- his was, "Its not in the middle, you know."
And Hawkes: "its not earth, stupid, its ocean."
This is an ocean planet.
T.S. Eliot really said it for me -- and this should give you goose bumps: "we shall not cease from exploration and the end of our exploring shall be to return where we started and know the place for the first time."
And the next lines are, "Through the unknown remembered gate, where the last of earth discovered is that which is the beginning."
So I have one message.
It seems to me that were all pointed in the wrong direction.
For the rocketeers in the audience: I love what youre doing, I admire the guts, I admire the courage -- but your rockets are pointed in the wrong goddamn direction.
(Laughter) And its all a question of perspective.
Let me try and tell you -- I dont mean to insult you, but look, if I -- and Im not doing this for real because it would be an insult, so Im going to pretend, and it softens the blow -- Im going to tell you what youre thinking.
If I held up a square that was one foot square and the color of earth, and I held up another square that was the root two square -- so its 1.5 times bigger -- and was the color of the oceans; and I said, what is the relative value of these two things?
Well, its the relative importance.
You would say -- yeah, yeah, yeah, we all know this; water covers twice the area of the planet than dry land.
But its a question of perception, and if thats what youre thinking, if thats what you think I mean when I say, "This is an ocean planet stupidly called 'Earth.'" If you think that thats the relative importance, two to one, youre wrong by a factor of ten.
Now, youre not as thick as two short planks, but you sound like it when you say "Earth," because that demonstration, if I turned around this way -- that earth plane would be as thin as paper.
Its a thin film, two-dimensional existence.
The ocean representation would have a depth to it.
And if you hefted those two things you might find that the relative scale of those is 20 to 1.
It turns out that something more than 94 percent of life on earth is aquatic.
That means that us terrestrials occupy a minority.
The problem we have in believing that is -- you just have to give up this notion that this Earth was created for us.
Because its a problem we have.
If this is an ocean planet and we only have a small minority of this planet, it just interferes with a lot of what humanity thinks.
Okay. Let me criticize this thing.
Im not talking about James Cameron -- although I could, but I wont.
You really do have to go and see his latest film, "Aliens of the Deep." Its incredible.
It features two of these deep rovers, and I can criticize them because these sweet things are mine.
This, I think, represents one of the most beautiful classic submersibles built.
If you look at that sub, youll see a sphere.
This is an acryclic sphere.
It generates all of the buoyancy, all of the payload for the craft, and the batteries are down here hanging underneath, exactly like a balloon.
This is the envelope, and this is the gondola, the payload.
Also coming up later for criticism are these massive lights.
And this one actually carries two great manipulators.
It actually is a very good working sub -- thats what it was designed for.
The problem with it is -- and the reason I will never build another one like it -- is that this is a product of two-dimensional thinking.
Its what we humans do when we go in the ocean as engineers; we take all our terrestrial hang-ups, all our constraints -- importantly, these two-dimensional constraints that we have, and theyre so constrained we dont even understand it -- and we take them underwater.
You notice that Jim Cameron is sitting in a seat.
A seat works in a two-dimensional world, where gravity blasts down on that seat, OK?
And in a two-dimensional world, we do know about the third dimension but we dont use it because to go up requires an awful lot of energy against gravity.
And then our mothers tell us, "Careful you dont fall down" -- because youll fall over.
Now, go into the real atmosphere of this planet.
This planet has an inner atmosphere of water; its its inner atmosphere. It has two atmospheres -- a lesser, outer gaseous atmosphere, a lighter one.
Most of life on earth is in that inner atmosphere.
And that life enjoys a three-dimensional existence, which is alien to us.
Fish do not sit in seats.
(Laughter) They dont. Their mothers dont say to little baby fish, "Careful you dont fall over."
They dont fall over. They dont fall.
They live in a three-dimensional world where there is no difference in energy between going this way, that way, that way or that way.
Its truly a three-dimensional space.
And were only just beginning to grasp it.
I dont know of any other submersible, or even remote, that just takes advantage that this is a three-dimensional space.
This is the way we should be going into the oceans.
This is a three-dimensional machine.
What we need to do is go down into the ocean with the freedom of the animals, and move in this three-dimensional space.
OK, this is good stuff.
This is mans first attempt at flying underwater.
Right now, Im just coming down on this gorgeous, big, giant manta ray.
She has twice the wingspan that I do.
There Im coming; she sees me.
And just notice how she rolls under and turns; she doesnt sit there and try and blow air into a tank and kind of flow up or sink down -- she just rolls.
And the craft that Im in -- this hasnt been shown before.
Chris asked us to show stuff that hasnt been shown before.
I wanted you to notice that she actually turned to come back up.
There I am; I see her coming back, coming up underneath me.
I put reverse thrust and I try and pull gently down.
Im trying to do everything very gently.
We spent about three hours together and shes beginning to trust me.
And this ballet is controlled by this lady here.
She gets about that close and then she pulls away.
So now I try and go after her, but Im practicing flying.
This is the first flying machine. This was the first prototype.
This was a fly by wire. It has wings.
Therere no silly buoyancy tanks -- its permanently, positively buoyant.
And then by moving through the water its able to take that control.
Now, look at that; look, its -- she just blew me away.
She just rolled right away from underneath.
Really thats the only real dive Ive ever made in this machine.
It took 10 years to build.
But this lady here taught me, hah, taught me so much.
We just learned so much in three hours in the water there.
I just had to go and build another machine.
But look here. Instead of blowing tanks and coming up slowly without thinking about it, its a little bit of back pressure, and that sub just comes straight back up out of the water.
This is an internal Sony camera. Thank you, Sony.
I dont really look that ugly, but the camera is so close that its just distorted.
Now, there she goes, right overhead.
This is a wide-angle camera.
Shes just a few inches off the top of my head.
"Aah, ha, oh, he just crossed over the top of my head about, oh, I dont know, just so close."
I come back up, not for air.
"This is an incredible encounter with a manta. Im speechless.
Weve been just feet apart. Im going back down now."
Okay, can we cut that? Lights back up please.
(Applause) Trying to fly and keep up with that animal -- it wasnt the lack of maneuverability that we had.
It was the fact she was going so slow.
I actually designed that to move faster through the water because I thought that was the thing that we needed to do: to move fast and get range.
But after that encounter I really did want to go back with that animal and dance.
She wanted to dance.
And so what we needed to do was increase the wing area so that we just had more grip, develop higher forces.
So the sub that was outside last year -- this is the one.
You see the larger wing area here.
Also, clearly, it was such a powerful thing, we wanted to try and bring other people but we couldn't figure out how to do it.
So we opened the worlds first flight school.
The rational for the worlds first flight school goes something like: when the coastguards come up to me and say -- they used to leave us alone when we were diving these goofy little spherical things, but when we started flying around in underwater jet fighters they got a little nervous -- they would come up and say, "Do you have a license for that?"
And then Id put my sunglasses on, the beard that would all sprout out, and I would say, "I dont need no stinking license."
(Laughter) "I write these stinking license," which I do.
So Bob Gelfond's around here -- but somebody in the audience here has license number 20.
Theyre one of the first subsea aviators.
So weve run two flight schools.
Where the hell that goes, I dont know, but its a lot of fun.
What comes next in 30 seconds? I cant tell you.
But the patent for underwater flight -- Karen and I, we were looking at it, some business partners wanted us to patent it -- we werent sure about that.
Weve decided were just going to let that go.
It just seems wrong to try and patent -- (Applause) -- the freedom for underwater flight.
So anybody who wants to copy us and come and join us, go for it.
The other thing is that weve got much lower costs.
We developed some other technology called spider optics, and Craig Ventner asked me to make an announcement here this morning: were going to be building a beautiful, little, small version of this -- unmanned, super deep -- for his boat to go and get back some deep sea DNA stuff.
(Applause) Thank you.
Well, hello.
This is Sophie.
It's all right, don't worry, everything's going to be fine.
(Laughter) There are some people on the balcony that are very happy to be up there now.
(Laughter) So this is Sophie -- not Sophia -- no, Sophie.
She has a French name.
And you wonder why?
(Laughter) So Sophie, for most people, is the incarnation of terror, really.
She's far too leggy, she's far too hairy, and she's far too big to ever be trusted.
But to me, Sophie is a fantastic feat of bioengineering.
You see, Sophie is a testimony to all those creatures that have managed to survive since the beginning of time; all those animals that have managed to have offspring generation after generation, until this day.
You see, over one billion years ago, the first primitive cells started to evolve on this planet.
It took spiders 430 million years to become what they are now: one of the most versatile, one of the most diverse and one of the most evolved groups -- (Laughter) of predators to ever walk this earth.
It's actually quite sporty to give a speech while wrangling a tarantula, I have to say.
(Laughter) So, we shouldn't forget that Sophie -- and in fact, all of us -- we all are a testimony to all those ruthless battles that actually were won consistently by all our ancestors, all our predecessors.
In fact, all of us, every single one of you, is in fact an uninterrupted, one-billion-years-old success story.
And in the gaze of Sophie, that success is partly due to what she has in her chest, just under her eyes.
In there, she has a pair of venom glands that are attached to a pair of fangs, and those fangs are folded into her mouth.
So, without those fangs and without this venom, Sophie would have never managed to survive.
Now, many animals have evolved venom systems in order to survive.
Nowadays, any species of venomous snakes, any species of spider, any species of scorpion, has its own venom signature, if you will, made out of dozens, if not hundreds, of chemical compounds.
And all of those compounds have evolved purely for one purpose: disable and, eventually, kill.
Now, venom can actually act in many different ways.
Venom, believe me, can make you feel pains that you've never felt before.
Venom can also make your heart stop within minutes, or it can turn your blood into jelly.
Venom can also paralyze you almost instantly, or it can just eat your flesh away, like acid.
Now, all of these are pretty gruesome stories, I know, but, to me, it's kind of music to my ears.
It's what I love.
So why is that?
Well, it's not because I'm a nutcase, no.
(Laughter) Just imagine what we could do if we could harvest all those super powerful compounds and use them to our benefit.
That would be amazing, right?
What if we could, I don't know, produce new antibiotics with those venoms?
What if we could actually help people that are suffering from diabetes or hypertension?
Well, in fact, all those applications are already being developed by scientists just like me everywhere around the world, as I speak.
You see, hypertension is actually treated regularly with a medication that has been developed from the toxin that is produced by a South American viper.
People that have type 2 diabetes can be monitored using, actually, the toxin produced by a lizard from North America.
And in hospitals all around the world, a new protocol is being developed to use a toxin from a marine snail for anesthetics.
You see, venom is that kind of huge library of chemical compounds that are available to us, that are produced by hundreds of thousands of live creatures.
And -- Oh, sorry, she just wants to go for a little walk.
(Laughter) Spiders alone are actually thought to produce over 10 million different kinds of compounds with potential therapeutic application.
10 million.
And do you know how many scientists actually have managed to study so far?
About 0.01 percent.
So that means that there is still 99.99 percent of all those compounds that are out there, completely unknown, and are just waiting to be harvested and tested, which is fantastic.
You see, so far, scientists have concentrated their efforts on very charismatic, very dangerous animals -- vipers and cobras or scorpions and black widows.
But what about all those little bugs that we actually have all around us?
You know, like that spider that lives behind your couch?
You know, the one that decides to just shoot through the floor when you're watching TV and freaks you out?
Ah, you have that one at home as well.
(Laughter) Well, what about those guys?
Do they actually produce some kind of amazing compound in their tiny body as well?
Well, an honest answer a few months ago would have been, "We have no clue."
But now that my students and myself have started to look into it, I can tell you those guys actually are producing very, very interesting compounds.
And I'm going to tell you more about that in a second, but first, I would like to tell you more about this "we are looking into it."
How does one look into it?
Well, first of all, my students and I have to capture a lot of spiders.
So how do we do that?
Well, you'd be surprised.
Once one starts to look, one finds a lot of spiders.
They actually live everywhere around us.
Within a couple of hours, we are capable of catching maybe two, three, four hundred spiders, and we bring them back to my laboratory, and we house each of them in its own individual home.
And we give each of them a little meal.
So now I know what you're thinking: "This guy's nuts.
He has a spider B&amp;B at work ..."
(Laughter) No, no it's not exactly that, and it's not the kind of venture I would advise you to start.
No, once we're done with that, we wait a few days, and then, we anesthetize those spiders.
Once they're asleep, we run a tiny little electric current through their body and that contracts their venom glads.
Then, under a microscope, we can see a tiny little droplet of venom appearing.
So we take a hair-thin glass tube, a capillary, and we collect that tiny droplet.
Then, we take the spider and we put it back into its home, and we start again with another one.
Because spiders are completely unharmed during the process, it means that a few days later, once they've produced a little bit of venom again and they've recovered, we can release them back into the wild.
It takes literally hundreds of spiders to just produce the equivalent of one raindrop of venom.
So that drop is incredibly precious to us.
And once we have it, we freeze it, and we then pass it in a machine that will separate and purify every chemical compound that is in that venom.
We're speaking about tiny amounts.
We're actually speaking about a tenth of a millionth of a liter of compound, but we can dilute that compound several thousand times in its own volume of water and then test it against a whole range of nasty stuff, like cancer cells or bacteria.
And this is when the very exciting part of my job starts, because this is pure scientific gambling.
It's kind of "Las Vegas, baby," for me.
(Laughter) We spend so many hours, so much resources, so much time trying to get those compounds ready, and then we test them.
And most of the time, nothing happens.
Nothing at all.
But once in a while -- just once in a while, we get that particular compound that has absolutely amazing effects.
That's the jackpot.
And when I'm saying that, actually, I should take out something else from my pocket -- be afraid, be very afraid.
(Laughter) Now, in that little tube, I have, actually, a very common spider.
The kind of spider that you could find in your shed, that you could find in your basement or that you could find in your sewer pipe, understand: in your toilet.
Now, that little spider happens to produce amazingly powerful antimicrobial compounds.
It is even capable of killing those drug-resistant bacteria that are giving us so much trouble, that are often making media headlines.
Now, honestly, if I was living in your sewer pipe, I'd produce antibiotics, too.
(Laughter) But that little spider, may actually hold the answer to a very, very serious concern we have.
You see, around the world, every single day, about 1,700 people die because of antimicrobial-resistant infections.
Multiply that by 365, and you're reaching the staggering number of 700,000 people dead every single year because antibiotics that were efficient 30, 20 or 10 years ago are not capable of killing very common bugs.
The reality is that the world is running out of antibiotics, and the pharmaceutical industry does not have any answer, actually, any weapon to address that concern.
You see, 30 years ago, you could consider that 10 to 15 new kinds of antibiotics would hit the market every couple of years.
Do you know how many of them hit the market in the past five years?
Two.
The reality is that if we continue this way, we are a few decades away from being completely helpless in front of infections, just like we were before the discovery of penicillin 90 years ago.
So you see, the reality is that we are at war against an invisible enemy that adapts and evolves a lot quicker than we do.
And in that war, this little spider might be one of our greatest secret weapons.
Just a half a millionth of a liter of a venom, diluted 10,000 times, is still capable of killing most bacteria that are resistant to any other kind of antibiotics.
It's absolutely amazing.
Every time I repeat this experiment, I just wonder: How is that possible?
How many other possibilities and secrets do the siblings actually have?
What kind of wonderful product can we really find, if we care to look?
So when people ask me, "Are bugs really the future of therapeutic drugs?"
my answer is, "Well, I really believe that they do hold some key answers."
And we need to really give ourselves the means to investigate them.
So when you head back home later tonight, and you see that spider in the corner of your room ...
(Laughter) don't squash it.
(Laughter) Just look at it, admire it and remember that it is an absolutely fantastic creature, a pure product of evolution, and that maybe that very spider, one day, will hold the answer, will hold the key to your very own survival.
You see, she's not so insignificant anymore now, is she?
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
For your sons sixth birthday, youve promised to get him the cutest creature in creation: the cuddly.
Its hard to believe that its a cousin of the terrifying duddly or the hideous fuddly.
Theyre all members of the Wuddly species, and the process of adopting them is deeply peculiar.
It takes 100 eggs to make a single animal in genus Wuddly.
When 100 eggs are placed together in an incubator, they undergo egg fusion, and combine in the following way.
Blue and purple combine to make red eggs.
Red and blue combine to make purple eggs, and red and purple combine to make blue eggs.
The most plentiful eggs pair up first, and if two piles are even, an egg comes from one of them at random.
They keep combining until theres just one left.
If the final egg is blue, a Cuddly hatches out of it.
Purple eggs give you Duddlies, and Red eggs give you Fuddlies.
The incubator currently has 99 eggs in it.
23 are blue, 33 are purple, and 43 are red.
You can begin the process of egg fusion by adding an egg of any color to the room.
When all the eggs have combined into a single egg, the creature that hatches will bond with you on sight, which is why getting a Cuddly is so important.
After all, you made a promise to your son.
Which color egg should you add to the incubator to get a cuddly?
Pause the video to figure it out for yourself.
Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1 Its easy to get mixed up with all the cuddlies, duddlies, and fuddlies coming from different colored eggs.
If we ignore how many total eggs of each color there are, and just look at the process of egg fusion, we might notice something that will make this problem simpler.
When two eggs fuse, the number of eggs of each of those colors decreases by one, and the number of the third color increases by one.
That means they all change parity, or evenness and oddness, at the same time.
Right now all three piles are odd, but you get to add an egg to one color, which means that itll be even and the other two will be odd.
Whichever color you choose will always be the opposite parity of the other two piles: odd when theyre even and even when theyre odd, since every egg fusion flips each piles parity simultaneously.
We want to end with 1 blue, 0 purple, and 0 red eggs, or odd, even, even.
That means we want the blue egg pile to be the opposite parity of the other two piles at the start as well.
So you add a blue egg into the room, and 99 egg fusions later, only a single blue egg remains.
The Cuddly that hatches is sure to make your 6-year-old as happy as can be.
Just be sure to follow the shopkeepers warning, and never feed it after midnight.
In 2012, a team of Japanese and Danish researchers set a world record, transmitting 1 petabit of data thats 10,000 hours of high-def video over a fifty-kilometer cable, in a second.
This wasnt just any cable.
It was a souped-up version of fiber optics the hidden network that links our planet and makes the internet possible.
For decades, long-distance communications between cities and countries were carried by electrical signals, in wires made of copper.
This was slow and inefficient, with metal wires limiting data rates and power lost as wasted heat.
But in the late 20th century, engineers mastered a far superior method of transmission.
Instead of metal, glass can be carefully melted and drawn into flexible fiber strands, hundreds of kilometers long and no thicker than human hair.
And instead of electricity, these strands carry pulses of light, representing digital data.
But how does light travel within glass, rather than just pass through it?
The trick lies in a phenomenon known as total internal reflection.
Since Isaac Newtons time, lensmakers and scientists have known that light bends when it passes between air and materials like water or glass.
When a ray of light inside glass hits its surface at a steep angle, it refracts, or bends as it exits into air.
But if the ray travels at a shallow angle, itll bend so far that it stays trapped, bouncing along inside the glass.
Under the right condition, something normally transparent to light can instead hide it from the world.
Compared to electricity or radio, fiber optic signals barely degrade over great distances a little power does scatter away, and fibers cant bend too sharply, otherwise the light leaks out.
Today, a single optical fiber carries many wavelengths of light, each a different channel of data.
And a fiber optic cable contains hundreds of these fiber strands.
Over a million kilometers of cable crisscross our ocean floors to link the continents thats enough to wind around the Equator nearly thirty times.
With fiber optics, distance hardly limits data, which has allowed the internet to evolve into a planetary computer.
Increasingly, our mobile work and play rely on legions of overworked computer servers, warehoused in gigantic data centers flung across the world.
This is called cloud computing, and it leads to two big problems: heat waste and bandwidth demand.
The vast majority of internet traffic shuttles around inside data centers, where thousands of servers are connected by traditional electrical cables.
Half of their running power is wasted as heat.
Meanwhile, wireless bandwidth demand steadily marches on, and the gigahertz signals used in our mobile devices are reaching their data delivery limits.
It seems fiber optics has been too good for its own good, fueling overly-ambitious cloud and mobile computing expectations.
But a related technology, integrated photonics, has come to the rescue.
Light can be guided not only in optical fibers, but also in ultrathin silicon wires.
Silicon wires dont guide light as well as fiber.
But they do enable engineers to shrink all the devices in a hundred kilometer fiber optic network down to tiny photonic chips that plug into servers and convert their electrical signals to optical and back.
These electricity-to-light chips allow for wasteful electrical cables in data centers to be swapped out for power-efficient fiber.
Photonic chips can help break open wireless bandwidth limitations, too.
Researchers are working to replace mobile gigahertz signals with terahertz frequencies, to carry data thousands of times faster.
But these are short-range signals: they get absorbed by moisture in the air, or blocked by tall buildings.
With tiny wireless-to-fiber photonic transmitter chips distributed throughout cities, terahertz signals can be relayed over long-range distances.
They can do so via a stable middleman, optical fiber, and make hyperfast wireless connectivity a reality.
For all of human history, light has gifted us with sight and heat, serving as a steady companion while we explored and settled the physical world.
Now, weve saddled light with information and redirected it to run along a fiber optic superhighway with many different integrated photonic exits to build an even more expansive, virtual world.
18 minutes is an absolutely brutal time limit, so I'm going to dive straight in, right at the point where I get this thing to work.
Here we go. I'm going to talk about five different things.
I'm going to talk about why defeating aging is desirable.
I'm going to talk about why we have to get our shit together, and actually talk about this a bit more than we do.
I'm going to talk about feasibility as well, of course.
I'm going to talk about why we are so fatalistic about doing anything about aging.
And then I'm going spend perhaps the second half of the talk talking about, you know, how we might actually be able to prove that fatalism is wrong, namely, by actually doing something about it.
I'm going to do that in two steps.
The first one I'm going to talk about is how to get from a relatively modest amount of life extension -- which I'm going to define as 30 years, applied to people who are already in middle-age when you start -- to a point which can genuinely be called defeating aging.
Namely, essentially an elimination of the relationship between how old you are and how likely you are to die in the next year -- or indeed, to get sick in the first place.
And of course, the last thing I'm going to talk about is how to reach that intermediate step, that point of maybe 30 years life extension.
So I'm going to start with why we should.
Now, I want to ask a question.
Hands up: anyone in the audience who is in favor of malaria?
That was easy. OK.
OK. Hands up: anyone in the audience who's not sure whether malaria is a good thing or a bad thing?
OK. So we all think malaria is a bad thing.
That's very good news, because I thought that was what the answer would be.
Now the thing is, I would like to put it to you that the main reason why we think that malaria is a bad thing is because of a characteristic of malaria that it shares with aging.
And here is that characteristic.
The only real difference is that aging kills considerably more people than malaria does.
Now, I like in an audience, in Britain especially, to talk about the comparison with foxhunting, which is something that was banned after a long struggle, by the government not very many months ago.
I mean, I know I'm with a sympathetic audience here, but, as we know, a lot of people are not entirely persuaded by this logic.
And this is actually a rather good comparison, it seems to me.
You know, a lot of people said, "Well, you know, city boys have no business telling us rural types what to do with our time.
It's a traditional part of the way of life, and we should be allowed to carry on doing it.
It's ecologically sound; it stops the population explosion of foxes."
But ultimately, the government prevailed in the end, because the majority of the British public, and certainly the majority of members of Parliament, came to the conclusion that it was really something that should not be tolerated in a civilized society.
And I think that human aging shares all of these characteristics in spades.
What part of this do people not understand?
It's not just about life, of course -- (Laughter) -- it's about healthy life, you know -- getting frail and miserable and dependent is no fun, whether or not dying may be fun.
So really, this is how I would like to describe it.
It's a global trance.
These are the sorts of unbelievable excuses that people give for aging.
And, I mean, OK, I'm not actually saying that these excuses are completely valueless.
There are some good points to be made here, things that we ought to be thinking about, forward planning so that nothing goes too -- well, so that we minimize the turbulence when we actually figure out how to fix aging.
But these are completely crazy, when you actually remember your sense of proportion.
You know, these are arguments; these are things that would be legitimate to be concerned about.
But the question is, are they so dangerous -- these risks of doing something about aging -- that they outweigh the downside of doing the opposite, namely, leaving aging as it is?
Are these so bad that they outweigh condemning 100,000 people a day to an unnecessarily early death?
You know, if you haven't got an argument that's that strong, then just don't waste my time, is what I say.
(Laughter) Now, there is one argument that some people do think really is that strong, and here it is.
People worry about overpopulation; they say, "Well, if we fix aging, no one's going to die to speak of, or at least the death toll is going to be much lower, only from crossing St. Giles carelessly.
And therefore, we're not going to be able to have many kids, and kids are really important to most people."
And that's true.
And you know, a lot of people try to fudge this question, and give answers like this.
I don't agree with those answers. I think they basically don't work.
I think it's true, that we will face a dilemma in this respect.
We will have to decide whether to have a low birth rate, or a high death rate.
A high death rate will, of course, arise from simply rejecting these therapies, in favor of carrying on having a lot of kids.
And, I say that that's fine -- the future of humanity is entitled to make that choice.
What's not fine is for us to make that choice on behalf of the future.
If we vacillate, hesitate, and do not actually develop these therapies, then we are condemning a whole cohort of people -- who would have been young enough and healthy enough to benefit from those therapies, but will not be, because we haven't developed them as quickly as we could -- we'll be denying those people an indefinite life span, and I consider that that is immoral.
That's my answer to the overpopulation question.
Right. So the next thing is, now why should we get a little bit more active on this?
And the fundamental answer is that the pro-aging trance is not as dumb as it looks.
It's actually a sensible way of coping with the inevitability of aging.
Aging is ghastly, but it's inevitable, so, you know, we've got to find some way to put it out of our minds, and it's rational to do anything that we might want to do, to do that.
Like, for example, making up these ridiculous reasons why aging is actually a good thing after all.
But of course, that only works when we have both of these components.
And as soon as the inevitability bit becomes a little bit unclear -- and we might be in range of doing something about aging -- this becomes part of the problem.
This pro-aging trance is what stops us from agitating about these things.
And that's why we have to really talk about this a lot -- evangelize, I will go so far as to say, quite a lot -- in order to get people's attention, and make people realize that they are in a trance in this regard.
So that's all I'm going to say about that.
I'm now going to talk about feasibility.
And the fundamental reason, I think, why we feel that aging is inevitable is summed up in a definition of aging that I'm giving here.
A very simple definition.
Aging is a side effect of being alive in the first place, which is to say, metabolism.
This is not a completely tautological statement; it's a reasonable statement.
Aging is basically a process that happens to inanimate objects like cars, and it also happens to us, despite the fact that we have a lot of clever self-repair mechanisms, because those self-repair mechanisms are not perfect.
So basically, metabolism, which is defined as basically everything that keeps us alive from one day to the next, has side effects.
Those side effects accumulate and eventually cause pathology.
That's a fine definition. So we can put it this way: we can say that, you know, we have this chain of events.
And there are really two games in town, according to most people, with regard to postponing aging.
They're what I'm calling here the "gerontology approach" and the "geriatrics approach."
The geriatrician will intervene late in the day, when pathology is becoming evident, and the geriatrician will try and hold back the sands of time, and stop the accumulation of side effects from causing the pathology quite so soon.
Of course, it's a very short-term-ist strategy; it's a losing battle, because the things that are causing the pathology are becoming more abundant as time goes on.
The gerontology approach looks much more promising on the surface, because, you know, prevention is better than cure.
But unfortunately the thing is that we don't understand metabolism very well.
In fact, we have a pitifully poor understanding of how organisms work -- even cells we're not really too good on yet.
We've discovered things like, for example, RNA interference only a few years ago, and this is a really fundamental component of how cells work.
Basically, gerontology is a fine approach in the end, but it is not an approach whose time has come when we're talking about intervention.
So then, what do we do about that?
I mean, that's a fine logic, that sounds pretty convincing, pretty ironclad, doesn't it?
But it isn't.
Before I tell you why it isn't, I'm going to go a little bit into what I'm calling step two.
Just suppose, as I said, that we do acquire -- let's say we do it today for the sake of argument -- the ability to confer 30 extra years of healthy life on people who are already in middle age, let's say 55.
I'm going to call that "robust human rejuvenation." OK.
What would that actually mean for how long people of various ages today -- or equivalently, of various ages at the time that these therapies arrive -- would actually live?
In order to answer that question -- you might think it's simple, but it's not simple.
We can't just say, "Well, if they're young enough to benefit from these therapies, then they'll live 30 years longer."
That's the wrong answer.
And the reason it's the wrong answer is because of progress.
There are two sorts of technological progress really, for this purpose.
There are fundamental, major breakthroughs, and there are incremental refinements of those breakthroughs.
Now, they differ a great deal in terms of the predictability of time frames.
Fundamental breakthroughs: very hard to predict how long it's going to take to make a fundamental breakthrough.
It was a very long time ago that we decided that flying would be fun, and it took us until 1903 to actually work out how to do it.
But after that, things were pretty steady and pretty uniform.
I think this is a reasonable sequence of events that happened in the progression of the technology of powered flight.
We can think, really, that each one is sort of beyond the imagination of the inventor of the previous one, if you like.
The incremental advances have added up to something which is not incremental anymore.
This is the sort of thing you see after a fundamental breakthrough.
And you see it in all sorts of technologies.
Computers: you can look at a more or less parallel time line, happening of course a bit later.
You can look at medical care. I mean, hygiene, vaccines, antibiotics -- you know, the same sort of time frame.
So I think that actually step two, that I called a step a moment ago, isn't a step at all.
That in fact, the people who are young enough to benefit from these first therapies that give this moderate amount of life extension, even though those people are already middle-aged when the therapies arrive, will be at some sort of cusp.
They will mostly survive long enough to receive improved treatments that will give them a further 30 or maybe 50 years.
In other words, they will be staying ahead of the game.
The therapies will be improving faster than the remaining imperfections in the therapies are catching up with us.
This is a very important point for me to get across.
Because, you know, most people, when they hear that I predict that a lot of people alive today are going to live to 1,000 or more, they think that I'm saying that we're going to invent therapies in the next few decades that are so thoroughly eliminating aging that those therapies will let us live to 1,000 or more.
I'm not saying that at all.
I'm saying that the rate of improvement of those therapies will be enough.
They'll never be perfect, but we'll be able to fix the things that 200-year-olds die of, before we have any 200-year-olds.
And the same for 300 and 400 and so on.
I decided to give this a little name, which is "longevity escape velocity."
(Laughter) Well, it seems to get the point across.
So, these trajectories here are basically how we would expect people to live, in terms of remaining life expectancy, as measured by their health, for given ages that they were at the time that these therapies arrive.
If you're already 100, or even if you're 80 -- and an average 80-year-old, we probably can't do a lot for you with these therapies, because you're too close to death's door for the really initial, experimental therapies to be good enough for you.
You won't be able to withstand them.
But if you're only 50, then there's a chance that you might be able to pull out of the dive and, you know -- (Laughter) -- eventually get through this and start becoming biologically younger in a meaningful sense, in terms of your youthfulness, both physical and mental, and in terms of your risk of death from age-related causes.
And of course, if you're a bit younger than that, then you're never really even going to get near to being fragile enough to die of age-related causes.
So this is a genuine conclusion that I come to, that the first 150-year-old -- we don't know how old that person is today, because we don't know how long it's going to take to get these first-generation therapies.
But irrespective of that age, I'm claiming that the first person to live to 1,000 -- subject of course, to, you know, global catastrophes -- is actually, probably, only about 10 years younger than the first 150-year-old.
And that's quite a thought.
Alright, so finally I'm going to spend the rest of the talk, my last seven-and-a-half minutes, on step one; namely, how do we actually get to this moderate amount of life extension that will allow us to get to escape velocity?
And in order to do that, I need to talk about mice a little bit.
I have a corresponding milestone to robust human rejuvenation.
I'm calling it "robust mouse rejuvenation," not very imaginatively.
And this is what it is.
I say we're going to take a long-lived strain of mouse, which basically means mice that live about three years on average.
We do exactly nothing to them until they're already two years old.
And then we do a whole bunch of stuff to them, and with those therapies, we get them to live, on average, to their fifth birthday.
So, in other words, we add two years -- we treble their remaining lifespan, starting from the point that we started the therapies.
The question then is, what would that actually mean for the time frame until we get to the milestone I talked about earlier for humans?
Which we can now, as I've explained, equivalently call either robust human rejuvenation or longevity escape velocity.
Secondly, what does it mean for the public's perception of how long it's going to take for us to get to those things, starting from the time we get the mice?
And thirdly, the question is, what will it do to actually how much people want it?
And it seems to me that the first question is entirely a biology question, and it's extremely hard to answer.
One has to be very speculative, and many of my colleagues would say that we should not do this speculation, that we should simply keep our counsel until we know more.
I say that's nonsense.
I say we absolutely are irresponsible if we stay silent on this.
We need to give our best guess as to the time frame, in order to give people a sense of proportion so that they can assess their priorities.
So, I say that we have a 50/50 chance of reaching this RHR milestone, robust human rejuvenation, within 15 years from the point that we get to robust mouse rejuvenation.
15 years from the robust mouse.
The public's perception will probably be somewhat better than that.
The public tends to underestimate how difficult scientific things are.
So they'll probably think it's five years away.
They'll be wrong, but that actually won't matter too much.
And finally, of course, I think it's fair to say that a large part of the reason why the public is so ambivalent about aging now is the global trance I spoke about earlier, the coping strategy.
That will be history at this point, because it will no longer be possible to believe that aging is inevitable in humans, since it's been postponed so very effectively in mice.
So we're likely to end up with a very strong change in people's attitudes, and of course that has enormous implications.
So in order to tell you now how we're going to get these mice, I'm going to add a little bit to my description of aging.
I'm going to use this word "damage" to denote these intermediate things that are caused by metabolism and that eventually cause pathology.
Because the critical thing about this is that even though the damage only eventually causes pathology, the damage itself is caused ongoing-ly throughout life, starting before we're born.
But it is not part of metabolism itself.
And this turns out to be useful.
Because we can re-draw our original diagram this way.
We can say that, fundamentally, the difference between gerontology and geriatrics is that gerontology tries to inhibit the rate at which metabolism lays down this damage.
And I'm going to explain exactly what damage is in concrete biological terms in a moment.
And geriatricians try to hold back the sands of time by stopping the damage converting into pathology.
And the reason it's a losing battle is because the damage is continuing to accumulate.
So there's a third approach, if we look at it this way.
We can call it the "engineering approach," and I claim that the engineering approach is within range.
The engineering approach does not intervene in any processes.
It does not intervene in this process or this one.
And that's good because it means that it's not a losing battle, and it's something that we are within range of being able to do, because it doesn't involve improving on evolution.
The engineering approach simply says, "Let's go and periodically repair all of these various types of damage -- not necessarily repair them completely, but repair them quite a lot, so that we keep the level of damage down below the threshold that must exist, that causes it to be pathogenic."
We know that this threshold exists, because we don't get age-related diseases until we're in middle age, even though the damage has been accumulating since before we were born.
Why do I say that we're in range? Well, this is basically it.
The point about this slide is actually the bottom.
If we try to say which bits of metabolism are important for aging, we will be here all night, because basically all of metabolism is important for aging in one way or another.
This list is just for illustration; it is incomplete.
The list on the right is also incomplete.
It's a list of types of pathology that are age-related, and it's just an incomplete list.
But I would like to claim to you that this list in the middle is actually complete -- this is the list of types of thing that qualify as damage, side effects of metabolism that cause pathology in the end, or that might cause pathology.
And there are only seven of them.
They're categories of things, of course, but there's only seven of them.
Cell loss, mutations in chromosomes, mutations in the mitochondria and so on.
First of all, I'd like to give you an argument for why that list is complete.
Of course one can make a biological argument.
One can say, "OK, what are we made of?"
We're made of cells and stuff between cells.
What can damage accumulate in?
The answer is: long-lived molecules, because if a short-lived molecule undergoes damage, but then the molecule is destroyed -- like by a protein being destroyed by proteolysis -- then the damage is gone, too.
It's got to be long-lived molecules.
So, these seven things were all under discussion in gerontology a long time ago and that is pretty good news, because it means that, you know, we've come a long way in biology in these 20 years, so the fact that we haven't extended this list is a pretty good indication that there's no extension to be done.
However, it's better than that; we actually know how to fix them all, in mice, in principle -- and what I mean by in principle is, we probably can actually implement these fixes within a decade.
Some of them are partially implemented already, the ones at the top.
I haven't got time to go through them at all, but my conclusion is that, if we can actually get suitable funding for this, then we can probably develop robust mouse rejuvenation in only 10 years, but we do need to get serious about it.
We do need to really start trying.
So of course, there are some biologists in the audience, and I want to give some answers to some of the questions that you may have.
You may have been dissatisfied with this talk, but fundamentally you have to go and read this stuff.
I've published a great deal on this; I cite the experimental work on which my optimism is based, and there's quite a lot of detail there.
The detail is what makes me confident of my rather aggressive time frames that I'm predicting here.
So if you think that I'm wrong, you'd better damn well go and find out why you think I'm wrong.
And of course the main thing is that you shouldn't trust people who call themselves gerontologists because, as with any radical departure from previous thinking within a particular field, you know, you expect people in the mainstream to be a bit resistant and not really to take it seriously.
So, you know, you've got to actually do your homework, in order to understand whether this is true.
And we'll just end with a few things.
One thing is, you know, you'll be hearing from a guy in the next session who said some time ago that he could sequence the human genome in half no time, and everyone said, "Well, it's obviously impossible."
And you know what happened.
So, you know, this does happen.
We have various strategies -- there's the Methuselah Mouse Prize, which is basically an incentive to innovate, and to do what you think is going to work, and you get money for it if you win.
There's a proposal to actually put together an institute.
This is what's going to take a bit of money.
But, I mean, look -- how long does it take to spend that on the war in Iraq?
Not very long. OK.
(Laughter) It's got to be philanthropic, because profits distract biotech, but it's basically got a 90 percent chance, I think, of succeeding in this.
And I think we know how to do it. And I'll stop there.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: OK. I don't know if there's going to be any questions but I thought I would give people the chance.
Audience: Since you've been talking about aging and trying to defeat it, why is it that you make yourself appear like an old man?
(Laughter) AG: Because I am an old man. I am actually 158.
(Laughter) (Applause) Audience: Species on this planet have evolved with immune systems to fight off all the diseases so that individuals live long enough to procreate.
However, as far as I know, all the species have evolved to actually die, so when cells divide, the telomerase get shorter, and eventually species die.
So, why does -- evolution has -- seems to have selected against immortality, when it is so advantageous, or is evolution just incomplete?
AG: Brilliant. Thank you for asking a question that I can answer with an uncontroversial answer.
I'm going to tell you the genuine mainstream answer to your question, which I happen to agree with, which is that, no, aging is not a product of selection, evolution; [aging] is simply a product of evolutionary neglect.
In other words, we have aging because it's hard work not to have aging; you need more genetic pathways, more sophistication in your genes in order to age more slowly, and that carries on being true the longer you push it out.
So, to the extent that evolution doesn't matter, doesn't care whether genes are passed on by individuals, living a long time or by procreation, there's a certain amount of modulation of that, which is why different species have different lifespans, but that's why there are no immortal species.
CA: The genes don't care but we do?
AG: That's right.
Audience: Hello. I read somewhere that in the last 20 years, the average lifespan of basically anyone on the planet has grown by 10 years.
If I project that, that would make me think that I would live until 120 if I don't crash on my motorbike.
That means that I'm one of your subjects to become a 1,000-year-old?
AG: If you lose a bit of weight.
(Laughter) Your numbers are a bit out.
The standard numbers are that lifespans have been growing at between one and two years per decade.
So, it's not quite as good as you might think, you might hope.
But I intend to move it up to one year per year as soon as possible.
Audience: I was told that many of the brain cells we have as adults are actually in the human embryo, and that the brain cells last 80 years or so.
If that is indeed true, biologically are there implications in the world of rejuvenation?
If there are cells in my body that live all 80 years, as opposed to a typical, you know, couple of months?
AG: There are technical implications certainly.
Basically what we need to do is replace cells in those few areas of the brain that lose cells at a respectable rate, especially neurons, but we don't want to replace them any faster than that -- or not much faster anyway, because replacing them too fast would degrade cognitive function.
What I said about there being no non-aging species earlier on was a little bit of an oversimplification.
There are species that have no aging -- Hydra for example -- but they do it by not having a nervous system -- and not having any tissues in fact that rely for their function on very long-lived cells.
This was in an area called Wellawatta, a prime residential area in Colombo.
We stood on the railroad tracks that ran between my friend's house and the beach.
The tracks are elevated about eight feet from the waterline normally, but at that point the water had receded to a level three or four feet below normal.
I'd never seen the reef here before.
There were fish caught in rock pools left behind by the receding water.
Some children jumped down and ran to the rock pools with bags.
They were trying to catch fish.
No one realized that this was a very bad idea.
The people on the tracks just continued to watch them.
I turned around to check on my friend's house.
Then someone on the tracks screamed.
Before I could turn around, everyone on the tracks was screaming and running.
The water had started coming back. It was foaming over the reef.
The children managed to run back onto the tracks.
No one was lost there. But the water continued to climb.
In about two minutes, it had reached the level of the railroad tracks and was coming over it. We had run about 100 meters by this time.
It continued to rise.
I saw an old man standing at his gate, knee-deep in water, refusing to move.
He said he'd lived his whole life there by the beach, and that he would rather die there than run.
A boy broke away from his mother to run back into his house to get his dog, who was apparently afraid.
An old lady, crying, was carried out of her house and up the road by her son.
The slum built on the railroad reservation between the sea and the railroad tracks was completely swept away.
Since this was a high-risk location, the police had warned the residents, and no one was there when the water rose.
But they had not had any time to evacuate any belongings.
For hours afterwards, the sea was strewn with bits of wood for miles around -- all of this was from the houses in the slum.
When the waters subsided, it was as if it had never existed.
This may seem hard to believe -- unless you've been reading lots and lots of news reports -- but in many places, after the tsunami, villagers were still terrified.
When what was a tranquil sea swallows up people, homes and long-tail boats -- mercilessly, without warning -- and no one can tell you anything reliable about whether another one is coming, I'm not sure you'd want to calm down either.
One of the scariest things about the tsunami that I've not seen mentioned is the complete lack of information.
This may seem minor, but it is terrifying to hear rumor after rumor after rumor that another tidal wave, bigger than the last, will be coming at exactly 1 p.m., or perhaps tonight, or perhaps ...
You don't even know if it is safe to go back down to the water, to catch a boat to the hospital.
We think that Phi Phi hospital was destroyed.
We think this boat is going to Phuket hospital, but if it's too dangerous to land at its pier, then perhaps it will go to Krabi instead, which is more protected.
We don't think another wave is coming right away.
At the Phi Phi Hill Resort, I was tucked into the corner furthest away from the television, but I strained to listen for information.
They reported that there was an 8.5 magnitude earthquake in Sumatra, which triggered the massive tsunami.
Having this news was comforting in some small way to understand what had just happened to us.
However, the report focused on what had already occurred and offered no information on what to expect now.
In general, everything was merely hearsay and rumor, and not a single person I spoke to for over 36 hours knew anything with any certainty.
Those were two accounts of the Asian tsunami from two Internet blogs that essentially sprang up after it occurred.
I'm now going to show you two video segments from the tsunami that also were shown on blogs.
I should warn you, they're pretty powerful.
One from Thailand, and the second one from Phuket as well.
(Screaming) Voice 1: It's coming in. It's coming again.
Voice 2: It's coming again?
Voice 1: Yeah. It's coming again.
Voice 2: Come get inside here.
Voice 1: It's coming again. Voice 2: New wave?
Voice 1: It's coming again. New wave!
[Unclear] (Screaming) They called me out here.
James Surowiecki: Phew. Those were both on this site: waveofdestruction.org.
In the world of blogs, there's going to be before the tsunami and after the tsunami, because one of the things that happened in the wake of the tsunami was that, although initially -- that is, in that first day -- there was actually a kind of dearth of live reporting, there was a dearth of live video and some people complained about this.
They said, "The blogsters let us down."
What became very clear was that, within a few days, the outpouring of information was immense, and we got a complete and powerful picture of what had happened in a way that we never had been able to get before.
And what you had was a group of essentially unorganized, unconnected writers, video bloggers, etc., who were able to come up with a collective portrait of a disaster that gave us a much better sense of what it was like to actually be there than the mainstream media could give us.
And so in some ways the tsunami can be seen as a sort of seminal moment, a moment in which the blogosphere came, to a certain degree, of age.
Now, I'm going to move now from this kind of -- the sublime in the traditional sense of the word, that is to say, awe-inspiring, terrifying -- to the somewhat more mundane.
Because when we think about blogs, I think for most of us who are concerned about them, we're primarily concerned with things like politics, technology, etc.
And I want to ask three questions in this talk, in the 10 minutes that remain, about the blogosphere.
The first one is, What does it tell us about our ideas, about what motivates people to do things?
The second is, Do blogs genuinely have the possibility of accessing a kind of collective intelligence that has previously remained, for the most part, untapped?
And then the third part is, What are the potential problems, or the dark side of blogs as we know them?
OK, the first question: What do they tell us about why people do things?
One of the fascinating things about the blogosphere specifically, and, of course, the Internet more generally -- and it's going to seem like a very obvious point, but I think it is an important one to think about -- is that the people who are generating these enormous reams of content every day, who are spending enormous amounts of time organizing, linking, commenting on the substance of the Internet, are doing so primarily for free.
They are not getting paid for it in any way other than in the attention and, to some extent, the reputational capital that they gain from doing a good job.
And this is -- at least, to a traditional economist -- somewhat remarkable, because the traditional account of economic man would say that, basically, you do things for a concrete reward, primarily financial.
But instead, what we're finding on the Internet -- and one of the great geniuses of it -- is that people have found a way to work together without any money involved at all.
They have come up with, in a sense, a different method for organizing activity.
The Yale Law professor Yochai Benkler, in an essay called "Coase's Penguin," talks about this open-source model, which we're familiar with from Linux, as being potentially applicable in a whole host of situations.
And, you know, if you think about this with the tsunami, what you have is essentially a kind of an army of local journalists, who are producing enormous amounts of material for no reason other than to tell their stories.
That's a very powerful idea, and it's a very powerful reality.
And it's one that offers really interesting possibilities for organizing a whole host of activities down the road.
So, I think the first thing that the blogosphere tells us is that we need to expand our idea of what counts as rational, and we need to expand our simple equation of value equals money, or, you have to pay for it to be good, but that in fact you can end up with collectively really brilliant products without any money at all changing hands.
There are a few bloggers -- somewhere maybe around 20, now -- who do, in fact, make some kind of money, and a few who are actually trying to make a full-time living out of it, but the vast majority of them are doing it because they love it or they love the attention, or whatever it is.
So, Howard Rheingold has written a lot about this and, I think, is writing about this more, but this notion of voluntary cooperation is an incredibly powerful one, and one worth thinking about.
The second question is, What does the blogosphere actually do for us, in terms of accessing collective intelligence?
You know, as Chris mentioned, I wrote a book called "The Wisdom of Crowds."
And the premise of "The Wisdom of Crowds" is that, under the right conditions, groups can be remarkably intelligent.
And they can actually often be smarter than even the smartest person within them.
The simplest example of this is if you ask a group of people to do something like guess how many jellybeans are in a jar.
If I had a jar of jellybeans and I asked you all to guess how many jellybeans were in that jar, your average guess would be remarkably good.
It would be somewhere probably within three and five percent of the number of beans in the jar, and it would be better than 90 to 95 percent of you.
There may be one or two of you who are brilliant jelly bean guessers, but for the most part the group's guess would be better than just about all of you.
And what's fascinating is that you can see this phenomenon at work in many more complicated situations.
For instance, if you look at the odds on horses at a racetrack, they predict almost perfectly how likely a horse is to win.
In a sense, the group of betters at the racetrack is forecasting the future, in probabilistic terms.
You know, if you think about something like Google, which essentially is relying on the collective intelligence of the Web to seek out those sites that have the most valuable information -- we know that Google does an exceptionally good job of doing that, and it does that because, collectively, this disorganized thing we call the "World Wide Web" actually has a remarkable order, or a remarkable intelligence in it.
And this, I think, is one of the real promises of the blogosphere.
Dan Gillmor -- whose book "We the Media" is included in the gift pack -- has talked about it as saying that, as a writer, he's recognized that his readers know more than he does.
And this is a very challenging idea. It's a very challenging idea to mainstream media. It's a very challenging idea to anyone who has invested an enormous amount of time and expertise, and who has a lot of energy invested in the notion that he or she knows better than everyone else.
But what the blogosphere offers is the possibility of getting at the kind of collective, distributive intelligence that is out there, and that we know is available to us if we can just figure out a way of accessing it.
Each blog post, each blog commentary may not, in and of itself, be exactly what we're looking for, but collectively the judgment of those people posting, those people linking, more often than not is going to give you a very interesting and enormously valuable picture of what's going on.
So, that's the positive side of it.
That's the positive side of what is sometimes called participatory journalism or citizen journalism, etc. -- that, in fact, we are giving people who have never been able to talk before a voice, and we're able to access information that has always been there but has essentially gone untapped.
But there is a dark side to this, and that's what I want to spend the last part of my talk on.
One of the things that happens if you spend a lot of time on the Internet, and you spend a lot of time thinking about the Internet, is that it is very easy to fall in love with the Internet.
It is very easy to fall in love with the decentralized, bottom-up structure of the Internet.
It is very easy to think that networks are necessarily good things -- that being linked from one place to another, that being tightly linked in a group, is a very good thing.
And much of the time it is.
But there's also a downside to this -- a kind of dark side, in fact -- and that is that the more tightly linked we've become to each other, the harder it is for each of us to remain independent.
One of the fundamental characteristics of a network is that, once you are linked in the network, the network starts to shape your views and starts to shape your interactions with everybody else.
That's one of the things that defines what a network is.
A network is not just the product of its component parts.
It is something more than that.
It is, as Steven Johnson has talked about, an emergent phenomenon.
Now, this has all these benefits: it's very beneficial in terms of the efficiency of communicating information; it gives you access to a whole host of people; it allows people to coordinate their activities in very good ways.
But the problem is that groups are only smart when the people in them are as independent as possible.
This is the paradox of the wisdom of crowds, or the paradox of collective intelligence, that what it requires is actually a form of independent thinking.
And networks make it harder for people to do that, because they drive attention to the things that the network values.
So, one of the phenomena that's very clear in the blogosphere is that once a meme, once an idea gets going, it is very easy for people to just sort of pile on, because other people have, say, a link.
People have linked to it, and so other people in turn link to it, etc., etc.
And that phenomenon of piling on the existing links is one that is characteristic of the blogosphere, particularly of the political blogosphere, and it is one that essentially throws off this beautiful, decentralized, bottom-up intelligence that blogs can manifest in the right conditions.
The metaphor that I like to use is the metaphor of the circular mill.
A lot of people talk about ants.
You know, this is a conference inspired by nature.
When we talk about bottom-up, decentralized phenomena, the ant colony is the classic metaphor, because, no individual ant knows what it's doing, but collectively ants are able to reach incredibly intelligent decisions.
They're able to reach food as efficiently as possible, they're able to guide their traffic with remarkable speed.
So, the ant colony is a great model: you have all these little parts that collectively add up to a great thing.
But we know that occasionally ants go astray, and what happens is that, if army ants are wandering around and they get lost, they start to follow a simple rule -- just do what the ant in front of you does.
And what happens is that the ants eventually end up in a circle.
And there's this famous example of one that was 1,200 feet long and lasted for two days, and the ants just kept marching around and around in a circle until they died.
And that, I think, is a sort of thing to watch out for.
That's the thing we have to fear -- is that we're just going to keep marching around and around until we die.
Now, I want to connect this back, though, to the tsunami, because one of the great things about the tsunami -- in terms of the blogosphere's coverage, not in terms of the tsunami itself -- is that it really did represent a genuine bottom-up phenomenon.
You saw sites that had never existed before getting huge amounts of traffic.
You saw people being able to offer up their independent points of view in a way that they hadn't before.
There, you really did see the intelligence of the Web manifest itself.
So, that's the upside. The circular mill is the downside.
And I think that the former is what we really need to strive for.
Thank you very much. (Applause)
I'm Denice Frohman, and this is "Accents."
my mom holds her accent like a shotgun, with two good hands.
her tongue, all brass knuckle slipping in between her lips her hips, are all laughter and wind clap.
she speaks a sanchocho of spanish and english, pushing up and against one another, in rapid fire there is no telling my mama to be "quiet," my mama don't know "quiet."
her voice is one size better fit all and you best not tell her to hush, she waited too many years for her voice to arrive to be told it needed house keeping.
English sits in her mouth remixed so "strawberry" becomes "eh-strawbeddy" and "cookie" becomes "eh-cookie" and kitchen, key chain, and chicken all sound the same.
my mama doesn't say "yes" she says, "ah ha" and suddenly the sky in her mouth becomes a Hector Lavoe song.
her tongue can't lay itself down flat enough for the English language, it got too much hip too much bone too much conga too much cuatro to two step got too many piano keys in between her teeth, it got too much clave too much hand clap got too much salsa to sit still it be an anxious child wanting to make Play-Doh out of concrete English be too neat for her kind of wonderful.
her words spill in conversation between women whose hands are all they got sometimes our hands are all we got and accents that remind us that we are still bomba, still plena you say "wepa" and a stranger becomes your hermano, you say "dale" and a crowd becomes a family reunion.
my mother's tongue is a telegram from her mother decorated with the coqui's of el campo so even when her lips can barely stretch themselves around english, her accent is a stubborn compass always pointing her towards home.
(Music) (Applause) Thank you for being here.
And I say "thank you for being here" because I was silent for 17 years.
And the first words that I spoke were in Washington, D.C., on the 20th anniversary of Earth Day.
And my family and friends had gathered there to hear me speak.
And I said, "Thank you for being here."
My mother, out in the audience, she jumped up, "Hallelujah, Johnnys talking!"
(Laughter) Imagine if you were quiet for 17 years and your mother was out in the audience, say.
My dad said to me, "Thats one" -- Ill explain that.
But I turned around because I didnt recognize where my voice was coming from.
I hadnt heard my voice in 17 years, so I turned around and I looked and I said, "God, who's saying what Im thinking?"
And then I realized it was me, you know, and I kind of laughed.
And I could see my father: "Yeah, he really is crazy."
Well, I want to take you on this journey.
And the journey, I believe, is a metaphor for all of our journeys.
Even though this one is kind of unusual, I want you to think about your own journey.
My journey began in 1971 when I witnessed two oil tankers collide beneath the Golden Gate, and a half a million gallons of oil spilled into the bay.
It disturbed me so much that I decided that I was going to give up riding and driving in motorized vehicles.
Thats a big thing in California.
And it was a big thing in my little community of Point Reyes Station in Inverness, California, because there were only about 350 people there in the winter  this was back in '71 now.
And so when I came in and I started walking around, people -- they just knew what was going on.
And people would drive up next to me and say, "John, what are you doing?"
And Id say, "Well, Im walking for the environment."
And they said, "No, youre walking to make us look bad, right?
Youre walking to make us feel bad."
And maybe there was some truth to that, because I thought that if I started walking, everyone would follow.
Because of the oil, everybody talked about the polllution.
And so I argued with people about that, I argued and I argued.
I called my parents up.
I said, "Ive given up riding and driving in cars."
My dad said, "Why didnt you do that when you were 16?"
(Laughter) I didnt know about the environment then.
Theyre back in Philadelphia.
And so I told my mother, "Im happy though, Im really happy."
She said, "If you were happy, son, you wouldnt have to say it."
Mothers are like that.
And so, on my 27th birthday I decided, because I argued so much and I talk so much, that I was going to stop speaking for just one day -- one day -- to give it a rest.
And so I did.
I got up in the morning and I didnt say a word.
And I have to tell you, it was a very moving experience, because for the first time, I began listening -- in a long time.
And what I heard, it kind of disturbed me.
Because what I used to do, when I thought I was listening, was I would listen just enough to hear what people had to say and think that I could -- I knew what they were going to say, and so I stopped listening.
And in my mind, I just kind of raced ahead and thought of what I was going to say back, while they were still finishing up.
And then I would launch in.
Well, that just ended communication.
So on this first day I actually listened.
And it was very sad for me, because I realized that for those many years I had not been learning.
I was 27. I thought I knew everything.
I didnt.
And so I decided Id better do this for another day, and another day, and another day until finally, I promised myself for a year I would keep quiet because I started learning more and more and I needed to learn more.
So for a year I said I would keep quiet, and then on my birthday I would reassess what I had learned and maybe I would talk again.
Well, that lasted 17 years.
Now during that time -- those 17 years -- I walked and I played the banjo and I painted and I wrote in my journal, and I tried to study the environment by reading books.
And I decided that I was going to go to school. So I did.
I walked up to Ashland, Oregon, where they were offering an environmental studies degree.
Its only 500 miles.
And I went into the Registrars office and -- "What, what, what?"
I had a newspaper clipping.
"Oh, so you really want to go to school here?
You dont ?
We have a special program for you." They did.
And in those two years, I graduated with my first degree -- a bachelors degree.
And my father came out, he was so proud.
He said, "Listen, were really proud of you son, but what are you going to do with a bachelors degree?
You dont ride in cars, you dont talk -- youre going to have to do those things."
(Laughter) I hunched my shoulder, I picked my backpack up again and I started walking.
I walked all the way up to Port Townsend, Washington, where I built a wooden boat, rode it across Puget Sound and walked across Washington [to] Idaho and down to Missoula, Montana.
I had written the University of Montana two years earlier and said I'd like to go to school there.
I said I'd be there in about two years.
(Laughter) And I was there. I showed up in two years and they -- I tell this story because they really helped me.
There are two stories in Montana.
The first story is I didnt have any money -- thats a sign I used a lot.
And they said,"Don't worry about that."
The director of the program said, "Come back tomorrow."
He gave me 150 dollars, and he said, "Register for one credit.
Youre going to go to South America, arent you?"
And I said -- Rivers and lakes, the hydrological systems, South America.
So I did that.
He came back; he said to me, "OK John, now that you've registered for that one credit, you can have a key to an office, you can matriculate -- youre matriculating, so you can use the library.
And what were going to do is, were going to have all of the professors allow you to go to class.
Theyre going to save your grade, and when we figure out how to get you the rest of the money, then you can register for that class and theyll give you the grade."
Wow, they dont do that in graduate schools, I dont think.
But I use that story because they really wanted to help me.
They saw that I was really interested in the environment, and they really wanted to help me along the way.
And during that time, I actually taught classes without speaking.
I had 13 students when I first walked into the class.
I explained, with a friend who could interpret my sign language, that I was John Francis, I was walking around the world, I didnt talk and this was the last time this persons going to be here interpreting for me.
All the students sat around and they went ...
(Laughter) I could see they were looking for the schedule, to see when they could get out.
They had to take that class with me.
Two weeks later, everyone was trying to get into our class.
And I learned in that class -- because I would do things like this ...
and they were all gathered around, going, "What's he trying to say?"
"I don't know, I think he's talking about clear cutting." "Yeah, clear cutting."
"No, no, no, that's not clear cutting, thats -- he's using a handsaw."
"Well, you cant clearcut with a ..."
"Yes, you can clear cut ..."
"No, I think hes talking about selective forestry."
Now this was a discussion class and we were having a discussion.
I just backed out of that, you know, and I just kind of kept the fists from flying.
But what I learned was that sometimes I would make a sign and they said things that I absolutely did not mean, but I should have.
And so what came to me is, if you were a teacher and you were teaching, if you werent learning you probably werent teaching very well.
And so I went on.
My dad came out to see me graduate and, you know, I did the deal, and my father said, "Were really proud of you son, but ... " You know what went on, he said, "Youve got to start riding and driving and start talking.
What are you going to do with a masters degree?"
I hunched my shoulder, I got my backpack and I went on to the University of Wisconsin.
I spent two years there writing on oil spills.
No one was interested in oil spills.
But something happened -- Exxon Valdez.
And I was the only one in the United States writing on oil spills.
My dad came out again.
He said, "I don't know how you do this, son -- I mean, you don't ride in cars, you dont talk.
My sister said maybe I should leave you alone, because you seem to be doing a lot better when youre not saying anything."
(Laughter) Well, I put on my backpack again.
I put my banjo on and I walked all the way to the East Coast, put my foot in the Atlantic Ocean -- it was seven years and one day it took me to walk across the United States.
And on Earth Day, 1990 -- the 20th anniversary of Earth Day -- thats when I began to speak.
And thats why I said, "Thank you for being here."
Because it's sort of like that tree in the forest falling; and if there's no one there to hear, does it really make a sound?
And Im thanking you, and I'm thanking my family because they had come to hear me speak.
And thats communication.
And they also taught me about listening -- that they listened to me.
And its one of those things that came out of the silence, the listening to each other.
Really, very important -- we need to listen to each other.
Well, my journey kept going on.
My dad said, "Thats one," and I still didnt let that go.
I worked for the Coastguard, was made a U.N. Goodwill Ambassador.
I wrote regulations for the United States -- I mean, I wrote oil spill regulations.
20 years ago, if someone had said to me, "John, do you really want to make a difference?"
"Yeah, I want to make a difference."
He said, "You just start walking east; get out of your car and just start walking east."
And as I walked off a little bit, they'd say, "Yeah, and shut up, too."
(Laughter) "Youre going to make a difference, buddy."
How could that be, how could that be?
How could doing such a simple thing like walking and not talking make a difference?
Well, my time at the Coast Guard was a really good time.
And after that -- I only worked one year -- I said, "That's enough. One year's enough for me to do that."
I got on a sailboat and I sailed down to the Caribbean, and walked through all of the islands, and to Venezuela.
And you know, I forgot the most important thing, which is why I started talking, which I have to tell you.
I started talking because I had studied environment.
Id studied environment at this formal level, but there was this informal level.
And the informal level -- I learned about people, and what we do and how we are.
And environment changed from just being about trees and birds and endangered species to being about how we treated each other.
Because if we are the environment, then all we need to do is look around us and see how we treat ourselves and how we treat each other.
And so thats the message that I had.
And I said, "Well, I'm going to have to spread that message."
And I got in my sailboat, sailed all the way through the Caribbean -- it wasn't really my sailboat, I kind of worked on that boat -- got to Venezuela and I started walking.
This is the last part of this story, because its how I got here, because I still didn't ride in motorized vehicles.
I was walking through El Dorado -- it's a prison town, famous prison, or infamous prison -- in Venezuela, and I dont know what possessed me, because this was not like me.
