That really wasn't the part of the equation that I needed to work on.
But I had been eating 3,000 calories a day, and I cut it to 2,000 calories a day, and the weight came off. I lost about a pound a week for about 40 weeks.
Along the way, though, I started examining my city, its culture, its infrastructure, trying to figure out why our specific city seemed to have a problem with obesity.
And I came to the conclusion that we had built an incredible quality of life if you happen to be a car.
(Laughter) But if you happen to be a person, you are combatting the car seemingly at every turn.
Our city is very spread out.
We have a great intersection of highways, I mean, literally no traffic congestion in Oklahoma City to speak of.
And so people live far, far away.
Our city limits are enormous, 620 square miles, but 15 miles is less than 15 minutes.
You literally can get a speeding ticket during rush hour in Oklahoma City.
And as a result, people tend to spread out.
Land's cheap.
We had also not required developers to build sidewalks on new developments for a long, long time.
We had fixed that, but it had been relatively recently, and there were literally 100,000 or more homes into our inventory in neighborhoods that had virtually no level of walkability.
And as I tried to examine how we might deal with obesity, and was taking all of these elements into my mind, I decided that the first thing we need to do was have a conversation.
You see, in Oklahoma City, we weren't talking about obesity.
And so, on New Year's Eve of 2007, I went to the zoo, and I stood in front of the elephants, and I said, "This city is going on a diet, and we're going to lose a million pounds."
Well, that's when all hell broke loose.
(Laughter) The national media gravitated toward this story immediately, and they really could have gone with it one of two ways.
They could have said, "This city is so fat that the mayor had to put them on a diet."
But fortunately, the consensus was, "Look, this is a problem in a lot of places.
This is a city that's wanting to do something about it."
And so they started helping us drive traffic to the website.
Now, the web address was thiscityisgoingonadiet.com.
And I appeared on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" one weekday morning to talk about the initiative, and on that day, 150,000 visits were placed to our website.
People were signing up, and so the pounds started to add up, and the conversation that I thought was so important to have was starting to take place.
It was taking place inside the homes, mothers and fathers talking about it with their kids.
It was taking place in churches.
Churches were starting their own running groups and their own support groups for people who were dealing with obesity.
Suddenly, it was a topic worth discussing at schools and in the workplace.
And the large companies, they typically have wonderful wellness programs, but the medium-sized companies that typically fall between the cracks on issues like this, they started to get engaged and used our program as a model for their own employees to try and have contests to see who might be able to deal with their obesity situation in a way that could be proactively beneficial to others.
And then came the next stage of the equation.
It was time to push what I called MAPS 3.
Now MAPS 3, like the other two programs, had had an economic development motive behind it, but along with the traditional economic development tasks like building a new convention center, we added some health-related infrastructure to the process.
We added a new central park, 70 acres in size, to be right downtown in Oklahoma City.
We're building a downtown streetcar to try and help the walkability formula for people who choose to live in the inner city and help us create the density there.
We're building senior health and wellness centers throughout the community.
We put some investments on the river that had originally been invested upon in the original MAPS, and now we are currently in the final stages of developing the finest venue in the world for the sports of canoe, kayak and rowing.
We hosted the Olympic trials last spring.
We have Olympic-caliber events coming to Oklahoma City, and athletes from all over the world moving in, along with inner city programs to get kids more engaged in these types of recreational activities that are a little bit nontraditional.
We also, with another initiative that was passed, are building hundreds of miles of new sidewalks throughout the metro area.
We're even going back into some inner city situations where we had built neighborhoods and we had built schools but we had not connected the two.
We had built libraries and we had built neighborhoods, but we had never really connected the two with any sort of walkability.
Through yet another funding source, we're redesigning all of our inner city streets to be more pedestrian-friendly.
Our streets were really wide, and you'd push the button to allow you to walk across, and you had to run in order to get there in time.
But now we've narrowed the streets, highly landscaped them, making them more pedestrian-friendly, really a redesign, rethinking the way we build our infrastructure, designing a city around people and not cars.
We're completing our bicycle trail master plan.
We'll have over 100 miles when we're through building it out.
And so you see this culture starting to shift in Oklahoma City.
And lo and behold, the demographic changes that are coming with it are very inspiring.
Highly educated twentysomethings are moving to Oklahoma City from all over the region and, indeed, even from further away, in California.
When we reached a million pounds, in January of 2012, I flew to New York with some our participants who had lost over 100 pounds, whose lives had been changed, and we appeared on the Rachael Ray show, and then that afternoon, I did a round of media in New York pushing the same messages that you're accustomed to hearing about obesity and the dangers of it.
And I went into the lobby of Men's Fitness magazine, the same magazine that had put us on that list five years before.
And as I'm sitting in the lobby waiting to talk to the reporter, I notice there's a magazine copy of the current issue right there on the table, and I pick it up, and I look at the headline across the top, and it says, "America's Fattest Cities: Do You Live in One?"
Well, I knew I did, so I picked up the magazine and I began to look, and we weren't on it.
(Applause) Then I looked on the list of fittest cities, and we were on that list.
We were on the list as the 22nd fittest city in the United States.
Our state health statistics are doing better.
Granted, we have a long way to go.
Health is still not something that we should be proud of in Oklahoma City, but we seem to have turned the cultural shift of making health a greater priority.
And we love the idea of the demographics of highly educated twentysomethings, people with choices, choosing Oklahoma City in large numbers.
We have the lowest unemployment in the United States, probably the strongest economy in the United States.
And if you're like me, at some point in your educational career, you were asked to read a book called "The Grapes of Wrath."
Oklahomans leaving for California in large numbers for a better future.
When we look at the demographic shifts of people coming from the west, it appears that what we're seeing now is the wrath of grapes.
(Laughter) (Applause) The grandchildren are coming home.
You've been a great audience and very attentive.
Thank you very much for having me here.
(Applause)
Today I am going to teach you how to play my favorite game: massively multiplayer thumb-wrestling.
It's the only game in the world that I know of that allows you, the player, the opportunity to experience 10 positive emotions in 60 seconds or less.
This is true, so if you play this game with me today for just one single minute, you will get to feel joy, relief, love, surprise, pride, curiosity, excitement, awe and wonder, contentment, and creativity, all in the span of one minute.
So this sounds pretty good, right? Now you're willing to play.
In order to teach you this game, I'm going to need some volunteers to come up onstage really quickly, and we're going to do a little hands-on demo.
While they're coming up, I should let you know, this game was invented 10 years ago by an artists' collective in Austria named Monochrom.
So thank you, Monochrom.
Okay, so most people are familiar with traditional, two-person thumb-wrestling.
Sunni, let's just remind them.
One, two, three, four, I declare a thumb war, and we wrestle, and of course Sunni beats me because she's the best.
Now the first thing about massively multiplayer thumb-wrestling, we're the gamer generation.
There are a billion gamers on the planet now, so we need more of a challenge.
So the first thing we need is more thumbs.
So Eric, come on over.
So we could get three thumbs together, and Peter could join us.
We could even have four thumbs together, and the way you win is you're the first person to pin someone else's thumb.
This is really important. You can't, like, wait while they fight it out and then swoop in at the last minute.
That is not how you win.
Ah, who did that? Eric you did that.
So Eric would have won. He was the first person to pin my thumb.
Okay, so that's the first rule, and we can see that three or four is kind of the typical number of thumbs in a node, but if you feel ambitious, you don't have to hold back.
We can really go for it.
So you can see up here.
Now the only other rule you need to remember is, gamer generation, we like a challenge.
I happen to notice you all have some thumbs you're not using.
So I think we should kind of get some more involved.
And if we had just four people, we would do it just like this, and we would try and wrestle both thumbs at the same time.
Perfect.
Now, if we had more people in the room, instead of just wrestling in a closed node, we might reach out and try and grab some other people.
And in fact, that's what we're going to do right now.
We're going to try and get all, something like, I don't know, 1,500 thumbs in this room connected in a single node.
And we have to connect both levels, so if you're up there, you're going to be reaching down and reaching up.
Now — (Laughter) — before we get started -- This is great. You're excited to play. — before we get started, can I have the slides back up here really quick, because if you get good at this game, I want you to know there are some advanced levels.
So this is the kind of simple level, right?
But there are advanced configurations.
This is called the Death Star Configuration.
Any Star Wars fans?
And this one's called the Möbius Strip.
Any science geeks, you get that one.
This is the hardest level. This is the extreme.
So we'll stick with the normal one for now, and I'm going to give you 30 seconds, every thumb into the node, connect the upper and the lower levels, you guys go on down there.
Thirty seconds. Into the network. Make the node.
Stand up! It's easier if you stand up.
Everybody, up up up up up!
Stand up, my friends.
All right.
Don't start wrestling yet.
If you have a free thumb, wave it around, make sure it gets connected.
Okay. We need to do a last-minute thumb check.
If you have a free thumb, wave it around to make sure.
Grab that thumb!
Reach behind you. There you go.
Any other thumbs?
Okay, on the count of three, you're going to go.
Try to keep track. Grab, grab, grab it.
Okay? One, two, three, go!
(Laughter) Did you win? You got it? You got it? Excellent!
(Applause) Well done. Thank you. Thank you very much.
All right.
While you are basking in the glow of having won your first massively multiplayer thumb-wrestling game, let's do a quick recap on the positive emotions.
So curiosity.
I said "massively multiplayer thumb-wrestling."
You were like, "What the hell is she talking about?"
So I provoked a little curiosity.
Creativity: it took creativity to solve the problem of getting all the thumbs into the node.
I'm reaching around and I'm reaching up.
So you used creativity. That was great.
How about surprise? The actual feeling of trying to wrestle two thumbs at once is pretty surprising.
You heard that sound go up in the room.
We had excitement. As you started to wrestle, maybe you're starting to win or this person's, like, really into it, so you kind of get the excitement going.
We have relief. You got to stand up.
You've been sitting for awhile, so the physical relief, getting to shake it out.
We had joy. You were laughing, smiling. Look at your faces. This room is full of joy.
We had some contentment.
I didn't see anybody sending text messages or checking their email while we were playing, so you were totally content to be playing.
The most important three emotions, awe and wonder, we had everybody connected physically for a minute.
When was the last time you were at TED and you got to connect physically with every single person in the room?
And it's truly awesome and wondrous.
And speaking of physical connection, you guys know I love the hormone oxytocin, you release oxytocin, you feel bonded to everyone in the room.
You guys know that the best way to release oxytocin quickly is to hold someone else's hand for at least six seconds.
You guys were all holding hands for way more than six seconds, so we are all now biochemically primed to love each other. That is great.
And the last emotion of pride.
How many people are like me. Just admit it.
You lost both your thumbs.
It just didn't work out for you.
That's okay, because you learned a new skill today.
You learned, from scratch, a game you never knew before.
Now you know how to play it. You can teach other people.
So congratulations.
How many of you won just won thumb?
All right. I have very good news for you.
According to the official rules of massively multiplayer thumb-wrestling, this makes you a grandmaster of the game.
Because there aren't that many people who know how to play, we have to kind of accelerate the program more than a game like chess.
So congratulations, grandmasters.
Win one thumb once, you will become a grandmaster.
Did anybody win both their thumbs?
Yes. Awesome. Okay.
Get ready to update your Twitter or Facebook status.
You guys, according to the rules, are legendary grandmasters, so congratulations.
I will just leave you with this tip, if you want to play again.
The best way to become a legendary grandmaster, you've got your two nodes going on.
Pick off the one that looks easiest.
They're not paying attention. They look kind of weak.
Focus on that one and do something crazy with this arm.
As soon as you win, suddenly stop.
Everybody is thrown off. You go in for the kill.
That's how you become a legendary grandmaster of massively multiplayer thumb-wrestling.
Thank you for letting me teach you my favorite game.
Wooo! (Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
(Applause) I want to talk to you a little bit about user-generated content.
I'm going to tell you three stories on the way to one argument that's going to tell you a little bit about how we open user-generated content up for business.
So, here's the first story.
1906. This man, John Philip Sousa, traveled to this place, the United States Capitol, to talk about this technology, what he called the, quote, "talking machines."
Sousa was not a fan of the talking machines.
This is what he had to say.
"These talking machines are going to ruin artistic development of music in this country.
When I was a boy, in front of every house in the summer evenings, you would find young people together singing the songs of the day, or the old songs.
Today, you hear these infernal machines going night and day.
We will not have a vocal chord left," Sousa said.
"The vocal chords will be eliminated by a process of evolution as was the tail of man when he came from the ape."
Now, this is the picture I want you to focus on.
This is a picture of culture.
We could describe it using modern computer terminology as a kind of read-write culture.
It's a culture where people participate in the creation and the re-creation of their culture. In that sense, it's read-write.
Sousa's fear was that we would lose that capacity because of these, quote, "infernal machines." They would take it away.
And in its place, we'd have the opposite of read-write culture, what we could call read-only culture.
Culture where creativity was consumed but the consumer is not a creator.
A culture which is top-down, owned, where the vocal chords of the millions have been lost.
Now, as you look back at the twentieth century, at least in what we think of as the, quote, "developed world" -- hard not to conclude that Sousa was right.
Never before in the history of human culture had it been as professionalized, never before as concentrated.
Never before has creativity of the millions been as effectively displaced, and displaced because of these, quote, "infernal machines."
The twentieth century was that century where, at least for those places we know the best, culture moved from this read-write to read-only existence.
So, second. Land is a kind of property -- it is property. It's protected by law.
As Lord Blackstone described it, land is protected by trespass law, for most of the history of trespass law, by presuming it protects the land all the way down below and to an indefinite extent upward.
Now, that was a pretty good system for most of the history of the regulation of land, until this technology came along, and people began to wonder, were these instruments trespassers as they flew over land without clearing the rights of the farms below as they traveled across the country?
Well, in 1945, Supreme Court got a chance to address that question.
Two farmers, Thomas Lee and Tinie Causby, who raised chickens, had a significant complaint because of these technologies.
The complaint was that their chickens followed the pattern of the airplanes and flew themselves into the walls of the barn when the airplanes flew over the land.
And so they appealed to Lord Blackstone to say these airplanes were trespassing.
Since time immemorial, the law had said, you can't fly over the land without permission of the landowner, so this flight must stop.
Well, the Supreme Court considered this 100-years tradition and said, in an opinion written by Justice Douglas, that the Causbys must lose.
The Supreme Court said the doctrine protecting land all the way to the sky has no place in the modern world, otherwise every transcontinental flight would subject the operator to countless trespass suits.
Common sense, a rare idea in the law, but here it was. Common sense -- (Laughter) -- Revolts at the idea. Common sense.
Finally. Before the Internet, the last great terror to rain down on the content industry was a terror created by this technology. Broadcasting: a new way to spread content, and therefore a new battle over the control of the businesses that would spread content.
Now, at that time, the entity, the legal cartel, that controlled the performance rights for most of the music that would be broadcast using these technologies was ASCAP.
They had an exclusive license on the most popular content, and they exercised it in a way that tried to demonstrate to the broadcasters who really was in charge.
So, between 1931 and 1939, they raised rates by some 448 percent, until the broadcasters finally got together and said, okay, enough of this.
And in 1939, a lawyer, Sydney Kaye, started something called Broadcast Music Inc. We know it as BMI.
And BMI was much more democratic in the art that it would include within its repertoire, including African American music for the first time in the repertoire.
But most important was that BMI took public domain works and made arrangements of them, which they gave away for free to their subscribers. So that in 1940, when ASCAP threatened to double their rates, the majority of broadcasters switched to BMI.
Now, ASCAP said they didn't care.
The people will revolt, they predicted, because the very best music was no longer available, because they had shifted to the second best public domain provided by BMI.
Well, they didn't revolt, and in 1941, ASCAP cracked.
And the important point to recognize is that even though these broadcasters were broadcasting something you would call second best, that competition was enough to break, at that time, this legal cartel over access to music.
Okay. Three stories. Here's the argument.
In my view, the most significant thing to recognize about what this Internet is doing is its opportunity to revive the read-write culture that Sousa romanticized.
Digital technology is the opportunity for the revival of these vocal chords that he spoke so passionately to Congress about.
User-generated content, spreading in businesses in extraordinarily valuable ways like these, celebrating amateur culture.
By which I don't mean amateurish culture, I mean culture where people produce for the love of what they're doing and not for the money.
I mean the culture that your kids are producing all the time.
For when you think of what Sousa romanticized in the young people together, singing the songs of the day, of the old songs, you should recognize what your kids are doing right now.
Taking the songs of the day and the old songs and remixing them to make them something different.
It's how they understand access to this culture.
So, let's have some very few examples to get a sense of what I'm talking about here.
Here's something called Anime Music Video, first example, taking anime captured from television re-edited to music tracks.
(Music) This one you should be -- confidence. Jesus survives. Don't worry.
(Music) (Laughter) And this is the best.
(Music) My love ...
There's only you in my life ...
The only thing that's bright ...
My first love ...
You're every breath that I take ...
You're every step I make ...
And I ....
I want to share all my love with you ...
No one else will do ...
And your eyes ...
They tell me how much you care ...
(Music) So, this is remix, right?
(Applause) And it's important to emphasize that what this is not is not what we call, quote, "piracy."
I'm not talking about nor justifying people taking other people's content in wholesale and distributing it without the permission of the copyright owner.
I'm talking about people taking and recreating using other people's content, using digital technologies to say things differently.
Now, the importance of this is not the technique that you've seen here.
Because, of course, every technique that you've seen here is something that television and film producers have been able to do for the last 50 years.
The importance is that that technique has been democratized.
It is now anybody with access to a $1,500 computer who can take sounds and images from the culture around us and use it to say things differently.
These tools of creativity have become tools of speech.
It is a literacy for this generation. This is how our kids speak.
It is how our kids think. It is what your kids are as they increasingly understand digital technologies and their relationship to themselves.
Now, in response to this new use of culture using digital technologies, the law has not greeted this Sousa revival with very much common sense.
Instead, the architecture of copyright law and the architecture of digital technologies, as they interact, have produced the presumption that these activities are illegal.
Because if copyright law at its core regulates something called copies, then in the digital world the one fact we can't escape is that every single use of culture produces a copy.
Every single use therefore requires permission; without permission, you are a trespasser.
You're a trespasser with about as much sense as these people were trespassers.
Common sense here, though, has not yet revolted in response to this response that the law has offered to these forms of creativity.
Instead, what we've seen is something much worse than a revolt.
There's a growing extremism that comes from both sides in this debate, in response to this conflict between the law and the use of these technologies.
One side builds new technologies, such as one recently announced that will enable them to automatically take down from sites like YouTube any content that has any copyrighted content in it, whether or not there's a judgment of fair use that might be applied to the use of that content.
And on the other side, among our kids, there's a growing copyright abolitionism, a generation that rejects the very notion of what copyright is supposed to do, rejects copyright and believes that the law is nothing more than an ass to be ignored and to be fought at every opportunity possible.
The extremism on one side begets extremism on the other, a fact we should have learned many, many times over, and both extremes in this debate are just wrong.
Now, the balance that I try to fight for, I, as any good liberal, try to fight for first by looking to the government. Total mistake, right?
(Laughter) Looked first to the courts and the legislatures to try to get them to do something to make the system make more sense.
It failed partly because the courts are too passive, partly because the legislatures are corrupted, by which I don't mean that there's bribery operating to stop real change, but more the economy of influence that governs how Congress functions means that policymakers here will not understand this until it's too late to fix it.
So, we need something different, we need a different kind of solution.
And the solution here, in my view, is a private solution, a solution that looks to legalize what it is to be young again, and to realize the economic potential of that, and that's where the story of BMI becomes relevant.
Because, as BMI demonstrated, competition here can achieve some form of balance. The same thing can happen now.
We don't have a public domain to draw upon now, so instead what we need is two types of changes.
First, that artists and creators embrace the idea, choose that their work be made available more freely.
So, for example, they can say their work is available freely for non-commercial, this amateur-type of use, but not freely for any commercial use.
And second, we need the businesses that are building out this read-write culture to embrace this opportunity expressly, to enable it, so that this ecology of free content, or freer content, can grow on a neutral platform where they both exist simultaneously, so that more-free can compete with less-free, and the opportunity to develop the creativity in that competition can teach one the lessons of the other.
Now, I would talk about one particular such plan that I know something about, but I don't want to violate TED's first commandment of selling, so I'm not going to talk about this at all.
I'm instead just going to remind you of the point that BMI teaches us.
That artist choice is the key for new technology having an opportunity to be open for business, and we need to build artist choice here if these new technologies are to have that opportunity.
But let me end with something I think much more important -- much more important than business.
It's the point about how this connects to our kids.
We have to recognize they're different from us. This is us, right?
(Laughter) We made mixed tapes; they remix music.
We watched TV; they make TV.
It is technology that has made them different, and as we see what this technology can do, we need to recognize you can't kill the instinct the technology produces. We can only criminalize it.
We can't stop our kids from using it.
We can only drive it underground.
We can't make our kids passive again.
We can only make them, quote, "pirates." And is that good?
We live in this weird time. It's kind of age of prohibitions, where in many areas of our life, we live life constantly against the law.
Ordinary people live life against the law, and that's what I -- we are doing to our kids.
They live life knowing they live it against the law.
That realization is extraordinarily corrosive, extraordinarily corrupting.
And in a democracy, we ought to be able to do better.
Do better, at least for them, if not for opening for business.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When we think of Nepal, we tend to think of the snow-capped mountains of the Himalayas, the crystal-clear still waters of its alpine lakes, or the huge expanse of its grasslands.
What some of us may not realize is that in the Himalayan foothills, where the climate is much warmer and the landscape much greener, there lives a great diversity of wildlife, including the one-horned rhinoceros, the Asian elephant and the Bengal tiger.
But unfortunately, these animals are under constant threat from poachers who hunt and kill them for their body parts.
To stop the killing of these animals, battalions of soldiers and rangers are sent to protect Nepal's national parks, but that is not an easy task, because these soldiers have to patrol thousands of hectares of forests on foot or elephant backs.
It is also risky for these soldiers when they get into gunfights with poachers, and therefore Nepal is always looking for new ways to help with protecting the forests and wildlife.
Well recently, Nepal acquired a new tool in the fight against wildlife crime, and these are drones, or more specifically, conservation drones.
For about a year now, my colleagues and I have been building drones for Nepal and training the park protection personnel on the use of these drones.
Not only does a drone give you a bird's-eye view of the landscape, but it also allows you to capture detailed, high-resolution images of objects on the ground.
This, for example, is a pair of rhinoceros taking a cooling bath on a hot summer day in the lowlands of Nepal.
Now we believe that drones have tremendous potential, not only for combating wildlife crime, but also for monitoring the health of these wildlife populations.
So what is a drone?
Well, the kind of drone I'm talking about is simply a model aircraft fitted with an autopilot system, and this autopilot unit contains a tiny computer, a GPS, a compass, a barometric altimeter and a few other sensors.
Now a drone like this is meant to carry a useful payload, such as a video camera or a photographic camera.
It also requires a software that allows the user to program a mission, to tell the drone where to go.
Now people I talk to are often surprised when they hear that these are the only four components that make a conservation drone, but they are even more surprised when I tell them how affordable these components are.
The facts is, a conservation drone doesn't cost very much more than a good laptop computer or a decent pair of binoculars.
So now that you've built your own conservation drone, you probably want to go fly it, but how does one fly a drone?
Well, actually, you don't, because the drone flies itself.
All you have to do is to program a mission to tell the drone where to fly.
But you simply do that by clicking on a few way points on the Google Maps interface using the open-source software.
Those missions could be as simple as just a few way points, or they could be slightly longer and more complicated, to fly along a river system.
Sometimes, we fly the drone in a lawnmower-type pattern and take pictures of that area, and those pictures can be processed to produce a map of that forest.
Other researchers might want to fly the drone along the boundaries of a forest to watch out for poachers or people who might be trying to enter the forest illegally.
Now whatever your mission is, once you've programmed it, you simply upload it to the autopilot system, bring your drone to the field, and launch it simply by tossing it in the air.
And often we'll go about this mission taking pictures or videos along the way, and usually at that point, we will go grab ourselves a cup of coffee, sit back, and relax for the next few minutes, although some of us sit back and panic for the next few minutes worrying that the drone will not return.
Usually it does, and when it does, it even lands automatically.
So what can we do with a conservation drone?
Well, when we built our first prototype drone, our main objective was to fly it over a remote rainforest in North Sumatra, Indonesia, to look for the nest of a species of great ape known as the orangutan.
The reason we wanted to do that was because we needed to know how many individuals of this species are still left in that forest.
Now the traditional method of surveying for orangutans is to walk the forest on foot carrying heavy equipment and to use a pair of binoculars to look up in the treetops where you might find an orangutan or its nest.
Now as you can imagine, that is a very time-consuming, labor-intensive, and costly process, so we were hoping that drones could significantly reduce the cost of surveying for orangutan populations in Indonesia and elsewhere in Southeast Asia.
So we were very excited when we captured our first pair of orangutan nests on camera.
And this is it; this is the first ever picture of orangutan nests taken with a drone.
Since then we have taken pictures of dozens of these nests from around various parts of Southeast Asia, and we're now working with computer scientists to develop algorithms that can automatically count the number of nests from the thousands of photos we've collected so far.
But nests are not the only objects these drones can detect.
This is a wild orangutan happily feeding on top of a palm tree, seemingly oblivious to our drone that was flying overhead, not once but several times.
We've also taken pictures of other animals including forest buffalos in Gabon, elephants, and even turtle nests.
But besides taking pictures of just the animals themselves, we also take pictures of the habitats these animals live in, because we want to keep track of the health of these habitats.
Sometimes, we zoom out a little and look at other things that might be happening in the landscape.
This is an oil palm plantation in Sumatra.
Now oil palm is a major driver of deforestation in that part of the world, so we wanted to use this new drone technology to keep track of the spread of these plantations in Southeast Asia.
But drones could also be used to keep track of illegal logging activities.
This is a recently logged forest, again in Sumatra.
You could even still see the processed wooden planks left on the ground.
But perhaps the most exciting part about taking pictures from the air is we could later stitch these pictures together using special software to create a map of the entire landscape, and this map gives us crucial information for monitoring land use change, to let us know where and when plantations might be expanding, where forests might be contracting, or where fires might be breaking out.
Aerial images could also be processed to produce three-dimensional computer models of forests.
Now these models are not just visually appealing, but they are also geometrically accurate, which means researchers can now measure the distance between trees, calculate surface area, the volume of vegetation, and so on, all of which are important information for monitoring the health of these forests.
Recently, we've also begun experimenting with thermal imaging cameras.
Now these cameras can detect heat-emitting objects from the ground, and therefore they are very useful for detecting poachers or their campfires at night.
So I've told you quite a lot about what conservation drones are, how you might operate one of these drones, and what a drone could do for you.
I will now tell you where conservation drones are being used around the world.
We built our first prototype drones in Switzerland.
We brought a few of these to Indonesia for the first few test flights.
Since then, we've been building drones for our collaborators from around the world, and these include fellow biologists and partners from major conservation organizations.
Perhaps the best and most rewarding part about working with these collaborators is the feedback they give us on how to improve our drones.
Building drones for us is a constant work in progress.
We are constantly trying to improve them in terms of their range, their ruggedness, and the amount of payload they can carry.
We also work with collaborators to discover new ways of using these drones.
For example, camera traps are a common tool used by biologists to take pictures of shy animals hiding in the forests, but these are motion-activated cameras, so they snap a picture every time an animal crosses their path.
But the problem with camera traps is that the researcher has to go back to the forest every so often to retrieve those images, and that takes a lot of time, especially if there are dozens or hundreds of these cameras placed in the forest.
Now a drone could be designed to perform the task much more efficiently.
This drone, carrying a special sensor, could be flown over the forest and remotely download these images from wi-fi–enabled cameras.
Radio collars are another tool that's commonly used by biologists.
Now these collars are put onto animals.
They transmit a radio signal which allows the researcher to track the movements of these animals across the landscape.
But the traditional way of tracking animals is pretty ridiculous, because it requires the researcher to be walking on the ground carrying a huge and cumbersome radio antenna, not unlike those old TV antennae we used to have on our rooftops. Some of us still do.
A drone could be used to do the same job much more efficiently.
Why not equip a drone with a scanning radio receiver, fly that over the forest canopy in a certain pattern which would allow the user or the operator to triangulate the location of these radio-collared animals remotely without having to step foot in the forest.
A third and perhaps most exciting way of using these drones is to fly them to a really remote, never-explored-before rainforest somewhere hidden in the tropics, and parachute down a tiny spy microphone that would allow us to eavesdrop on the calls of mammals, birds, amphibians, the Yeti, the Sasquatch, Bigfoot, whatever.
That would give us biologists a pretty good idea of what animals might be living in those forests.
And finally, I would like to show you the latest version of our conservation drone.
The MAJA drone has a wingspan of about two meters.
It weighs only about two kilograms, but it can carry half its weight.
It is a fully autonomous system.
During its mission, it can even transmit a live video feed back to a ground station laptop, which allows the user to see what the drone is seeing in real time.
It carries a variety of sensors, and the photo quality of some of these sensors can be as high as one to two centimeters per pixel.
This drone can stay in the air for 40 to 60 minutes, which gives it a range of up to 50 kilometers.
That is quite sufficient for most of our conservation applications.
Now, conservation drones began as a crazy idea from two biologists who are just deeply passionate about this technology.
And we believe, strongly believe, that drones can and will be a game changer for conservation research and applications.
We've had our fair share of skeptics and critics who thought that we were just fooling around with toy planes.
And in a way, they are right.
I mean, let's be honest, drones are the ultimate toys for boys.
But at the same time, we've also gotten to know many wonderful colleagues and collaborators who share our vision and see the potential of conservation drones.
To us, it is obvious that conservation biologists and practitioners should make full use of every available tool, including drones, in our fight to save the last remaining forests and wildlife of this planet.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Five years ago, I was on a sabbatical, and I returned to the medical university where I studied.
I saw real patients and I wore the white coat for the first time in 17 years, in fact since I became a management consultant.
There were two things that surprised me during the month I spent.
The first one was that the common theme of the discussions we had were hospital budgets and cost-cutting, and the second thing, which really bothered me, actually, was that several of the colleagues I met, former friends from medical school, who I knew to be some of the smartest, most motivated, engaged and passionate people I'd ever met, many of them had turned cynical, disengaged, or had distanced themselves from hospital management.
So with this focus on cost-cutting, I asked myself, are we forgetting the patient?
Many countries that you represent and where I come from struggle with the cost of healthcare.
It's a big part of the national budgets.
And many different reforms aim at holding back this growth.
In some countries, we have long waiting times for patients for surgery.
In other countries, new drugs are not being reimbursed, and therefore don't reach patients.
In several countries, doctors and nurses are the targets, to some extent, for the governments.
After all, the costly decisions in health care are taken by doctors and nurses.
You choose an expensive lab test, you choose to operate on an old and frail patient.
So, by limiting the degrees of freedom of physicians, this is a way to hold costs down.
And ultimately, some physicians will say today that they don't have the full liberty to make the choices they think are right for their patients.
So no wonder that some of my old colleagues are frustrated.
At BCG, we looked at this, and we asked ourselves, this can't be the right way of managing healthcare.
And so we took a step back and we said, "What is it that we are trying to achieve?"
Ultimately, in the healthcare system, we're aiming at improving health for the patients, and we need to do so at a limited, or affordable, cost.
We call this value-based healthcare.
On the screen behind me, you see what we mean by value: outcomes that matter to patients relative to the money we spend.
This was described beautifully in a book in 2006 by Michael Porter and Elizabeth Teisberg.
On this picture, you have my father-in-law surrounded by his three beautiful daughters.
When we started doing our research at BCG, we decided not to look so much at the costs, but to look at the quality instead, and in the research, one of the things that fascinated us was the variation we saw.
You compare hospitals in a country, you'll find some that are extremely good, but you'll find a large number that are vastly much worse.
The differences were dramatic.
Erik, my father-in-law, he suffers from prostate cancer, and he probably needs surgery.
Now living in Europe, he can choose to go to Germany that has a well-reputed healthcare system.
If he goes there and goes to the average hospital, he will have the risk of becoming incontinent by about 50 percent, so he would have to start wearing diapers again.
You flip a coin. Fifty percent risk. That's quite a lot.
If he instead would go to Hamburg, and to a clinic called the Martini-Klinik, the risk would be only one in 20.
Either you a flip a coin, or you have a one in 20 risk.
That's a huge difference, a seven-fold difference.
When we look at many hospitals for many different diseases, we see these huge differences.
But you and I don't know. We don't have the data.
And often, the data actually doesn't exist.
Nobody knows.
So going the hospital is a lottery.
Now, it doesn't have to be that way. There is hope.
In the late '70s, there were a group of Swedish orthopedic surgeons who met at their annual meeting, and they were discussing the different procedures they used to operate hip surgery.
To the left of this slide, you see a variety of metal pieces, artificial hips that you would use for somebody who needs a new hip.
They all realized they had their individual way of operating.
They all argued that, "My technique is the best," but none of them actually knew, and they admitted that.
So they said, "We probably need to measure quality so we know and can learn from what's best."
So they in fact spent two years debating, "So what is quality in hip surgery?"
"Oh, we should measure this." "No, we should measure that."
And they finally agreed.
And once they had agreed, they started measuring, and started sharing the data.
Very quickly, they found that if you put cement in the bone of the patient before you put the metal shaft in, it actually lasted a lot longer, and most patients would never have to be re-operated on in their lifetime.
They published the data, and it actually transformed clinical practice in the country.
Everybody saw this makes a lot of sense.
Since then, they publish every year.
Once a year, they publish the league table: who's best, who's at the bottom?
And they visit each other to try to learn, so a continuous cycle of improvement.
For many years, Swedish hip surgeons had the best results in the world, at least for those who actually were measuring, and many were not.
Now I found this principle really exciting.
So the physicians get together, they agree on what quality is, they start measuring, they share the data, they find who's best, and they learn from it.
Continuous improvement.
Now, that's not the only exciting part.
That's exciting in itself.
But if you bring back the cost side of the equation, and look at that, it turns out, those who have focused on quality, they actually also have the lowest costs, although that's not been the purpose in the first place.
So if you look at the hip surgery story again, there was a study done a couple years ago where they compared the U.S. and Sweden.
They looked at how many patients have needed to be re-operated on seven years after the first surgery.
In the United States, the number was three times higher than in Sweden.
So many unnecessary surgeries, and so much unnecessary suffering for all the patients who were operated on in that seven year period.
Now, you can imagine how much savings there would be for society.
We did a study where we looked at OECD data.
OECD does, every so often, look at quality of care where they can find the data across the member countries.
The United States has, for many diseases, actually a quality which is below the average in OECD.
Now, if the American healthcare system would focus a lot more on measuring quality, and raise quality just to the level of average OECD, it would save the American people 500 billion U.S. dollars a year.
That's 20 percent of the budget, of the healthcare budget of the country.
Now you may say that these numbers are fantastic, and it's all logical, but is it possible?
This would be a paradigm shift in healthcare, and I would argue that not only can it be done, but it has to be done.
The agents of change are the doctors and nurses in the healthcare system.
In my practice as a consultant, I meet probably a hundred or more than a hundred doctors and nurses and other hospital or healthcare staff every year.
The one thing they have in common is they really care about what they achieve in terms of quality for their patients.
Physicians are, like most of you in the audience, very competitive.
They were always best in class.
We were always best in class.
And if somebody can show them that the result they perform for their patients is no better than what others do, they will do whatever it takes to improve.
But most of them don't know.
But physicians have another characteristic.
They actually thrive from peer recognition.
If a cardiologist calls another cardiologist in a competing hospital and discusses why that other hospital has so much better results, they will share.
They will share the information on how to improve.
So it is, by measuring and creating transparency, you get a cycle of continuous improvement, which is what this slide shows.
Now, you may say this is a nice idea, but this isn't only an idea.
This is happening in reality.
We're creating a global community, and a large global community, where we'll be able to measure and compare what we achieve.
Together with two academic institutions, Michael Porter at Harvard Business School, and the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, BCG has formed something we call ICHOM.
You may think that's a sneeze, but it's not a sneeze, it's an acronym.
It stands for the International Consortium for Health Outcome Measurement.
We're bringing together leading physicians and patients to discuss, disease by disease, what is really quality, what should we measure, and to make those standards global.
They've worked -- four working groups have worked during the past year: cataracts, back pain, coronary artery disease, which is, for instance, heart attack, and prostate cancer.
The four groups will publish their data in November of this year.
That's the first time we'll be comparing apples to apples, not only within a country, but between countries.
Next year, we're planning to do eight diseases, the year after, 16.
In three years' time, we plan to have covered 40 percent of the disease burden.
Compare apples to apples. Who's better?
Why is that?
Five months ago, I led a workshop at the largest university hospital in Northern Europe.
They have a new CEO, and she has a vision: I want to manage my big institution much more on quality, outcomes that matter to patients.
This particular day, we sat in a workshop together with physicians, nurses and other staff, discussing leukemia in children.
The group discussed, how do we measure quality today?
Can we measure it better than we do?
We discussed, how do we treat these kids, what are important improvements?
And we discussed what are the costs for these patients, can we do treatment more efficiently?
There was an enormous energy in the room.
There were so many ideas, so much enthusiasm.
At the end of the meeting, the chairman of the department, he stood up.
He looked over the group and he said -- first he raised his hand, I forgot that -- he raised his hand, clenched his fist, and then he said to the group, "Thank you.
Thank you. Today, we're finally discussing what this hospital does the right way."
By measuring value in healthcare, that is not only costs but outcomes that matter to patients, we will make staff in hospitals and elsewhere in the healthcare system not a problem but an important part of the solution.
I believe measuring value in healthcare will bring about a revolution, and I'm convinced that the founder of modern medicine, the Greek Hippocrates, who always put the patient at the center, he would smile in his grave.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Technology can change our understanding of nature.
Take for example the case of lions.
For centuries, it's been said that female lions do all of the hunting out in the open savanna, and male lions do nothing until it's time for dinner.
You've heard this too, I can tell.
Well recently, I led an airborne mapping campaign in the Kruger National Park in South Africa.
Our colleagues put GPS tracking collars on male and female lions, and we mapped their hunting behavior from the air.
The lower left shows a lion sizing up a herd of impala for a kill, and the right shows what I call the lion viewshed.
That's how far the lion can see in all directions until his or her view is obstructed by vegetation.
And what we found is that male lions are not the lazy hunters we thought them to be.
They just use a different strategy.
Whereas the female lions hunt out in the open savanna over long distances, usually during the day, male lions use an ambush strategy in dense vegetation, and often at night.
This video shows the actual hunting viewsheds of male lions on the left and females on the right.
Red and darker colors show more dense vegetation, and the white are wide open spaces.
And this is the viewshed right literally at the eye level of hunting male and female lions.
All of a sudden, you get a very clear understanding of the very spooky conditions under which male lions do their hunting.
I bring up this example to begin, because it emphasizes how little we know about nature.
There's been a huge amount of work done so far to try to slow down our losses of tropical forests, and we are losing our forests at a rapid rate, as shown in red on the slide.
I find it ironic that we're doing so much, yet these areas are fairly unknown to science.
So how can we save what we don't understand?
Now I'm a global ecologist and an Earth explorer with a background in physics and chemistry and biology and a lot of other boring subjects, but above all, I'm obsessed with what we don't know about our planet.
So I created this, the Carnegie Airborne Observatory, or CAO.
It may look like a plane with a fancy paint job, but I packed it with over 1,000 kilos of high-tech sensors, computers, and a very motivated staff of Earth scientists and pilots.
Two of our instruments are very unique: one is called an imaging spectrometer that can actually measure the chemical composition of plants as we fly over them.
Another one is a set of lasers, very high-powered lasers, that fire out of the bottom of the plane, sweeping across the ecosystem and measuring it at nearly 500,000 times per second in high-resolution 3D.
Here's an image of the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, not far from where I live.
Although we flew straight over this bridge, we imaged it in 3D, captured its color in just a few seconds.
But the real power of the CAO is its ability to capture the actual building blocks of ecosystems.
This is a small town in the Amazon, imaged with the CAO.
We can slice through our data and see, for example, the 3D structure of the vegetation and the buildings, or we can use the chemical information to actually figure out how fast the plants are growing as we fly over them.
The hottest pinks are the fastest-growing plants.
And we can see biodiversity in ways that you never could have imagined.
This is what a rainforest might look like as you fly over it in a hot air balloon.
This is how we see a rainforest, in kaleidoscopic color that tells us that there are many species living with one another.
But you have to remember that these trees are literally bigger than whales, and what that means is that they're impossible to understand just by walking on the ground below them.
So our imagery is 3D, it's chemical, it's biological, and this tells us not only the species that are living in the canopy, but it tells us a lot of information about the rest of the species that occupy the rainforest.
Now I created the CAO in order to answer questions that have proven extremely challenging to answer from any other vantage point, such as from the ground, or from satellite sensors.
I want to share three of those questions with you today.
The first questions is, how do we manage our carbon reserves in tropical forests?
Tropical forests contain a huge amount of carbon in the trees, and we need to keep that carbon in those forests if we're going to avoid any further global warming.
Unfortunately, global carbon emissions from deforestation now equals the global transportation sector.
That's all ships, airplanes, trains and automobiles combined.
So it's understandable that policy negotiators have been working hard to reduce deforestation, but they're doing it on landscapes that are hardly known to science.
If you don't know where the carbon is exactly, in detail, how can you know what you're losing?
Basically, we need a high-tech accounting system.
With our system, we're able to see the carbon stocks of tropical forests in utter detail.
The red shows, obviously, closed-canopy tropical forest, and then you see the cookie cutting, or the cutting of the forest in yellows and greens.
It's like cutting a cake except this cake is about whale deep.
And yet, we can zoom in and see the forest and the trees at the same time.
And what's amazing is, even though we flew very high above this forest, later on in analysis, we can go in and actually experience the treetrops, leaf by leaf, branch by branch, just as the other species that live in this forest experience it along with the trees themselves.
We've been using the technology to explore and to actually put out the first carbon geographies in high resolution in faraway places like the Amazon Basin and not-so-faraway places like the United States and Central America.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to take you on a high-resolution, first-time tour of the carbon landscapes of Peru and then Panama.
The colors are going to be going from red to blue.
Red is extremely high carbon stocks, your largest cathedral forests you can imagine, and blue are very low carbon stocks.
And let me tell you, Peru alone is an amazing place, totally unknown in terms of its carbon geography until today.
We can fly to this area in northern Peru and see super high carbon stocks in red, and the Amazon River and floodplain cutting right through it.
We can go to an area of utter devastation caused by deforestation in blue, and the virus of deforestation spreading out in orange.
We can also fly to the southern Andes to see the tree line and see exactly how the carbon geography ends as we go up into the mountain system.
And we can go to the biggest swamp in the western Amazon.
It's a watery dreamworld akin to Jim Cameron's "Avatar."
We can go to one of the smallest tropical countries, Panama, and see also a huge range of carbon variation, from high in red to low in blue.
Unfortunately, most of the carbon is lost in the lowlands, but what you see that's left, in terms of high carbon stocks in greens and reds, is the stuff that's up in the mountains.
One interesting exception to this is right in the middle of your screen.
You're seeing the buffer zone around the Panama Canal.
That's in the reds and yellows.
The canal authorities are using force to protect their watershed and global commerce.
This kind of carbon mapping has transformed conservation and resource policy development.
It's really advancing our ability to save forests and to curb climate change.
My second question: How do we prepare for climate change in a place like the Amazon rainforest?
Let me tell you, I spend a lot of time in these places, and we're seeing the climate changing already.
Temperatures are increasing, and what's really happening is we're getting a lot of droughts, recurring droughts.
The 2010 mega-drought is shown here with red showing an area about the size of Western Europe.
The Amazon was so dry in 2010 that even the main stem of the Amazon river itself dried up partially, as you see in the photo in the lower portion of the slide.
What we found is that in very remote areas, these droughts are having a big negative impact on tropical forests.
For example, these are all of the dead trees in red that suffered mortality following the 2010 drought.
This area happens to be on the border of Peru and Brazil, totally unexplored, almost totally unknown scientifically.
So what we think, as Earth scientists, is species are going to have to migrate with climate change from the east in Brazil all the way west into the Andes and up into the mountains in order to minimize their exposure to climate change.
One of the problems with this is that humans are taking apart the western Amazon as we speak.
Look at this 100-square-kilometer gash in the forest created by gold miners.
You see the forest in green in 3D, and you see the effects of gold mining down below the soil surface.
Species have nowhere to migrate in a system like this, obviously.
If you haven't been to the Amazon, you should go.
It's an amazing experience every time, no matter where you go.
You're going to probably see it this way, on a river.
But what happens is a lot of times the rivers hide what's really going on back in the forest itself.
We flew over this same river, imaged the system in 3D.
The forest is on the left.
And then we can digitally remove the forest and see what's going on below the canopy.
And in this case, we found gold mining activity, all of it illegal, set back away from the river's edge, as you'll see in those strange pockmarks coming up on your screen on the right.
Don't worry, we're working with the authorities to deal with this and many, many other problems in the region.
So in order to put together a conservation plan for these unique, important corridors like the western Amazon and the Andes Amazon corridor, we have to start making geographically explicit plans now.
How do we do that if we don't know the geography of biodiversity in the region, if it's so unknown to science?
So what we've been doing is using the laser-guided spectroscopy from the CAO to map for the first time the biodiversity of the Amazon rainforest.
Here you see actual data showing different species in different colors.
Reds are one type of species, blues are another, and greens are yet another.
And when we take this together and scale up to the regional level, we get a completely new geography of biodiversity unknown prior to this work.
This tells us where the big biodiversity changes occur from habitat to habitat, and that's really important because it tells us a lot about where species may migrate to and migrate from as the climate shifts.
And this is the pivotal information that's needed by decision makers to develop protected areas in the context of their regional development plans.
And third and final question is, how do we manage biodiversity on a planet of protected ecosystems?
The example I started out with about lions hunting, that was a study we did behind the fence line of a protected area in South Africa.
And the truth is, much of Africa's nature is going to persist into the future in protected areas like I show in blue on the screen.
This puts incredible pressure and responsibility on park management.
They need to do and make decisions that will benefit all of the species that they're protecting.
Some of their decisions have really big impacts.
For example, how much and where to use fire as a management tool?
Or, how to deal with a large species like elephants, which may, if their populations get too large, have a negative impact on the ecosystem and on other species.
And let me tell you, these types of dynamics really play out on the landscape.
In the foreground is an area with lots of fire and lots of elephants: wide open savanna in blue, and just a few trees.
As we cross this fence line, now we're getting into an area that has had protection from fire and zero elephants: dense vegetation, a radically different ecosystem.
And in a place like Kruger, the soaring elephant densities are a real problem.
I know it's a sensitive issue for many of you, and there are no easy answers with this.
But what's good is that the technology we've developed and we're working with in South Africa, for example, is allowing us to map every single tree in the savanna, and then through repeat flights we're able to see which trees are being pushed over by elephants, in the red as you see on the screen, and how much that's happening in different types of landscapes in the savanna.
That's giving park managers a very first opportunity to use tactical management strategies that are more nuanced and don't lead to those extremes that I just showed you.
So really, the way we're looking at protected areas nowadays is to think of it as tending to a circle of life, where we have fire management, elephant management, those impacts on the structure of the ecosystem, and then those impacts affecting everything from insects up to apex predators like lions.
Going forward, I plan to greatly expand the airborne observatory.
I'm hoping to actually put the technology into orbit so we can manage the entire planet with technologies like this.
Until then, you're going to find me flying in some remote place that you've never heard of.
I just want to end by saying that technology is absolutely critical to managing our planet, but even more important is the understanding and wisdom to apply it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Sarge Salman: All the way from Los Altos Hills, California, Mr. Henry Evans.
(Applause) Henry Evans: Hello.
My name is Henry Evans, and until August 29, 2002, I was living my version of the American dream.
I grew up in a typical American town near St. Louis.
My dad was a lawyer.
My mom was a homemaker.
My six siblings and I were good kids, but caused our fair share of trouble.
After high school, I left home to study and learn more about the world.
I went to Notre Dame University and graduated with degrees in accounting and German, including spending a year of study in Austria.
Later on, I earned an MBA at Stanford.
I married my high school sweetheart, Jane.
I am lucky to have her.
Together, we raised four wonderful children.
I worked and studied hard to move up the career ladder, eventually becoming a chief financial officer in Silicon Valley, a job I really enjoyed.
My family and I bought our first and only home on December 13, 2001, a fixer-upper in a beautiful spot of Los Altos Hills, California, from where I am speaking to you now.
We were looking forward to rebuilding it, but eight months after we moved in, I suffered a stroke-like attack caused by a birth defect.
Overnight, I became a mute quadriplegic at the ripe old age of 40.
It took me several years, but with the help of an incredibly supportive family, I finally decided life was still worth living.
I became fascinated with using technology to help the severely disabled.
Head tracking devices sold commercially by the company Madentec convert my tiny head movements into cursor movements, and enable my use of a regular computer.
I can surf the web, exchange email with people, and routinely destroy my friend Steve Cousins in online word games.
This technology allows me to remain engaged, mentally active, and feel like I am a part of the world.
One day, I was lying in bed watching CNN, when I was amazed by Professor Charlie Kemp of the Healthcare Robotics Lab at Georgia Tech demonstrating a PR2 robot.
I emailed Charlie and Steve Cousins of Willow Garage, and we formed the Robots for Humanity project.
For about two years, Robots for Humanity developed ways for me to use the PR2 as my body surrogate.
I shaved myself for the first time in 10 years.
From my home in California, I shaved Charlie in Atlanta. (Laughter) I handed out Halloween candy.
I opened my refrigerator on my own.
I began doing tasks around the house.
I saw new and previously unthinkable possibilities to live and contribute, both for myself and others in my circumstance.
All of us have disabilities in one form or another.
For example, if either of us wants to go 60 miles an hour, both of us will need an assistive device called a car.
Your disability doesn't make you any less of a person, and neither does mine.
By the way, check out my sweet ride. (Laughter) Since birth, we have both suffered from the inability to fly on our own.
Last year, Kaijen Hsiao of Willow Garage connected with me Chad Jenkins.
Chad showed me how easy it is to purchase and fly aerial drones.
It was then I realized that I could also use an aerial drone to expand the worlds of bedridden people through flight, giving a sense of movement and control that is incredible.
Using a mouse cursor I control with my head, these web interfaces allow me to see video from the robot and send control commands by pressing buttons in a web browser.
With a little practice, I became good enough with this interface to drive around my home on my own.
I could look around our garden and see the grapes we are growing.
I inspected the solar panels on our roof. (Laughter) One of my challenges as a pilot is to land the drone on our basketball hoop.
I went even further by seeing if I could use a head-mounted display, the Oculus Rift, as modified by Fighting Walrus, to have an immersive experience controlling the drone.
With Chad's group at Brown, I regularly fly drones around his lab several times a week, from my home 3,000 miles away.
All work and no fun makes for a dull quadriplegic, so we also find time to play friendly games of robot soccer. (Laughter) I never thought I would be able to casually move around a campus like Brown on my own.
I just wish I could afford the tuition. (Laughter) Chad Jenkins: Henry, all joking aside, I bet all of these people here would love to see you fly this drone from your bed in California 3,000 miles away.
(Applause) Okay, Henry, have you been to D.C. lately?
(Laughter) Are you excited to be at TEDxMidAtlantic?
(Laughter) (Applause) Can you show us how excited you are?
(Laughter) All right, big finish.
Can you show us how good of a pilot you are?
(Applause) All right, we still have a little ways to go with that, but I think it shows the promise.
What makes Henry's story amazing is it's about understanding Henry's needs, understanding what people in Henry's situation need from technology, and then also understanding what advanced technology can provide, and then bringing those two things together for use in a wise and responsible way.
What we're trying to do is democratize robotics, so that anybody can be a part of this.
We're providing affordable, off-the-shelf robot platforms such as the A.R. drone, 300 dollars, the Suitable Technologies beam, only 17,000 dollars, along with open-source robotics software so that you can be a part of what we're trying to do.
And our hope is that, by providing these tools, that you'll be able to think of better ways to provide movement for the disabled, to provide care for our aging population, to help better educate our children, to think about what the new types of middle class jobs could be for the future, to both monitor and protect our environment, and to explore the universe.
Back to you, Henry.
HE: Thank you, Chad.
With this drone setup, we show the potential for bedridden people to once again be able to explore the outside world, and robotics will eventually provide a level playing field where one is only limited by their mental acuity and imagination, where the disabled are able to perform the same activities as everyone else, and perhaps better, and technology will even allow us to provide an outlet for many people who are presently considered vegetables.
One hundred years ago, I would have been treated like a vegetable.
Actually, that's not true.
I would have died.
It is up to us, all of us, to decide how robotics will be used, for good or for evil, for simply replacing people or for making people better, for allowing us to do and enjoy more.
Our goal for robotics is to unlock everyone's mental power by making the world more physically accessible to people such as myself and others like me around the globe.
With the help of people like you, we can make this dream a reality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
One billion people in the world today do not have access to all-season roads.
One billion people.
One seventh of the Earth's population are totally cut off for some part of the year.
We cannot get medicine to them reliably, they cannot get critical supplies, and they cannot get their goods to market in order to create a sustainable income.
In sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, 85 percent of roads are unusable in the wet season.
Investments are being made, but at the current level, it's estimated it's going to take them 50 years to catch up.
In the U.S. alone, there's more than four million miles of roads, very expensive to build, very expensive to maintain infrastructure, with a huge ecological footprint, and yet, very often, congested.
So we saw this and we thought, can there be a better way?
Can we create a system using today's most advanced technologies that can allow this part of the world to leapfrog in the same way they've done with mobile telephones in the last 10 years?
Many of those nations have excellent telecommunications today without ever putting copper lines in the ground.
Could we do the same for transportation?
Imagine this scenario.
Imagine you are in a maternity ward in Mali, and have a newborn in need of urgent medication.
What would you do today?
Well, you would place a request via mobile phone, and someone would get the request immediately.
That's the part that works.
The medication may take days to arrive, though, because of bad roads.
That's the part that's broken.
We believe we can deliver it within hours with an electric autonomous flying vehicle such as this.
This can transport a small payload today, about two kilograms, over a short distance, about 10 kilometers, but it's part of a wider network that may cover the entire country, maybe even the entire continent.
It's an ultra-flexible, automated logistics network.
It's a network for a transportation of matter.
We call it Matternet.
We use three key technologies.
The first is electric autonomous flying vehicles.
The second is automated ground stations that the vehicles fly in and out of to swap batteries and fly farther, or pick up or deliver loads.
And the third is the operating system that manages the whole network.
Let's look at each one of those technologies in a bit more detail.
First of all, the UAVs.
Eventually, we're going to be using all sorts of vehicles for different payload capacities and different ranges.
Today, we're using small quads.
These are able to transport two kilograms over 10 kilometers in just about 15 minutes.
Compare this with trying to trespass a bad road in the developing world, or even being stuck in traffic in a developed world country.
These fly autonomously.
This is the key to the technology.
So they use GPS and other sensors on board to navigate between ground stations.
Every vehicle is equipped with an automatic payload and battery exchange mechanism, so these vehicles navigate to those ground stations, they dock, swap a battery automatically, and go out again.
The ground stations are located on safe locations on the ground.
They secure the most vulnerable part of the mission, which is the landing.
They are at known locations on the ground, so the paths between them are also known, which is very important from a reliability perspective from the whole network.
Apart from fulfilling the energy requirements of the vehicles, eventually they're going to be becoming commercial hubs where people can take out loads or put loads into the network.
The last component is the operating system that manages the whole network.
It monitors weather data from all the ground stations and optimizes the routes of the vehicles through the system to avoid adverse weather conditions, avoid other risk factors, and optimize the use of the resources throughout the network.
I want to show you what one of those flights looks like.
Here we are flying in Haiti last summer, where we've done our first field trials.
We're modeling here a medical delivery in a camp we set up after the 2010 earthquake.
People there love this.
And I want to show you what one of those vehicles looks like up close.
So this is a $3,000 vehicle.
Costs are coming down very rapidly.
We use this in all sorts of weather conditions, very hot and very cold climates, very strong winds. They're very sturdy vehicles.
Imagine if your life depended on this package, somewhere in Africa or in New York City, after Sandy.
The next big question is, what's the cost?
Well, it turns out that the cost to transport two kilograms over 10 kilometers with this vehicle is just 24 cents.
(Applause) And it's counterintuitive, but the cost of energy expended for the flight is only two cents of a dollar today, and we're just at the beginning of this.
When we saw this, we felt that this is something that can have significant impact in the world.
So we said, okay, how much does it cost to set up a network somewhere in the world?
And we looked at setting up a network in Lesotho for transportation of HIV/AIDS samples.
The problem there is how do you take them from clinics where they're being collected to hospitals where they're being analyzed?
And we said, what if we wanted to cover an area spanning around 140 square kilometers?
That's roughly one and a half times the size of Manhattan.
Well it turns out that the cost to do that there would be less than a million dollars.
Compare this to normal infrastructure investments.
We think this can be -- this is the power of a new paradigm.
So here we are: a new idea about a network for transportation that is based on the ideas of the Internet.
It's decentralized, it's peer-to-peer, it's bidirectional, highly adaptable, with very low infrastructure investment, very low ecological footprint.
If it is a new paradigm, though, there must be other uses for it.
It can be used perhaps in other places in the world.
So let's look at the other end of the spectrum: our cities and megacities.
Half of the Earth's population lives in cities today.
Half a billion of us live in megacities.
We are living through an amazing urbanization trend.
China alone is adding a megacity the size of New York City every two years.
These are places that do have road infrastructure, but it's very inefficient.
Congestion is a huge problem.
So we think it makes sense in those places to set up a network of transportation that is a new layer that sits between the road and the Internet, initially for lightweight, urgent stuff, and over time, we would hope to develop this into a new mode of transportation that is truly a modern solution to a very old problem.
It's ultimately scalable with a very small ecological footprint, operating in the background 24/7, just like the Internet.
So when we started this a couple of years ago now, we've had a lot of people come up to us who said, "This is a very interesting but crazy idea, and certainly not something that you should engage with anytime soon."
And of course, we're talking about drones, right, a technology that's not only unpopular in the West but one that has become a very, very unpleasant fact of life for many living in poor countries, especially those engaged in conflict.
So why are we doing this?
Well, we chose to do this one not because it's easy, but because it can have amazing impact.
Imagine one billion people being connected to physical goods in the same way that mobile telecommunications connected them to information.
Imagine if the next big network we built in the world was a network for the transportation of matter.
In the developing world, we would hope to reach millions of people with better vaccines, reach them with better medication.
It would give us an unfair advantage against battling HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and other epidemics.
Over time, we would hope it would become a new platform for economic transactions, lifting millions of people out of poverty.
In the developed world and the emerging world, we would hope it would become a new mode of transportation that could help make our cities more livable.
So for those that still believe that this is science fiction, I firmly say to you that it is not.
We do need to engage, though, in social fiction to make it happen.
Thank you.
(Applause)
To give me an idea of how many of you here may find what I'm about to tell you of practical value, let me ask you please to raise your hands: Who here is either over 65 years old or hopes to live past age 65 or has parents or grandparents who did live or have lived past 65, raise your hands please. (Laughter) Okay. You are the people to whom my talk will be of practical value. (Laughter) The rest of you won't find my talk personally relevant, but I think that you will still find the subject fascinating.
I'm going to talk about growing older in traditional societies.
This subject constitutes just one chapter of my latest book, which compares traditional, small, tribal societies with our large, modern societies, with respect to many topics such as bringing up children, growing older, health, dealing with danger, settling disputes, religion and speaking more than one language.
Those tribal societies, which constituted all human societies for most of human history, are far more diverse than are our modern, recent, big societies.
All big societies that have governments, and where most people are strangers to each other, are inevitably similar to each other and different from tribal societies.
Tribes constitute thousands of natural experiments in how to run a human society.
They constitute experiments from which we ourselves may be able to learn.
Tribal societies shouldn't be scorned as primitive and miserable, but also they shouldn't be romanticized as happy and peaceful.
When we learn of tribal practices, some of them will horrify us, but there are other tribal practices which, when we hear about them, we may admire and envy and wonder whether we could adopt those practices ourselves.
Most old people in the U.S. end up living separately from their children and from most of their friends of their earlier years, and often they live in separate retirements homes for the elderly, whereas in traditional societies, older people instead live out their lives among their children, their other relatives, and their lifelong friends.
Nevertheless, the treatment of the elderly varies enormously among traditional societies, from much worse to much better than in our modern societies.
At the worst extreme, many traditional societies get rid of their elderly in one of four increasingly direct ways: by neglecting their elderly and not feeding or cleaning them until they die, or by abandoning them when the group moves, or by encouraging older people to commit suicide, or by killing older people.
In which tribal societies do children abandon or kill their parents?
It happens mainly under two conditions.
One is in nomadic, hunter-gather societies that often shift camp and that are physically incapable of transporting old people who can't walk when the able-bodied younger people already have to carry their young children and all their physical possessions.
The other condition is in societies living in marginal or fluctuating environments, such as the Arctic or deserts, where there are periodic food shortages, and occasionally there just isn't enough food to keep everyone alive.
Whatever food is available has to be reserved for able-bodied adults and for children.
To us Americans, it sounds horrible to think of abandoning or killing your own sick wife or husband or elderly mother or father, but what could those traditional societies do differently?
They face a cruel situation of no choice.
Their old people had to do it to their own parents, and the old people know what now is going to happen to them.
At the opposite extreme in treatment of the elderly, the happy extreme, are the New Guinea farming societies where I've been doing my fieldwork for the past 50 years, and most other sedentary traditional societies around the world.
In those societies, older people are cared for.
They are fed. They remain valuable.
And they continue to live in the same hut or else in a nearby hut near their children, relatives and lifelong friends.
There are two main sets of reasons for this variation among societies in their treatment of old people.
The variation depends especially on the usefulness of old people and on the society's values.
First, as regards usefulness, older people continue to perform useful services.
One use of older people in traditional societies is that they often are still effective at producing food.
Another traditional usefulness of older people is that they are capable of babysitting their grandchildren, thereby freeing up their own adult children, the parents of those grandchildren, to go hunting and gathering food for the grandchildren.
Still another traditional value of older people is in making tools, weapons, baskets, pots and textiles.
In fact, they're usually the people who are best at it.
Older people usually are the leaders of traditional societies, and the people most knowledgeable about politics, medicine, religion, songs and dances.
Finally, older people in traditional societies have a huge significance that would never occur to us in our modern, literate societies, where our sources of information are books and the Internet.
In contrast, in traditional societies without writing, older people are the repositories of information.
It's their knowledge that spells the difference between survival and death for their whole society in a time of crisis caused by rare events for which only the oldest people alive have had experience.
Those, then, are the ways in which older people are useful in traditional societies.
Their usefulness varies and contributes to variation in the society's treatment of the elderly.
The other set of reasons for variation in the treatment of the elderly is the society's cultural values.
For example, there's particular emphasis on respect for the elderly in East Asia, associated with Confucius' doctrine of filial piety, which means obedience, respect and support for elderly parents.
Cultural values that emphasize respect for older people contrast with the low status of the elderly in the U.S.
Older Americans are at a big disadvantage in job applications.
They're at a big disadvantage in hospitals.
Our hospitals have an explicit policy called age-based allocation of healthcare resources.
That sinister expression means that if hospital resources are limited, for example if only one donor heart becomes available for transplant, or if a surgeon has time to operate on only a certain number of patients, American hospitals have an explicit policy of giving preference to younger patients over older patients on the grounds that younger patients are considered more valuable to society because they have more years of life ahead of them, even though the younger patients have fewer years of valuable life experience behind them.
There are several reasons for this low status of the elderly in the U.S.
One is our Protestant work ethic which places high value on work, so older people who are no longer working aren't respected.
Another reason is our American emphasis on the virtues of self-reliance and independence, so we instinctively look down on older people who are no longer self-reliant and independent.
Still a third reason is our American cult of youth, which shows up even in our advertisements.
Ads for Coca-Cola and beer always depict smiling young people, even though old as well as young people buy and drink Coca-Cola and beer.
Just think, what's the last time you saw a Coke or beer ad depicting smiling people 85 years old? Never.
Instead, the only American ads featuring white-haired old people are ads for retirement homes and pension planning.
Well, what has changed in the status of the elderly today compared to their status in traditional societies?
There have been a few changes for the better and more changes for the worse.
Big changes for the better include the fact that today we enjoy much longer lives, much better health in our old age, and much better recreational opportunities.
Another change for the better is that we now have specialized retirement facilities and programs to take care of old people.
Changes for the worse begin with the cruel reality that we now have more old people and fewer young people than at any time in the past.
That means that all those old people are more of a burden on the few young people, and that each old person has less individual value.
Another big change for the worse in the status of the elderly is the breaking of social ties with age, because older people, their children, and their friends, all move and scatter independently of each other many times during their lives.
We Americans move on the average every five years.
Hence our older people are likely to end up living distant from their children and the friends of their youth.
Yet another change for the worse in the status of the elderly is formal retirement from the workforce, carrying with it a loss of work friendships and a loss of the self-esteem associated with work.
Perhaps the biggest change for the worse is that our elderly are objectively less useful than in traditional societies.
Widespread literacy means that they are no longer useful as repositories of knowledge.
When we want some information, we look it up in a book or we Google it instead of finding some old person to ask.
The slow pace of technological change in traditional societies means that what someone learns there as a child is still useful when that person is old, but the rapid pace of technological change today means that what we learn as children is no longer useful 60 years later.
And conversely, we older people are not fluent in the technologies essential for surviving in modern society.
For example, as a 15-year-old, I was considered outstandingly good at multiplying numbers because I had memorized the multiplication tables and I know how to use logarithms and I'm quick at manipulating a slide rule.
Today, though, those skills are utterly useless because any idiot can now multiply eight-digit numbers accurately and instantly with a pocket calculator.
Conversely, I at age 75 am incompetent at skills essential for everyday life.
My family's first TV set in 1948 had only three knobs that I quickly mastered: an on-off switch, a volume knob, and a channel selector knob.
Today, just to watch a program on the TV set in my own house, I have to operate a 41-button TV remote that utterly defeats me.
I have to telephone my 25-year-old sons and ask them to talk me through it while I try to push those wretched 41 buttons.
What can we do to improve the lives of the elderly in the U.S., and to make better use of their value?
That's a huge problem.
In my remaining four minutes today, I can offer just a few suggestions.
One value of older people is that they are increasingly useful as grandparents for offering high-quality childcare to their grandchildren, if they choose to do it, as more young women enter the workforce and as fewer young parents of either gender stay home as full-time caretakers of their children.
Compared to the usual alternatives of paid babysitters and day care centers, grandparents offer superior, motivated, experienced child care.
They've already gained experience from raising their own children.
They usually love their grandchildren, and are eager to spend time with them.
Unlike other caregivers, grandparents don't quit their job because they found another job with higher pay looking after another baby.
A second value of older people is paradoxically related to their loss of value as a result of changing world conditions and technology.
At the same time, older people have gained in value today precisely because of their unique experience of living conditions that have now become rare because of rapid change, but that could come back.
For example, only Americans now in their 70s or older today can remember the experience of living through a great depression, the experience of living through a world war, and agonizing whether or not dropping atomic bombs would be more horrible than the likely consequences of not dropping atomic bombs.
Most of our current voters and politicians have no personal experience of any of those things, but millions of older Americans do.
Unfortunately, all of those terrible situations could come back.
Even if they don't come back, we have to be able to plan for them on the basis of the experience of what they were like.
Older people have that experience.
Younger people don't.
The remaining value of older people that I'll mention involves recognizing that while there are many things that older people can no longer do, there are other things that they can do better than younger people.
A challenge for society is to make use of those things that older people are better at doing.
Some abilities, of course, decrease with age.
Those include abilities at tasks requiring physical strength and stamina, ambition, and the power of novel reasoning in a circumscribed situation, such as figuring out the structure of DNA, best left to scientists under the age of 30.
Conversely, valuable attributes that increase with age include experience, understanding of people and human relationships, ability to help other people without your own ego getting in the way, and interdisciplinary thinking about large databases, such as economics and comparative history, best left to scholars over the age of 60.
Hence older people are much better than younger people at supervising, administering, advising, strategizing, teaching, synthesizing, and devising long-term plans.
I've seen this value of older people with so many of my friends in their 60s, 70s, 80s and 90s, who are still active as investment managers, farmers, lawyers and doctors.
In short, many traditional societies make better use of their elderly and give their elderly more satisfying lives than we do in modern, big societies.
Paradoxically nowadays, when we have more elderly people than ever before, living healthier lives and with better medical care than ever before, old age is in some respects more miserable than ever before.
The lives of the elderly are widely recognized as constituting a disaster area of modern American society.
We can surely do better by learning from the lives of the elderly in traditional societies.
But what's true of the lives of the elderly in traditional societies is true of many other features of traditional societies as well.
Of course, I'm not advocating that we all give up agriculture and metal tools and return to a hunter-gatherer lifestyle.
There are many obvious respects in which our lives today are far happier than those in small, traditional societies.
To mention just a few examples, our lives are longer, materially much richer, and less plagued by violence than are the lives of people in traditional societies.
But there are also things to be admired about people in traditional societies, and perhaps to be learned from them.
Their lives are usually socially much richer than our lives, although materially poorer.
Their children are more self-confident, more independent, and more socially skilled than are our children.
They think more realistically about dangers than we do.
They almost never die of diabetes, heart disease, stroke, and the other noncommunicable diseases that will be the causes of death of almost all of us in this room today.
Features of the modern lifestyle predispose us to those diseases, and features of the traditional lifestyle protect us against them.
Those are just some examples of what we can learn from traditional societies.
I hope that you will find it as fascinating to read about traditional societies as I found it to live in those societies.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So yesterday, I was out in the street in front of this building, and I was walking down the sidewalk, and I had company, several of us, and we were all abiding by the rules of walking down sidewalks.
We're not talking each other. We're facing forward.
We're moving.
When the person in front of me slows down.
And so I'm watching him, and he slows down, and finally he stops.
Well, that wasn't fast enough for me, so I put on my turn signal, and I walked around him, and as I walked, I looked to see what he was doing, and he was doing this.
He was texting, and he couldn't text and walk at the same time.
Now we could approach this from a working memory perspective or from a multitasking perspective.
We're going to do working memory today.
Now, working memory is that part of our consciousness that we are aware of at any given time of day.
You're going it right now.
It's not something we can turn off.
If you turn it off, that's called a coma, okay?
So right now, you're doing just fine.
Now working memory has four basic components.
It allows us to store some immediate experiences and a little bit of knowledge.
It allows us to reach back into our long-term memory and pull some of that in as we need it, mixes it, processes it in light of whatever our current goal is.
Now the current goal isn't something like, I want to be president or the best surfer in the world.
It's more mundane. I'd like that cookie, or I need to figure out how to get into my hotel room.
Now working memory capacity is our ability to leverage that, our ability to take what we know and what we can hang onto and leverage it in ways that allow us to satisfy our current goal.
Now working memory capacity has a fairly long history, and it's associated with a lot of positive effects.
People with high working memory capacity tend to be good storytellers.
They tend to solve and do well on standardized tests, however important that is.
They're able to have high levels of writing ability.
They're also able to reason at high levels.
So what we're going to do here is play a little bit with some of that.
So I'm going to ask you to perform a couple tasks, and we're going to take your working memory out for a ride.
You up for that? Okay.
I'm going to give you five words, and I just want you to hang on to them.
Don't write them down. Just hang on to them.
Five words.
While you're hanging on to them, I'm going to ask you to answer three questions.
I want to see what happens with those words.
So here's the words: tree, highway, mirror, Saturn and electrode.
So far so good?
Okay. What I want you to do is I want you to tell me what the answer is to 23 times eight.
Just shout it out.
(Mumbling) (Laughter) In fact it's -- (Mumbling) -- exactly. (Laughter) All right. I want you to take out your left hand and I want you to go, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10."
It's a neurological test, just in case you were wondering.
All right, now what I want you to do is to recite the last five letters of the English alphabet backwards.
You should have started with Z.
(Laughter) All right. How many people here are still pretty sure you've got all five words?
Okay. Typically we end up with about less than half, right, which is normal. There will be a range.
Some people can hang on to five.
Some people can hang on to 10.
Some will be down to two or three.
What we know is this is really important to the way we function, right?
And it's going to be really important here at TED because you're going to be exposed to so many different ideas.
Now the problem that we have is that life comes at us, and it comes at us very quickly, and what we need to do is to take that amorphous flow of experience and somehow extract meaning from it with a working memory that's about the size of a pea.
Now don't get me wrong, working memory is awesome.
Working memory allows us to investigate our current experience as we move forward.
It allows us to make sense of the world around us.
But it does have certain limits.
Now working memory is great for allowing us to communicate.
We can have a conversation, and I can build a narrative around that so I know where we've been and where we're going and how to contribute to this conversation.
It allows us to problem-solve, critical think.
We can be in the middle of a meeting, listen to somebody's presentation, evaluate it, decide whether or not we like it, ask follow-up questions.
All of that occurs within working memory.
It also allows us to go to the store and allows us to get milk and eggs and cheese when what we're really looking for is Red Bull and bacon. (Laughter) Gotta make sure we're getting what we're looking for.
Now, a central issue with working memory is that it's limited.
It's limited in capacity, limited in duration, limited in focus.
We tend to remember about four things.
Okay? It used to be seven, but with functional MRIs, apparently it's four, and we were overachieving.
Now we can remember those four things for about 10 to 20 seconds unless we do something with it, unless we process it, unless we apply it to something, unless we talk to somebody about it.
When we think about working memory, we have to realize that this limited capacity has lots of different impacts on us.
Have you ever walked from one room to another and then forgotten why you're there?
You do know the solution to that, right?
You go back to that original room. (Laughter) Have you ever forgotten your keys?
You ever forgotten your car?
You ever forgotten your kids?
Have you ever been involved in a conversation, and you realize that the conversation to your left is actually more interesting? (Laughter) So you're nodding and you're smiling, but you're really paying attention to this one over here, until you hear that last word go up, and you realize, you've been asked a question. (Laughter) And you're really hoping the answer is no, because that's what you're about to say.
All of that talks about working memory, what we can do and what we can't do.
We need to realize that working memory has a limited capacity, and that working memory capacity itself is how we negotiate that.
We negotiate that through strategies.
So what I want to do is talk a little bit about a couple of strategies here, and these will be really important because you are now in an information target-rich environment for the next several days.
Now the first part of this that we need to think about and we need to process our existence, our life, immediately and repeatedly.
We need to process what's going on the moment it happens, not 10 minutes later, not a week later, at the moment.
So we need to think about, well, do I agree with him?
What's missing? What would I like to know?
Do I agree with the assumptions?
How can I apply this in my life?
It's a way of processing what's going on so that we can use it later.
Now we also need to repeat it. We need to practice.
So we need to think about it here.
In between, we want to talk to people about it.
We're going to write it down, and when you get home, pull out those notes and think about them and end up practicing over time.
Practice for some reason became a very negative thing.
It's very positive.
The next thing is, we need to think elaboratively and we need to think illustratively.
Oftentimes, we think that we have to relate new knowledge to prior knowledge.
What we want to do is spin that around.
We want to take all of our existence and wrap it around that new knowledge and make all of these connections and it becomes more meaningful.
We also want to use imagery. We are built for images.
We need to take advantage of that.
Think about things in images, write things down that way.
If you read a book, pull things up.
I just got through reading "The Great Gatsby," and I have a perfect idea of what he looks like in my head, so my own version.
The last one is organization and support.
We are meaning-making machines. It's what we do.
We try to make meaning out of everything that happens to us.
Organization helps, so we need to structure what we're doing in ways that make sense.
If we are providing knowledge and experience, we need to structure that.
And the last one is support.
We all started as novices.
Everything we do is an approximation of sophistication.
We should expect it to change over time. We have to support that.
The support may come in asking people questions, giving them a sheet of paper that has an organizational chart on it or has some guiding images, but we need to support it.
Now, the final piece of this, the take-home message from a working memory capacity standpoint is this: what we process, we learn.
If we're not processing life, we're not living it.
Live life. Thank you.
(Applause)
What is so special about the human brain?
Why is it that we study other animals instead of them studying us?
What does a human brain have or do that no other brain does?
When I became interested in these questions about 10 years ago, scientists thought they knew what different brains were made of.
Though it was based on very little evidence, many scientists thought that all mammalian brains, including the human brain, were made in the same way, with a number of neurons that was always proportional to the size of the brain.
This means that two brains of the same size, like these two, with a respectable 400 grams, should have similar numbers of neurons.
Now, if neurons are the functional information processing units of the brain, then the owners of these two brains should have similar cognitive abilities.
And yet, one is a chimp, and the other is a cow.
Now maybe cows have a really rich internal mental life and are so smart that they choose not to let us realize it, but we eat them.
I think most people will agree that chimps are capable of much more complex, elaborate and flexible behaviors than cows are.
So this is a first indication that the "all brains are made the same way" scenario is not quite right.
But let's play along.
If all brains were made the same way and you were to compare animals with brains of different sizes, larger brains should always have more neurons than smaller brains, and the larger the brain, the more cognitively able its owner should be.
So the largest brain around should also be the most cognitively able.
And here comes the bad news: Our brain, not the largest one around.
It seems quite vexing.
Our brain weighs between 1.2 and 1.5 kilos, but elephant brains weigh between four and five kilos, and whale brains can weigh up to nine kilos, which is why scientists used to resort to saying that our brain must be special to explain our cognitive abilities.
It must be really extraordinary, an exception to the rule.
Theirs may be bigger, but ours is better, and it could be better, for example, in that it seems larger than it should be, with a much larger cerebral cortex than we should have for the size of our bodies.
So that would give us extra cortex to do more interesting things than just operating the body.
That's because the size of the brain usually follows the size of the body.
So the main reason for saying that our brain is larger than it should be actually comes from comparing ourselves to great apes.
Gorillas can be two to three times larger than we are, so their brains should also be larger than ours, but instead it's the other way around.
Our brain is three times larger than a gorilla brain.
The human brain also seems special in the amount of energy that it uses.
Although it weighs only two percent of the body, it alone uses 25 percent of all the energy that your body requires to run per day.
That's 500 calories out of a total of 2,000 calories, just to keep your brain working.
So the human brain is larger than it should be, it uses much more energy than it should, so it's special.
And this is where the story started to bother me.
In biology, we look for rules that apply to all animals and to life in general, so why should the rules of evolution apply to everybody else but not to us?
Maybe the problem was with the basic assumption that all brains are made in the same way.
Maybe two brains of a similar size can actually be made of very different numbers of neurons.
Maybe a very large brain does not necessarily have more neurons than a more modest-sized brain.
Maybe the human brain actually has the most neurons of any brain, regardless of its size, especially in the cerebral cortex.
So this to me became the important question to answer: how many neurons does the human brain have, and how does that compare to other animals?
Now, you may have heard or read somewhere that we have 100 billion neurons, so 10 years ago, I asked my colleagues if they knew where this number came from.
But nobody did.
I've been digging through the literature for the original reference for that number, and I could never find it.
It seems that nobody had actually ever counted the number of neurons in the human brain, or in any other brain for that matter.
So I came up with my own way to count cells in the brain, and it essentially consists of dissolving that brain into soup.
It works like this: You take a brain, or parts of that brain, and you dissolve it in detergent, which destroys the cell membranes but keeps the cell nuclei intact, so you end up with a suspension of free nuclei that looks like this, like a clear soup.
This soup contains all the nuclei that once were a mouse brain.
Now, the beauty of a soup is that because it is soup, you can agitate it and make those nuclei be distributed homogeneously in the liquid, so that now by looking under the microscope at just four or five samples of this homogeneous solution, you can count nuclei, and therefore tell how many cells that brain had.
It's simple, it's straightforward, and it's really fast.
So we've used that method to count neurons in dozens of different species so far, and it turns out that all brains are not made the same way.
Take rodents and primates, for instance: In larger rodent brains, the average size of the neuron increases, so the brain inflates very rapidly and gains size much faster than it gains neurons.
But primate brains gain neurons without the average neuron becoming any larger, which is a very economical way to add neurons to your brain.
The result is that a primate brain will always have more neurons than a rodent brain of the same size, and the larger the brain, the larger this difference will be.
Well, what about our brain then?
We found that we have, on average, 86 billion neurons, 16 billion of which are in the cerebral cortex, and if you consider that the cerebral cortex is the seat of functions like awareness and logical and abstract reasoning, and that 16 billion is the most neurons that any cortex has, I think this is the simplest explanation for our remarkable cognitive abilities.
But just as important is what the 86 billion neurons mean.
Because we found that the relationship between the size of the brain and its number of neurons could be described mathematically, we could calculate what a human brain would look like if it was made like a rodent brain.
So, a rodent brain with 86 billion neurons would weigh 36 kilos.
That's not possible.
A brain that huge would be crushed by its own weight, and this impossible brain would go in the body of 89 tons.
I don't think it looks like us.
So this brings us to a very important conclusion already, which is that we are not rodents.
The human brain is not a large rat brain.
Compared to a rat, we might seem special, yes, but that's not a fair comparison to make, given that we know that we are not rodents.
We are primates, so the correct comparison is to other primates.
And there, if you do the math, you find that a generic primate with 86 billion neurons would have a brain of about 1.2 kilos, which seems just right, in a body of some 66 kilos, which in my case is exactly right, which brings us to a very unsurprising but still incredibly important conclusion: I am a primate.
And all of you are primates.
And so was Darwin.
I love to think that Darwin would have really appreciated this.
His brain, like ours, was made in the image of other primate brains.
So the human brain may be remarkable, yes, but it is not special in its number of neurons.
It is just a large primate brain.
I think that's a very humbling and sobering thought that should remind us of our place in nature.
Why does it cost so much energy, then?
Well, other people have figured out how much energy the human brain and that of other species costs, and now that we knew how many neurons each brain was made of, we could do the math.
And it turns out that both human and other brains cost about the same, an average of six calories per billion neurons per day.
So the total energetic cost of a brain is a simple, linear function of its number of neurons, and it turns out that the human brain costs just as much energy as you would expect.
So the reason why the human brain costs so much energy is simply because it has a huge number of neurons, and because we are primates with many more neurons for a given body size than any other animal, the relative cost of our brain is large, but just because we're primates, not because we're special.
Last question, then: how did we come by this remarkable number of neurons, and in particular, if great apes are larger than we are, why don't they have a larger brain than we do, with more neurons?
When we realized how much expensive it is to have a lot of neurons in the brain, I figured, maybe there's a simple reason.
They just can't afford the energy for both a large body and a large number of neurons.
So we did the math.
We calculated on the one hand how much energy a primate gets per day from eating raw foods, and on the other hand, how much energy a body of a certain size costs and how much energy a brain of a certain number of neurons costs, and we looked for the combinations of body size and number of brain neurons that a primate could afford if it ate a certain number of hours per day.
And what we found is that because neurons are so expensive, there is a tradeoff between body size and number of neurons.
So a primate that eats eight hours per day can afford at most 53 billion neurons, but then its body cannot be any bigger than 25 kilos.
To weigh any more than that, it has to give up neurons.
So it's either a large body or a large number of neurons.
When you eat like a primate, you can't afford both.
One way out of this metabolic limitation would be to spend even more hours per day eating, but that gets dangerous, and past a certain point, it's just not possible.
Gorillas and orangutans, for instance, afford about 30 billion neurons by spending eight and a half hours per day eating, and that seems to be about as much as they can do.
Nine hours of feeding per day seems to be the practical limit for a primate.
What about us?
With our 86 billion neurons and 60 to 70 kilos of body mass, we should have to spend over nine hours per day every single day feeding, which is just not feasible.
If we ate like a primate, we should not be here.
How did we get here, then?
Well, if our brain costs just as much energy as it should, and if we can't spend every waking hour of the day feeding, then the only alternative, really, is to somehow get more energy out of the same foods.
And remarkably, that matches exactly what our ancestors are believed to have invented one and a half million years ago, when they invented cooking.
To cook is to use fire to pre-digest foods outside of your body.
Cooked foods are softer, so they're easier to chew and to turn completely into mush in your mouth, so that allows them to be completely digested and absorbed in your gut, which makes them yield much more energy in much less time.
So cooking frees time for us to do much more interesting things with our day and with our neurons than just thinking about food, looking for food, and gobbling down food all day long.
So because of cooking, what once was a major liability, this large, dangerously expensive brain with a lot of neurons, could now become a major asset, now that we could both afford the energy for a lot of neurons and the time to do interesting things with them.
So I think this explains why the human brain grew to become so large so fast in evolution, all of the while remaining just a primate brain.
With this large brain now affordable by cooking, we went rapidly from raw foods to culture, agriculture, civilization, grocery stores, electricity, refrigerators, all of those things that nowadays allow us to get all the energy we need for the whole day in a single sitting at your favorite fast food joint.
So what once was a solution now became the problem, and ironically, we look for the solution in raw food.
So what is the human advantage?
What is it that we have that no other animal has?
My answer is that we have the largest number of neurons in the cerebral cortex, and I think that's the simplest explanation for our remarkable cognitive abilities.
And what is it that we do that no other animal does, and which I believe was fundamental to allow us to reach that large, largest number of neurons in the cortex?
In two words, we cook.
No other animal cooks its food. Only humans do.
And I think that's how we got to become human.
Studying the human brain changed the way I think about food.
I now look at my kitchen, and I bow to it, and I thank my ancestors for coming up with the invention that probably made us humans.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
(Applause) It's really quite an honor to be here tonight, and I'm really glad that I stayed here and listened because I've really been inspired.
And I'm going to play some songs for you tonight that are, literally, world premieres.
I've been working on my new record and I've never played these songs for anybody except the microphone.
This is a song that I wrote about the meaning of technology, which goes perfectly with this gathering.
I started thinking about -- when I was in college, especially as a blind person, doing a research paper was a major undertaking.
You had to go to the library, see if you could get them to find the books for you, you know, footnotes and all that.
Now you can just go on Google. Just look it up.
I wish I had that when I was in college.
Anyway, this is a song about: we have all this, but what are we going to do with it?
It's called "All the Answers."
♫ What is the weather in Cincinnati? ♫ ♫ What is the time in Tokyo? ♫ ♫ Who is this little child's daddy? ♫ ♫ And who the hell needs to know? ♫ ♫ Why do memories of you linger ♫ ♫ when I'm trying to reach my goal? ♫ ♫ And why must I move my fingers ♫ ♫ to the music in my soul? ♫ ♫ I don't know. ♫ ♫ I don't have to know. ♫ ♫ 'Cause here I go ... ♫ ♫ and I got all the answers ♫ ♫ right here in my hand. ♫ ♫ And I got all the answers ♫ ♫ and I don't have to understand ♫ ♫ 'cause I got all the answers. ♫ ♫ Think I'll rummage through the century ♫ ♫ while I listen to the sea. ♫ ♫ Oh, it's good to be so free, ♫ ♫ so free. ♫ ♫ Who was mayor of Chicago ♫ ♫ back in 1964? ♫ ♫ And why did Shakespeare create Iago ♫ ♫ to tear apart a love so pure? ♫ ♫ How can my dreams be so vivid ♫ ♫ in a psychosonic way? ♫ ♫ Why must I become so livid ♫ ♫ about the news I hear today? ♫ ♫ I don't know. ♫ ♫ I don't have to know. ♫ ♫ And here I go ... ♫ ♫ 'cause I got all the answers ♫ ♫ right here in my hand. ♫ ♫ And I got all the answers. ♫ ♫ See, I don't have to understand ♫ ♫ 'cause I got all the answers. ♫ ♫ I think I'll browse on through ♫ ♫ the tabloid news ♫ ♫ while I sip my tea. ♫ ♫ Mm, it's good to be so free. ♫ (Trumpet sounds) ♫ I never ever have to be alone. ♫ ♫ I can do it all right here in my home. ♫ ♫ Yeah, mm-hmm ... ♫ ♫ Everything that's ever been known, ♫ ♫ I can punch it up right here on my phone. ♫ ♫ Freedom train, coming soon ♫ ♫ right here in my living room ♫ ♫ from Baton Rouge to Saskatoon ♫ ♫ and all points in between. ♫ ♫ 'Cause I got all the answers ♫ ♫ right here on my screen. ♫ ♫ And I got all the answers, yeah. ♫ ♫ I got every book and magazine. ♫ ♫ I got all, I got all, I got all ... ♫ ♫ I got all the answers, ♫ ♫ all the answers, oh yeah. ♫ ♫ Uh-huh ... ♫ ♫ But I tell you what I'm going to do: ♫ ♫ I'm going to find the capitol of Peru ♫ ♫ or the latitude of Kathmandu. ♫ ♫ I'm gonna Google it ♫ ♫ 'cause everybody's doing it. ♫ ♫ And then I'll rummage through the century. ♫ ♫ I got all, I got all, I got all ... ♫ ♫ I got all the answers. ♫ ♫ Yeah, yeah ♫ ♫ I got all the answers. ♫ (Applause) Thank you.
Whew! It's a miracle I didn't make any mistakes on that song.
That's the first time I've ever played it.
(Applause) It's a "feel the fear and do it anyway" kind of thing.
This next song is a song that started out as a dream -- a childhood dream.
It was one of the titles that I was sort of thinking about calling my record, except there's a couple of problems.
One thing is, it's unpronounceable.
And it's a made-up word.
It's called "Tembererana."
And the song is based on what I think was my first childhood attempts to think about invisible forces.
So "tembererana" was these dreams, in which I would be running away from bad feelings -- is the only way I can put it.
So this is called "Tembererana."
It's based on an Argentinian rhythm called "carnivalito."
♫ A dream within a dream, ♫ ♫ a world within a world, ♫ ♫ the sound of a primal scream ♫ ♫ travels out across the land. ♫ ♫ Images flickering, ♫ ♫ the sound of the war machine, ♫ ♫ a procession of limousines ♫ ♫ travels slowly across the land. ♫ ♫ Another child could use a hand. ♫ ♫ Reaching out from within ♫ ♫ tembererana, hey, tembererana ... ♫ ♫ Annihilation moves. ♫ ♫ The earth is an open tomb. ♫ ♫ The sound of the final boom ♫ ♫ rumbles fiercely across the land. ♫ ♫ Fear, you're the enemy. ♫ ♫ Obliterating all but thee. ♫ ♫ You see what you want to see. ♫ ♫ Before I'm blinded, I will toast ♫ ♫ the shade of power that I love most, ♫ ♫ the power of creation. ♫ ♫ Tembererana, hey, tembererana ... ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da, da, da, da ♫ ♫ As a child, alone and afraid, ♫ ♫ escaping the impressions every feeling made, ♫ ♫ I would run, run away ♫ ♫ into a world where the good was the aim of the game ♫ ♫ and the sum of invisible power ♫ ♫ had a name. ♫ ♫ It's the same name. ♫ ♫ Tembererana, hey, tembererana ... ♫ ♫ Da, da, da, da, da, da, da ♫ ♫ Tembere, tembere, tembere, tembererana ♫ ♫ Tembere, tembere, tembere, tembererana, hey ♫ ♫ Tembererana, hey ♫ ♫ Tembererana ... ♫ (Applause)
There is something you know about me, something very personal, and there is something I know about every one of you and that's very central to your concerns.
There is something that we know about everyone we meet anywhere in the world, on the street, that is the very mainspring of whatever they do and whatever they put up with.
And that is that all of us want to be happy.
In this, we are all together.
How we imagine our happiness, that differs from one another, but it's already a lot that we have all in common, that we want to be happy.
Now my topic is gratefulness.
What is the connection between happiness and gratefulness?
Many people would say, well, that's very easy.
When you are happy, you are grateful.
But think again.
Is it really the happy people that are grateful?
We all know quite a number of people who have everything that it would take to be happy, and they are not happy, because they want something else or they want more of the same.
And we all know people who have lots of misfortune, misfortune that we ourselves would not want to have, and they are deeply happy.
They radiate happiness. You are surprised.
Why? Because they are grateful.
So it is not happiness that makes us grateful.
It's gratefulness that makes us happy.
If you think it's happiness that makes you grateful, think again.
It's gratefulness that makes you happy.
Now, we can ask, what do we really mean by gratefulness?
And how does it work?
I appeal to your own experience.
We all know from experience how it goes.
We experience something that's valuable to us.
Something is given to us that's valuable to us.
And it's really given.
These two things have to come together.
It has to be something valuable, and it's a real gift.
You haven't bought it. You haven't earned it.
You haven't traded it in. You haven't worked for it.
It's just given to you.
And when these two things come together, something that's really valuable to me and I realize it's freely given, then gratefulness spontaneously rises in my heart, happiness spontaneously rises in my heart.
That's how gratefulness happens.
Now the key to all this is that we cannot only experience this once in a while.
We cannot only have grateful experiences.
We can be people who live gratefully.
Grateful living, that is the thing.
And how can we live gratefully?
By experiencing, by becoming aware that every moment is a given moment, as we say.
It's a gift. You haven't earned it.
You haven't brought it about in any way.
You have no way of assuring that there will be another moment given to you, and yet, that's the most valuable thing that can ever be given to us, this moment, with all the opportunity that it contains.
If we didn't have this present moment, we wouldn't have any opportunity to do anything or experience anything, and this moment is a gift.
It's a given moment, as we say.
Now, we say the gift within this gift is really the opportunity.
What you are really grateful for is the opportunity, not the thing that is given to you, because if that thing were somewhere else and you didn't have the opportunity to enjoy it, to do something with it, you wouldn't be grateful for it.
Opportunity is the gift within every gift, and we have this saying, opportunity knocks only once.
Well, think again.
Every moment is a new gift, over and over again, and if you miss the opportunity of this moment, another moment is given to us, and another moment.
We can avail ourselves of this opportunity, or we can miss it, and if we avail ourselves of the opportunity, it is the key to happiness.
Behold the master key to our happiness in our own hands.
Moment by moment, we can be grateful for this gift.
Does that mean that we can be grateful for everything?
Certainly not.
We cannot be grateful for violence, for war, for oppression, for exploitation.
On the personal level, we cannot be grateful for the loss of a friend, for unfaithfulness, for bereavement.
But I didn't say we can be grateful for everything.
I said we can be grateful in every given moment for the opportunity, and even when we are confronted with something that is terribly difficult, we can rise to this occasion and respond to the opportunity that is given to us.
It isn't as bad as it might seem.
Actually, when you look at it and experience it, you find that most of the time, what is given to us is the opportunity to enjoy, and we only miss it because we are rushing through life and we are not stopping to see the opportunity.
But once in a while, something very difficult is given to us, and when this difficult thing occurs to us, it's a challenge to rise to that opportunity, and we can rise to it by learning something which is sometimes painful.
Learning patience, for instance.
We have been told that the road to peace is not a sprint, but is more like a marathon.
That takes patience. That's difficult.
It may be to stand up for your opinion, to stand up for your conviction.
That's an opportunity that is given to us.
To learn, to suffer, to stand up, all these opportunities are given to us, but they are opportunities, and those who avail themselves of those opportunities are the ones that we admire.
They make something out of life.
And those who fail get another opportunity.
We always get another opportunity.
That's the wonderful richness of life.
So how can we find a method that will harness this?
How can each one of us find a method for living gratefully, not just once in a while being grateful, but moment by moment to be grateful.
How can we do it? It's a very simple method.
It's so simple that it's actually what we were told as children when we learned to cross the street.
Stop.
That's all.
But how often do we stop?
We rush through life. We don't stop.
We miss the opportunity because we don't stop.
We have to stop.
And we have to build stop signs into our lives.
When I was in Africa some years ago and then came back, I noticed water.
In Africa where I was, I didn't have drinkable water.
Every time I turned on the faucet, I was overwhelmed.
Every time I clicked on the light, I was so grateful.
It made me so happy.
But after a while, this wears off.
So I put little stickers on the light switch and on the water faucet, and every time I turned it on, water.
So leave it up to your own imagination.
You can find whatever works best for you, but you need stop signs in your life.
And when you stop, then the next thing is to look.
You look. You open your eyes.
You open your ears. You open your nose.
You open all your senses for this wonderful richness that is given to us.
There is no end to it, and that is what life is all about, to enjoy, to enjoy what is given to us.
And then we can also open our hearts, our hearts for the opportunities, for the opportunities also to help others, to make others happy, because nothing makes us more happy than when all of us are happy.
And when we open our hearts to the opportunities, the opportunities invite us to do something, and that is the third.
Stop, look, and then go, and really do something.
And what we can do is whatever life offers to you in that present moment.
Mostly it's the opportunity to enjoy, but sometimes it's something more difficult.
But whatever it is, if we take this opportunity, we go with it, we are creative, those are the creative people.
And that little stop, look, go, is such a potent seed that it can revolutionize our world.
Because we are at the present moment in the middle of a change of consciousness, and you will be surprised if you -- I am always surprised when I hear how many times this word "gratefulness" and "gratitude" comes up.
Everywhere you find it, a grateful airline, a restaurant gratefulness, a café gratefulness, a wine that is gratefulness.
Yes, I have even come across a toilet paper whose brand is called "Thank You."
(Laughter) There is a wave of gratefulness because people are becoming aware how important this is and how this can change our world.
It can change our world in immensely important ways, because if you're grateful, you're not fearful, and if you're not fearful, you're not violent.
If you're grateful, you act out of a sense of enough and not of a sense of scarcity, and you are willing to share.
If you are grateful, you are enjoying the differences between people, and you are respectful to everybody, and that changes this power pyramid under which we live.
And it doesn't make for equality, but it makes for equal respect, and that is the important thing.
The future of the world will be a network, not a pyramid turned upside down.
The revolution of which I am speaking is a nonviolent revolution, and it's so revolutionary that it even revolutionizes the very concept of a revolution, because the normal revolution is one where the power pyramid is turned upside down and those who were on the bottom are now on the top and are doing exactly the same thing that the ones before.
What we need is a networking of smaller groups, smaller and smaller groups who know one another, who interact with one another, and that is a grateful world.
A grateful world is a world of joyful people.
Grateful people are joyful people, and joyful people -- the more and more joyful people there are, the more and more we'll have a joyful world.
We have a network for grateful living, and it has mushroomed.
We couldn't understand why it mushroomed.
We have an opportunity for people to light a candle when they are grateful for something.
And there have been 15 million candles lit in one decade.
People are becoming aware that a grateful world is a happy world, and we all have the opportunity by the simple stop, look, go, to transform the world, to make it a happy place.
And that is what I hope for us, and if this has contributed a little to making you want to do the same, stop, look, go.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here today to talk about social change, not a new therapy or a new intervention or a new way of working with kids or something like that, but a new business model for social change, a new way of tackling the problem.
In Britain, 63 percent of all men who come out of short sentences from prison re-offend again within a year.
Now how many previous offenses do you think they have on average managed to commit?
Forty-three.
And how many previous times do you think they've been in prison?
Seven.
So we went to talk to the Ministry of Justice, and we said to the Ministry of Justice, what's it worth to you if fewer of these guys re-offend?
It's got to be worth something, right?
I mean, there's prison costs, there's police costs, there's court costs, all these things that you're spending money on to deal with these guys. What's it worth?
Now, of course, we care about the social value.
Social Finance, the organization I helped set up, cares about social stuff.
But we wanted to make the economic case, because if we could make the economic case, then the value of doing this would be completely compelling.
And if we can agree on both a value and a way of measuring whether we've been successful at reducing that re-offending, then we can do something we think rather interesting.
The idea is called the social impact bond.
Now, the social impact bond is simply saying, if we can get the government to agree, that we can create a contract where they only pay if it worked.
So that means that they can try out new stuff without the embarrassment of having to pay if it didn't work, which for still quite a lot of bits of government, that's a serious issue.
Now, many of you may have noticed there's a problem at this point, and that is that it takes a long time to measure whether those outcomes have happened.
So we have to raise some money.
We use the contract to raise money from socially motivated investors.
Socially motivated investors: there's an interesting idea, right?
But actually, there's a lot of people who, if they're given the chance, would love to invest in something that does social good.
And here's the opportunity.
Do you want to also help government find whether there's a better economic model, not just leaving these guys to come out of prison and waiting till they re-offend and putting them back in again, but actually working with them to move to a different path to end up with fewer crimes and fewer victims?
So we find some investors, and they pay for a set of services, and if those services are successful, then they improve outcomes, and with those measured reductions in re-offending, government saves money, and with those savings, they can pay outcomes.
And the investors do not just get their money back, but they make a return.
So in March 2010, we signed the first social impact bond with the Ministry of Justice around Peterborough Prison.
It was to work with 3,000 offenders split into three cohorts of 1,000 each.
Now, each of those cohorts would get measured over the two years that they were coming out of prison.
They've got to have a year to commit their crimes, six months to get through the court system, and then they would be compared to a group taken from the police national computer, as similar as possible, and we would get paid providing we achieved a hurdle rate of 10-percent reduction, for every conviction event that didn't happen.
So we get paid for crimes saved.
Now if we achieved that 10-percent reduction across all three cohorts, then the investors get a seven and a half percent annualized return on their investment, and if we do better than that, they can get up to 13 percent annualized return on their investment, which is okay.
So everyone wins here, right?
The Ministry of Justice can try out a new program and they only pay if it works.
Investors get two opportunities: for the first time, they can invest in social change.
Also, they make a reasonable return, and they also know that first investors in these kinds of things, they're going to have to believers.
They're going to have to care in the social program, but if this builds a track record over five or 10 years, then you can widen that investor community as more people have confidence in the product.
The service providers, well, for the first time, they've got an opportunity to provide services and grow the evidence for what they're doing in a really constructive way and learn and demonstrate the value of what they're doing over five or six years, not just one or two as often happens at the moment.
Society wins: fewer crimes, fewer victims.
Now, the offenders, they also benefit.
Instead of just coming out of the prison with 46 pounds in their pocket, half of them not knowing where they're spending their first night out of jail, actually, someone meets them in prison, learns about their issues, meets them at the gate, takes them through to somewhere to stay, connects them to benefits, connects them to employment, drug rehabilitation, mental health, whatever's needed.
So let's think of another example: working with children in care.
Social impact bonds work great for any area where there is at the moment very expensive provision that produces poor outcomes for people.
So children in the state care tend to do very badly.
Only 13 percent achieve a reasonable level of five GCSEs at 16, against 58 percent of the wider population.
More troublingly, 27 percent of offenders in prison have spent some time in care.
And even more worryingly, and this is a Home Office statistic, 70 percent of prostitutes have spent some time in care.
The state is not a great parent.
But there are great programs for adolescents who are on the edge of care, and 30 percent of kids going into care are adolescents.
So we set up a program with Essex County Council to test out intensive family therapeutic support for those families with adolescents on the edge of the care system.
Essex only pays in the event that it's saving them care costs.
Investors have put in 3.1 million pounds.
That program started last month.
Others, around homelessness in London, around youth and employment and education elsewhere in the country.
There are now 13 social impact bonds in Britain, and amazing levels of interest in this idea all over the world.
So David Cameron's put 20 million pounds into a social outcomes fund to support this idea.
Obama has suggested 300 million dollars in the U.S. budget for these kinds of ideas and structures to move it forward, and a lot of other countries are demonstrating considerable interest.
So what's caused this excitement?
Why is this so different for people?
Well, the first piece, which we've talked about, is innovation.
It enables testing of new ideas in a way that's less difficult for everybody.
The second piece it brings is rigor.
By working to outcomes, people really have to test and bring data into the situation that one's dealing with.
So taking Peterborough as an example, we add case management across all of the different organizations that we're working with so they know what actually has been done with different prisoners, and at the same time they learn from the Ministry of Justice, and we learn, because we pushed for the data, what actually happens, whether they get re-arrested or not.
And we learn and adapt the program accordingly.
And this leads to the third element, which is new, and that's flexibility.
Because normal contracting for things, when you're spending government money, you're spending our money, tax money, and the people who are in charge of that are very aware of it so the temptation is to control exactly how you spend it.
Now any entrepreneur in the room knows that version 1.0, the business plan, is not the one that generally works.
So when you're trying to do something like this, you need the flexibility to adapt the program.
And again, in Peterborough, we started off with a program, but we also collected data, and over the period of time, we nuanced and changed that program to add a range of other elements, so that the service adapts and we meet the needs of the long term as well as the short term: greater engagement from the prisoners, longer-term engagement as well.
The last element is partnership.
There is, at the moment, a stale debate going on very often: state's better, public sector's better, private sector's better, social sector's better, for a lot of these programs.
Actually, for creating social change, we need to bring in the expertise from all of those parties in order to make this work.
And this creates a structure through which they can combine.
So where does this leave us?
This leaves us with a way that people can invest in social change.
We've met thousands, possibly millions of people, who want the opportunity to invest in social change.
We've met champions all over the public sector keen to make these kinds of differences.
With this kind of model, we can help bring them together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Over the course of our lifetimes, our bodies undergo a series of extraordinary metamorphoses: we grow, experience puberty, and many of us reproduce.
Behind the scenes, the endocrine system works constantly to orchestrate these changes.
Alongside growth and sexual maturity, this system regulates everything from your sleep to the rhythm of your beating heart, exerting its influence over each and every one of your cells.
The endocrine system relies on interactions between three features to do its job: glands, hormones, and trillions of cell receptors.
Firstly, there are several hormone-producing glands: three in your brain, and seven in the rest of your body.
Each is surrounded by a network of blood vessels, from which they extract ingredients to manufacture dozens of hormones.
Those hormones are then pumped out in tiny amounts, usually into the bloodstream.
From there, each hormone needs to locate a set of target cells in order to bring about a specific change.
To find its targets, it’s helped along by receptors, which are special proteins inside or on the cell’s surface.
Those receptors recognise specific hormones as they waft by, and bind to them.
When this happens, that hormone-receptor combination triggers a range of effects that either increase or decrease specific processes inside the cell to change the way that cell behaves.
By exposing millions of cells at a time to hormones in carefully-regulated quantities, the endocrine system drives large-scale changes across the body.
Take, for instance, the thyroid and the two hormones it produces, triiodothyronine and thyroxine.
These hormones travel to most of the body’s cells, where they influence how quickly those cells use energy and how rapidly they work.
In turn, that regulates everything from breathing rate to heartbeat, body temperature, and digestion.
Hormones also have some of their most visible—and familiar—effects during puberty.
In men, puberty begins when the testes start secreting testosterone.
That triggers the gradual development of the sexual organs, makes facial hair sprout, and causes the voice to deepen and height to increase.
In women, estrogen secreted from the ovaries signals the start of adulthood.
It helps the body develop, makes the hips widen, and thickens the womb’s lining, preparing the body for menstruation or pregnancy.
An enduring misconception around the endocrine system is that there are exclusively male and female hormones.
In fact, men and women have estrogen and testosterone, just in different amounts.
Both hormones play a role in pregnancy, as well, alongside more than 10 other hormones that ensure the growth of the fetus, enable birth, and help the mother feed her child.
Such periods of hormonal change are also associated with fluctuations in mood.
That’s because hormones can influence the production of certain chemicals in the brain, like serotonin.
When chemical levels shift, they may cause changes in mood, as well.
But that’s not to say that hormones have unlimited power over us.
They’re frequently viewed as the main drivers of our behavior, making us slaves to their effects, especially during puberty.
But research shows that our behavior is collectively shaped by a variety of influences, including the brain and its neurotransmitters, our hormones, and various social factors.
The primary function of the endocrine system is to regulate our bodily processes, not control us.
Sometimes disease, stress, and even diet can disrupt that regulatory function, however, altering the quantity of hormones that glands secrete or changing the way that cells respond.
Diabetes is one of the most common hormonal disorders, occurring when the pancreas secretes too little insulin, a hormone that manages blood sugar levels.
And hypo- and hyperthyroidism occur when the thyroid gland makes too little or too much thyroid hormone.
When there’s too little thyroid hormone, that results in a slowed heart rate, fatigue, and depression, and when there’s too much thyroid hormone, weight loss, sleeplessness, and irritability.
But most of the time, the endocrine system manages to keep our bodies in a state of balance.
And through its constant regulation, it drives the changes that ultimately help us become who we are.
We have a global health challenge in our hands today, and that is that the way we currently discover and develop new drugs is too costly, takes far too long, and it fails more often than it succeeds.
It really just isn't working, and that means that patients that badly need new therapies are not getting them, and diseases are going untreated.
We seem to be spending more and more money.
So for every billion dollars we spend in R&amp;D, we're getting less drugs approved into the market.
More money, less drugs. Hmm.
So what's going on here?
Well, there's a multitude of factors at play, but I think one of the key factors is that the tools that we currently have available to test whether a drug is going to work, whether it has efficacy, or whether it's going to be safe before we get it into human clinical trials, are failing us. They're not predicting what's going to happen in humans.
And we have two main tools available at our disposal.
They are cells in dishes and animal testing.
Now let's talk about the first one, cells in dishes.
So, cells are happily functioning in our bodies.
We take them and rip them out of their native environment, throw them in one of these dishes, and expect them to work.
Guess what. They don't.
They don't like that environment because it's nothing like what they have in the body.
What about animal testing?
Well, animals do and can provide extremely useful information.
They teach us about what happens in the complex organism.
We learn more about the biology itself.
However, more often than not, animal models fail to predict what will happen in humans when they're treated with a particular drug.
So we need better tools.
We need human cells, but we need to find a way to keep them happy outside the body.
Our bodies are dynamic environments.
We're in constant motion.
Our cells experience that.
They're in dynamic environments in our body.
They're under constant mechanical forces.
So if we want to make cells happy outside our bodies, we need to become cell architects.
We need to design, build and engineer a home away from home for the cells.
And at the Wyss Institute, we've done just that.
We call it an organ-on-a-chip.
And I have one right here.
It's beautiful, isn't it? But it's pretty incredible.
Right here in my hand is a breathing, living human lung on a chip.
And it's not just beautiful.
It can do a tremendous amount of things.
We have living cells in that little chip, cells that are in a dynamic environment interacting with different cell types.
There's been many people trying to grow cells in the lab.
They've tried many different approaches.
They've even tried to grow little mini-organs in the lab.
We're not trying to do that here.
We're simply trying to recreate in this tiny chip the smallest functional unit that represents the biochemistry, the function and the mechanical strain that the cells experience in our bodies.
So how does it work? Let me show you.
We use techniques from the computer chip manufacturing industry to make these structures at a scale relevant to both the cells and their environment.
We have three fluidic channels.
In the center, we have a porous, flexible membrane on which we can add human cells from, say, our lungs, and then underneath, they had capillary cells, the cells in our blood vessels.
And we can then apply mechanical forces to the chip that stretch and contract the membrane, so the cells experience the same mechanical forces that they did when we breathe.
And they experience them how they did in the body.
There's air flowing through the top channel, and then we flow a liquid that contains nutrients through the blood channel.
Now the chip is really beautiful, but what can we do with it?
We can get incredible functionality inside these little chips.
Let me show you.
We could, for example, mimic infection, where we add bacterial cells into the lung.
then we can add human white blood cells.
White blood cells are our body's defense against bacterial invaders, and when they sense this inflammation due to infection, they will enter from the blood into the lung and engulf the bacteria.
Well now you're going to see this happening live in an actual human lung on a chip.
We've labeled the white blood cells so you can see them flowing through, and when they detect that infection, they begin to stick.
They stick, and then they try to go into the lung side from blood channel.
And you can see here, we can actually visualize a single white blood cell.
It sticks, it wiggles its way through between the cell layers, through the pore, comes out on the other side of the membrane, and right there, it's going to engulf the bacteria labeled in green.
In that tiny chip, you just witnessed one of the most fundamental responses our body has to an infection.
It's the way we respond to -- an immune response.
It's pretty exciting.
Now I want to share this picture with you, not just because it's so beautiful, but because it tells us an enormous amount of information about what the cells are doing within the chips.
It tells us that these cells from the small airways in our lungs, actually have these hairlike structures that you would expect to see in the lung.
These structures are called cilia, and they actually move the mucus out of the lung.
Yeah. Mucus. Yuck.
But mucus is actually very important.
Mucus traps particulates, viruses, potential allergens, and these little cilia move and clear the mucus out.
When they get damaged, say, by cigarette smoke for example, they don't work properly, and they can't clear that mucus out.
And that can lead to diseases such as bronchitis.
Cilia and the clearance of mucus are also involved in awful diseases like cystic fibrosis.
But now, with the functionality that we get in these chips, we can begin to look for potential new treatments.
We didn't stop with the lung on a chip.
We have a gut on a chip.
You can see one right here.
And we've put intestinal human cells in a gut on a chip, and they're under constant peristaltic motion, this trickling flow through the cells, and we can mimic many of the functions that you actually would expect to see in the human intestine.
Now we can begin to create models of diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome.
This is a disease that affects a large number of individuals.
It's really debilitating, and there aren't really many good treatments for it.
Now we have a whole pipeline of different organ chips that we are currently working on in our labs.
Now, the true power of this technology, however, really comes from the fact that we can fluidically link them.
There's fluid flowing across these cells, so we can begin to interconnect multiple different chips together to form what we call a virtual human on a chip.
Now we're really getting excited.
We're not going to ever recreate a whole human in these chips, but what our goal is is to be able to recreate sufficient functionality so that we can make better predictions of what's going to happen in humans.
For example, now we can begin to explore what happens when we put a drug like an aerosol drug.
Those of you like me who have asthma, when you take your inhaler, we can explore how that drug comes into your lungs, how it enters the body, how it might affect, say, your heart.
Does it change the beating of your heart?
Does it have a toxicity?
Does it get cleared by the liver?
Is it metabolized in the liver?
Is it excreted in your kidneys?
We can begin to study the dynamic response of the body to a drug.
This could really revolutionize and be a game changer for not only the pharmaceutical industry, but a whole host of different industries, including the cosmetics industry.
We can potentially use the skin on a chip that we're currently developing in the lab to test whether the ingredients in those products that you're using are actually safe to put on your skin without the need for animal testing.
We could test the safety of chemicals that we are exposed to on a daily basis in our environment, such as chemicals in regular household cleaners.
We could also use the organs on chips for applications in bioterrorism or radiation exposure.
We could use them to learn more about diseases such as ebola or other deadly diseases such as SARS.
Organs on chips could also change the way we do clinical trials in the future.
Right now, the average participant in a clinical trial is that: average.
Tends to be middle aged, tends to be female.
You won't find many clinical trials in which children are involved, yet every day, we give children medications, and the only safety data we have on that drug is one that we obtained from adults.
Children are not adults.
They may not respond in the same way adults do.
There are other things like genetic differences in populations that may lead to at-risk populations that are at risk of having an adverse drug reaction.
Now imagine if we could take cells from all those different populations, put them on chips, and create populations on a chip.
This could really change the way we do clinical trials.
And this is the team and the people that are doing this.
We have engineers, we have cell biologists, we have clinicians, all working together.
We're really seeing something quite incredible at the Wyss Institute.
It's really a convergence of disciplines, where biology is influencing the way we design, the way we engineer, the way we build.
It's pretty exciting.
We're establishing important industry collaborations such as the one we have with a company that has expertise in large-scale digital manufacturing.
They're going to help us make, instead of one of these, millions of these chips, so that we can get them into the hands of as many researchers as possible.
And this is key to the potential of that technology.
Now let me show you our instrument.
This is an instrument that our engineers are actually prototyping right now in the lab, and this instrument is going to give us the engineering controls that we're going to require in order to link 10 or more organ chips together.
It does something else that's very important.
It creates an easy user interface.
So a cell biologist like me can come in, take a chip, put it in a cartridge like the prototype you see there, put the cartridge into the machine just like you would a C.D., and away you go.
Plug and play. Easy.
Now, let's imagine a little bit what the future might look like if I could take your stem cells and put them on a chip, or your stem cells and put them on a chip.
It would be a personalized chip just for you.
Now all of us in here are individuals, and those individual differences mean that we could react very differently and sometimes in unpredictable ways to drugs.
I myself, a couple of years back, had a really bad headache, just couldn't shake it, thought, "Well, I'll try something different."
I took some Advil. Fifteen minutes later, I was on my way to the emergency room with a full-blown asthma attack.
Now, obviously it wasn't fatal, but unfortunately, some of these adverse drug reactions can be fatal.
So how do we prevent them?
Well, we could imagine one day having Geraldine on a chip, having Danielle on a chip, having you on a chip.
Personalized medicine. Thank you.
(Applause)
So when I do my job, people hate me.
In fact, the better I do my job, the more people hate me.
And no, I'm not a meter maid, and I'm not an undertaker.
I am a progressive, lesbian talking head on Fox News.
(Applause) So y'all heard that, right? Just to make sure, right?
I am a gay talking head on Fox News.
I am going to tell you how I do it, and the most important thing I've learned.
So I go on television.
I debate people who literally want to obliterate everything I believe in -- in some cases, who don't want me and people like me to even exist.
It's sort of like Thanksgiving with your conservative uncle on steroids, with a live television audience of millions.
It's totally almost just like that.
And that's just on air.
The hate mail I get is unbelievable.
Last week alone, I got 238 pieces of nasty email and more hate tweets than I can even count.
I was called an idiot, a traitor, a scourge, a cunt and an ugly man, and that was just in one email.
(Laughter) So what have I realized, being on the receiving end of all this ugliness?
Well, my biggest takeaway is that for decades, we've been focused on political correctness, but what matters more is emotional correctness.
Let me give you a small example.
I don't care if you call me a dyke. I really don't.
I care about two things.
One, I care that you spell it right.
(Laughter) (Applause) Just quick refresher, it's D-Y-K-E.
You'd totally be surprised.
And second, I don't care about the word, I care about how you use it.
Are you being friendly? Are you just being naive?
Or do you really want to hurt me personally?
Emotional correctness is the tone, the feeling, how we say what we say, the respect and compassion we show one another.
And what I've realized is that political persuasion doesn't begin with ideas or facts or data.
Political persuasion begins with being emotionally correct.
So when I first went to go work at Fox News, true confession, I expected there to be marks in the carpet from all the knuckle-dragging.
That, by the way, in case you're paying attention, is not emotionally correct.
But liberals on my side, we can be self-righteous, we can be condescending, we can be dismissive of anyone who doesn't agree with us.
In other words, we can be politically right but emotionally wrong.
And incidentally, that means that people don't like us. Right?
Now here's the kicker.
Conservatives are really nice.
I mean, not all of them, and not the ones who send me hate mail, but you would be surprised.
Sean Hannity is one of the sweetest guys I've ever met.
He spends his free time trying to fix up his staff on blind dates, and I know that if I ever had a problem, he would do anything he could to help.
Now, I think Sean Hannity is 99 percent politically wrong, but his emotional correctness is strikingly impressive.
And that's why people listen to him.
Because you can't get anyone to agree with you if they don't even listen to you first.
We spend so much time talking past each other and not enough time talking through our disagreements.
And if we can start to find compassion for one another, then we have a shot at building common ground.
It actually sounds really hokey to say it standing up here, but when you try to put it in practice, it's really powerful.
So someone who says they hate immigrants, I try to imagine how scared they must be that their community is changing from what they've always known.
Or someone who says they don't like teachers' unions, I bet they're really devastated to see their kid's school going into the gutter, and they're just looking for someone to blame.
Our challenge is to find the compassion for others that we want them to have for us.
That is emotional correctness.
I'm not saying it's easy.
An average of, like, 5.6 times per day I have to stop myself from responding to all of my hate mail with a flurry of vile profanities.
This whole finding compassion and common ground with your enemies thing is kind of like a political-spiritual practice for me, and I ain't the Dalai Lama.
I'm not perfect, but what I am is optimistic.
Because I don't just get hate mail.
I get a lot of really nice letters, lots of them.
And one of my all-time favorites begins: "I am not a big fan of your political leanings or your sometimes tortured logic, (Laughter) but I'm a big fan of you as a person."
Now this guy doesn't agree with me -- yet.
(Laughter) But he's listening -- not because of what I said, but because of how I said it.
And somehow, even though we've never met, we've managed to form a connection.
That's emotional correctness, and that's how we start the conversations that really lead to change.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Aquatic noises) So this video was taken at Aquarius undersea laboratory four miles off the coast of Key Largo, about 60 feet below the surface.
NASA uses this extreme environment to train astronauts and aquanauts, and last year, they invited us along for the ride.
All the footage was taken from our open ROV, which is a robot that we built in our garage.
So ROV stands for Remote Operated Vehicle, which in our case means our little robot sends live video across that ultra-thin tether back to the computer topside.
It's open source, meaning we publish and share all of our design files and all of our code online, allowing anyone to modify or improve or change the design.
It's built with mostly off-the-shelf parts and costs about 1,000 times cheaper than the ROVs James Cameron used to explore the Titanic.
So ROVs aren't new.
They've been around for decades.
Scientists use ROVs to explore the oceans.
Oil and gas companies use them for exploration and construction.
What we've built isn't unique.
It's how we've built it that's really unique.
So I want to give you a quick story of how it got started.
So a few years ago, my friend Eric and I decided we wanted to explore this underwater cave in the foothills of the Sierras.
We had heard this story about lost gold from a Gold Rush-era robbery, and we wanted to go up there.
Unfortunately, we didn't have any money and we didn't have any tools to do it.
So Eric had an initial design idea for a robot, but we didn't have all the parts figured out, so we did what anybody would do in our situation: we asked the Internet for help.
More specifically, we created this website, openROV.com, and shared our intentions and our plans For the first few months, it was just Eric and I talking back to each other on the forums, but pretty soon, we started to get feedback from makers and hobbyists, and then actually professional ocean engineers who had some suggestions for what we should do.
We kept working on it. We learned a lot.
We kept prototyping, and eventually, we decided we wanted to go to the cave. We were ready.
So about that time, our little expedition became quite a story, and it got picked up in The New York Times.
And we were pretty much just overwhelmed with interest from people who wanted a kit that they could build this open ROV themselves.
So we decided to put the project on Kickstarter, and when we did, we raised our funding goal in about two hours, and all of a sudden, had this money to make these kits.
But then we had to learn how to make them.
I mean, we had to learn small batch manufacturing.
So we quickly learned that our garage was not big enough to hold our growing operation.
But we were able to do it, we got all the kits made, thanks a lot to TechShop, which was a big help to us, and we shipped these kits all over the world just before Christmas of last year, so it was just a few months ago.
But we're already starting to get video and photos back from all over the world, including this shot from under the ice in Antarctica.
We've also learned the penguins love robots.
(Laughter) So we're still publishing all the designs online, encouraging anyone to build these themselves.
That's the only way that we could have done this.
By being open source, we've created this distributed R&amp;D network, and we're moving faster than any venture-backed counterpart.
But the actual robot is really only half the story.
The real potential, the long term potential, is with this community of DIY ocean explorers that are forming all over the globe.
What can we discover when there's thousands of these devices roaming the seas?
So you're probably all wondering: the cave.
Did you find the gold?
Well, we didn't find any gold, but we decided that what we found was much more valuable.
It was the glimpse into a potential future for ocean exploration.
It's something that's not limited to the James Camerons of the world, but something that we're all participating in.
It's an underwater world we're all exploring together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Mobility in developing world cities is a very peculiar challenge, because different from health or education or housing, it tends to get worse as societies become richer.
Clearly, a unsustainable model.
Mobility, as most other developing country problems, more than a matter of money or technology, is a matter of equality, equity.
The great inequality in developing countries makes it difficult to see, for example, that in terms of transport, an advanced city is not one where even the poor use cars, but rather one where even the rich use public transport.
Or bicycles: For example, in Amsterdam, more than 30 percent of the population uses bicycles, despite the fact that the Netherlands has a higher income per capita than the United States.
There is a conflict in developing world cities for money, for government investment.
If more money is invested in highways, of course there is less money for housing, for schools, for hospitals, and also there is a conflict for space.
There is a conflict for space between those with cars and those without them.
Most of us accept today that private property and a market economy is the best way to manage most of society's resources.
However, there is a problem with that, that market economy needs inequality of income in order to work.
Some people must make more money, some others less.
Some companies succeed. Others fail.
Then what kind of equality can we hope for today with a market economy?
I would propose two kinds which both have much to do with cities.
The first one is equality of quality of life, especially for children, that all children should have, beyond the obvious health and education, access to green spaces, to sports facilities, to swimming pools, to music lessons.
And the second kind of equality is one which we could call "democratic equality."
The first article in every constitution states that all citizens are equal before the law.
That is not just poetry.
It's a very powerful principle.
For example, if that is true, a bus with 80 passengers has a right to 80 times more road space than a car with one.
We have been so used to inequality, sometimes, that it's before our noses and we do not see it.
Less than 100 years ago, women could not vote, and it seemed normal, in the same way that it seems normal today to see a bus in traffic.
In fact, when I became mayor, applying that democratic principle that public good prevails over private interest, that a bus with 100 people has a right to 100 times more road space than a car, we implemented a mass transit system based on buses in exclusive lanes.
We called it TransMilenio, in order to make buses sexier.
And one thing is that it is also a very beautiful democratic symbol, because as buses zoom by, expensive cars stuck in traffic, it clearly is almost a picture of democracy at work.
In fact, it's not just a matter of equity.
It doesn't take Ph.D.'s.
A committee of 12-year-old children would find out in 20 minutes that the most efficient way to use scarce road space is with exclusive lanes for buses.
In fact, buses are not sexy, but they are the only possible means to bring mass transit to all areas of fast growing developing cities.
They also have great capacity.
For example, this system in Guangzhou is moving more passengers our direction than all subway lines in China, except for one line in Beijing, at a fraction of the cost.
We fought not just for space for buses, but we fought for space for people, and that was even more difficult.
Cities are human habitats, and we humans are pedestrians.
Just as fish need to swim or birds need to fly or deer need to run, we need to walk.
There is a really enormous conflict, when we are talking about developing country cities, between pedestrians and cars.
Here, what you see is a picture that shows insufficient democracy.
What this shows is that people who walk are third-class citizens while those who go in cars are first-class citizens.
In terms of transport infrastructure, what really makes a difference between advanced and backward cities is not highways or subways but quality sidewalks.
Here they made a flyover, probably very useless, and they forgot to make a sidewalk.
This is prevailing all over the world.
Not even schoolchildren are more important than cars.
In my city of Bogotá, we fought a very difficult battle in order to take space from cars, which had been parking on sidewalks for decades, in order to make space for people that should reflect dignity of human beings, and to make space for protected bikeways.
First of all, I had black hair before that.
(Laughter) And I was almost impeached in the process.
It is a very difficult battle.
However, it was possible, finally, after very difficult battles, to make a city that would reflect some respect for human dignity, that would show that those who walk are equally important to those who have cars.
Indeed, a very important ideological and political issue anywhere is how to distribute that most valuable resource of a city, which is road space.
A city could find oil or diamonds underground and it would not be so valuable as road space.
How to distribute it between pedestrians, bicycles, public transport and cars?
This is not a technological issue, and we should remember that in no constitution parking is a constitutional right when we make that distribution.
We also built, and this was 15 years ago, before there were bikeways in New York or in Paris or in London, it was a very difficult battle as well, more than 350 kilometers of protected bicycle ways.
I don't think protected bicycle ways are a cute architectural feature.
They are a right, just as sidewalks are, unless we believe that only those with access to a motor vehicle have a right to safe mobility, without the risk of getting killed.
And just as busways are, protected bikeways also are a powerful symbol of democracy, because they show that a citizen on a $30 bicycle is equally important to one in a $30,000 car.
And we are living in a unique moment in history.
In the next 50 years, more than half of those cities which will exist in the year 2060 will be built.
In many developing country cities, more than 80 and 90 percent of the city which will exist in 2060 will be built over the next four or five decades.
But this is not just a matter for developing country cities.
In the United States, for example, more than 70 million new homes must be built over the next 40 or 50 years.
That's more than all the homes that today exist in Britain, France and Canada put together.
And I believe that our cities today have severe flaws, and that different, better ones could be built.
What is wrong with our cities today?
Well, for example, if we tell any three-year-old child who is barely learning to speak in any city in the world today, "Watch out, a car," the child will jump in fright, and with a very good reason, because there are more than 10,000 children who are killed by cars every year in the world.
We have had cities for 8,000 years, and children could walk out of home and play.
In fact, only very recently, towards 1900, there were no cars.
Cars have been here for really less than 100 years.
They completely changed cities.
In 1900, for example, nobody was killed by cars in the United States.
Only 20 years later, between 1920 and 1930, almost 200,000 people were killed by cars in the United States.
Only in 1925, almost 7,000 children were killed by cars in the United States.
So we could make different cities, cities that will give more priority to human beings than to cars, that will give more public space to human beings than to cars, cities which show great respect for those most vulnerable citizens, such as children or the elderly.
I will propose to you a couple of ingredients which I think would make cities much better, and it would be very simple to implement them in the new cities which are only being created.
Hundreds of kilometers of greenways criss-crossing cities in all directions.
Children will walk out of homes into safe spaces.
They could go for dozens of kilometers safely without any risk in wonderful greenways, sort of bicycle highways, and I would invite you to imagine the following: a city in which every other street would be a street only for pedestrians and bicycles.
In new cities which are going to be built, this would not be particularly difficult.
When I was mayor of Bogotá, in only three years, we were able to create 70 kilometers, in one of the most dense cities in the world, of these bicycle highways.
And this changes the way people live, move, enjoy the city.
In this picture, you see in one of the very poor neighborhoods, we have a luxury pedestrian bicycle street, and the cars still in the mud.
Of course, I would love to pave this street for cars.
But what do we do first?
Ninety-nine percent of the people in those neighborhoods don't have cars.
But you see, when a city is only being created, it's very easy to incorporate this kind of infrastructure.
Then the city grows around it.
And of course this is just a glimpse of something which could be much better if we just create it, and it changes the way of life.
And the second ingredient, which would solve mobility, that very difficult challenge in developing countries, in a very low-cost and simple way, would be to have hundreds of kilometers of streets only for buses, buses and bicycles and pedestrians.
This would be, again, a very low-cost solution if implemented from the start, low cost, pleasant transit with natural sunlight.
But unfortunately, reality is not as good as my dreams.
Because of private property of land and high land prices, all developing country cities have a large problem of slums.
In my country of Colombia, almost half the homes in cities initially were illegal developments.
And of course it's very difficult to have mass transit or to use bicycles in such environments.
But even legal developments have also been located in the wrong places, very far from the city centers where it's impossible to provide low-cost, high-frequency public transport.
As a Latin American, and Latin America was the most recently organized region in the world, I would recommend, respectfully, passionately, to those countries which are yet to urbanize -- Latin America went from 40 percent urban in 1950 to 80 percent urban in 2010 -- I would recommend Asian and African countries which are yet to urbanize, such as India which is only 33 percent urban now, that governments should acquire all land around cities.
In this way, their cities could grow in the right places with the right spaces, with the parks, with the greenways, with the busways.
The cities we are going to build over the next 50 years will determine quality of life and even happiness for billions of people towards the future.
What a fantastic opportunity for leaders and many young leaders to come, especially in the developing countries.
They can create a much happier life for billions towards the future.
I am sure, I am optimistic, that they will make cities better than our most ambitious dreams.
(Applause)
A couple of years ago, Harvard Business School chose the best business model of that year.
It chose Somali piracy.
Pretty much around the same time, I discovered that there were 544 seafarers being held hostage on ships, often anchored just off the Somali coast in plain sight.
And I learned these two facts, and I thought, what's going on in shipping?
And I thought, would that happen in any other industry?
Would we see 544 airline pilots held captive in their jumbo jets on a runway for months, or a year?
Would we see 544 Greyhound bus drivers?
It wouldn't happen.
So I started to get intrigued.
And I discovered another fact, which to me was more astonishing almost for the fact that I hadn't known it before at the age of 42, 43.
That is how fundamentally we still depend on shipping.
Because perhaps the general public thinks of shipping as an old-fashioned industry, something brought by sailboat with Moby Dicks and Jack Sparrows.
But shipping isn't that.
Shipping is as crucial to us as it has ever been.
Shipping brings us 90 percent of world trade.
Shipping has quadrupled in size since 1970.
We are more dependent on it now than ever.
And yet, for such an enormous industry -- there are a 100,000 working vessels on the sea — it's become pretty much invisible.
Now that sounds absurd in Singapore to say that, because here shipping is so present that you stuck a ship on top of a hotel.
(Laughter) But elsewhere in the world, if you ask the general public what they know about shipping and how much trade is carried by sea, you will get essentially a blank face.
You will ask someone on the street if they've heard of Microsoft.
I should think they'll say yes, because they'll know that they make software that goes on computers, and occasionally works.
But if you ask them if they've heard of Maersk, I doubt you'd get the same response, even though Maersk, which is just one shipping company amongst many, has revenues pretty much on a par with Microsoft.
[$60.2 billion] Now why is this?
A few years ago, the first sea lord of the British admiralty -- he is called the first sea lord, although the chief of the army is not called a land lord — he said that we, and he meant in the industrialized nations in the West, that we suffer from sea blindness.
We are blind to the sea as a place of industry or of work.
It's just something we fly over, a patch of blue on an airline map.
Nothing to see, move along.
So I wanted to open my own eyes to my own sea blindness, so I ran away to sea.
A couple of years ago, I took a passage on the Maersk Kendal, a mid-sized container ship carrying nearly 7,000 boxes, and I departed from Felixstowe, on the south coast of England, and I ended up right here in Singapore five weeks later, considerably less jet-lagged than I am right now.
And it was a revelation.
We traveled through five seas, two oceans, nine ports, and I learned a lot about shipping.
And one of the first things that surprised me when I got on board Kendal was, where are all the people?
I have friends in the Navy who tell me they sail with 1,000 sailors at a time, but on Kendal there were only 21 crew.
Now that's because shipping is very efficient.
Containerization has made it very efficient.
Ships have automation now.
They can operate with small crews.
But it also means that, in the words of a port chaplain I once met, the average seafarer you're going to find on a container ship is either tired or exhausted, because the pace of modern shipping is quite punishing for what the shipping calls its human element, a strange phrase which they don't seem to realize sounds a little bit inhuman.
So most seafarers now working on container ships often have less than two hours in port at a time.
They don't have time to relax.
They're at sea for months at a time, and even when they're on board, they don't have access to what a five-year-old would take for granted, the Internet.
And another thing that surprised me when I got on board Kendal was who I was sitting next to -- Not the queen; I can't imagine why they put me underneath her portrait -- But around that dining table in the officer's saloon, I was sitting next to a Burmese guy, I was opposite a Romanian, a Moldavian, an Indian.
On the next table was a Chinese guy, and in the crew room, it was entirely Filipinos.
So that was a normal working ship.
Now how is that possible?
Because the biggest dramatic change in shipping over the last 60 years, when most of the general public stopped noticing it, was something called an open registry, or a flag of convenience.
Ships can now fly the flag of any nation that provides a flag registry.
You can get a flag from the landlocked nation of Bolivia, or Mongolia, or North Korea, though that's not very popular.
(Laughter) So we have these very multinational, global, mobile crews on ships.
And that was a surprise to me.
And when we got to pirate waters, down the Bab-el-Mandeb strait and into the Indian Ocean, the ship changed.
And that was also shocking, because suddenly, I realized, as the captain said to me, that I had been crazy to choose to go through pirate waters on a container ship.
We were no longer allowed on deck.
There were double pirate watches.
And at that time, there were those 544 seafarers being held hostage, and some of them were held hostage for years because of the nature of shipping and the flag of convenience.
Not all of them, but some of them were, because for the minority of unscrupulous ship owners, it can be easy to hide behind the anonymity offered by some flags of convenience.
What else does our sea blindness mask?
Well, if you go out to sea on a ship or on a cruise ship, and look up to the funnel, you'll see very black smoke.
And that's because shipping has very tight margins, and they want cheap fuel, so they use something called bunker fuel, which was described to me by someone in the tanker industry as the dregs of the refinery, or just one step up from asphalt.
And shipping is the greenest method of transport.
In terms of carbon emissions per ton per mile, it emits about a thousandth of aviation and about a tenth of trucking.
But it's not benign, because there's so much of it.
So shipping emissions are about three to four percent, almost the same as aviation's.
And if you put shipping emissions on a list of the countries' carbon emissions, it would come in about sixth, somewhere near Germany.
It was calculated in 2009 that the 15 largest ships pollute in terms of particles and soot and noxious gases as much as all the cars in the world.
And the good news is that people are now talking about sustainable shipping.
There are interesting initiatives going on.
But why has it taken so long?
When are we going to start talking and thinking about shipping miles as well as air miles?
I also traveled to Cape Cod to look at the plight of the North Atlantic right whale, because this to me was one of the most surprising things about my time at sea, and what it made me think about.
We know about man's impact on the ocean in terms of fishing and overfishing, but we don't really know much about what's happening underneath the water.
And in fact, shipping has a role to play here, because shipping noise has contributed to damaging the acoustic habitats of ocean creatures.
Light doesn't penetrate beneath the surface of the water, so ocean creatures like whales and dolphins and even 800 species of fish communicate by sound.
And a North Atlantic right whale can transmit across hundreds of miles.
A humpback can transmit a sound across a whole ocean.
But a supertanker can also be heard coming across a whole ocean, and because the noise that propellers make underwater is sometimes at the same frequency that whales use, then it can damage their acoustic habitat, and they need this for breeding, for finding feeding grounds, for finding mates.
And the acoustic habitat of the North Atlantic right whale has been reduced by up to 90 percent.
But there are no laws governing acoustic pollution yet.
And when I arrived in Singapore, and I apologize for this, but I didn't want to get off my ship.
I'd really loved being on board Kendal.
I'd been well treated by the crew, I'd had a garrulous and entertaining captain, and I would happily have signed up for another five weeks, something that the captain also said I was crazy to think about.
But I wasn't there for nine months at a time like the Filipino seafarers, who, when I asked them to describe their job to me, called it "dollar for homesickness."
They had good salaries, but theirs is still an isolating and difficult life in a dangerous and often difficult element.
But when I get to this part, I'm in two minds, because I want to salute those seafarers who bring us 90 percent of everything and get very little thanks or recognition for it.
I want to salute the 100,000 ships that are at sea that are doing that work, coming in and out every day, bringing us what we need.
But I also want to see shipping, and us, the general public, who know so little about it, to have a bit more scrutiny, to be a bit more transparent, to have 90 percent transparency.
Because I think we could all benefit from doing something very simple, which is learning to see the sea.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I would like to show you how architecture has helped to change the life of my community and has opened opportunities to hope.
I am a native of Burkina Faso.
According to the World Bank, Burkina Faso is one of the poorest countries in the world, but what does it look like to grow up in a place like that?
I am an example of that.
I was born in a little village called Gando.
In Gando, there was no electricity, no access to clean drinking water, and no school.
But my father wanted me to learn how to read and write.
For this reason, I had to leave my family when I was seven and to stay in a city far away from my village with no contact with my family.
In this place I sat in a class like that with more than 150 other kids, and for six years.
In this time, it just happened to me to come to school to realize that my classmate died.
Today, not so much has changed.
There is still no electricity in my village.
People still are dying in Burkina Faso, and access to clean drinking water is still a big problem.
I had luck. I was lucky, because this is a fact of life when you grow up in a place like that.
But I was lucky.
I had a scholarship.
I could go to Germany to study.
So now, I suppose, I don't need to explain to you how great a privilege it is for me to be standing before you today.
From Gando, my home village in Burkina Faso, to Berlin in Germany to become an architect is a big, big step.
But what to do with this privilege?
Since I was a student, I wanted to open up better opportunities to other kids in Gando.
I just wanted to use my skills and build a school.
But how do you do it when you're still a student and you don't have money?
Oh yes, I started to make drawings and asked for money.
Fundraising was not an easy task.
I even asked my classmates to spend less money on coffee and cigarettes, but to sponsor my school project.
In real wonder, two years later, I was able to collect 50,000 U.S. dollars.
When I came home to Gando to bring the good news, my people were over the moon, but when they realized that I was planning to use clay, they were shocked.
"A clay building is not able to stand a rainy season, and Francis wants us to use it and build a school.
Is this the reason why he spent so much time in Europe studying instead of working in the field with us?"
My people build all the time with clay, but they don't see any innovation with mud.
So I had to convince everybody.
I started to speak with the community, and I could convince everybody, and we could start to work.
And the women, the men, everybody from the village, was part of this building process.
I was allowed to use even traditional techniques.
So clay floor for example, the young men come and stand like that, beating, hours for hours, and then their mothers came, and they are beating in this position, for hours, giving water and beating.
And then the polishers come.
They start polishing it with a stone for hours.
And then you have this result, very fine, like a baby bottom.
(Laughter) It's not photoshopped. (Laughter) This is the school, built with the community.
The walls are totally made out of compressed clay blocks from Gando.
The roof structure is made with cheap steel bars normally hiding inside concrete.
And the classroom, the ceiling is made out of both of them used together.
In this school, there was a simple idea: to create comfort in a classroom.
Don't forget, it can be 45 degrees in Burkina Faso, so with simple ventilation, I wanted to make the classroom good for teaching and learning.
And this is the project today, 12 years old, still in best condition.
And the kids, they love it.
And for me and my community, this project was a huge success.
It has opened up opportunities to do more projects in Gando.
So I could do a lot of projects, and here I am going to share with you only three of them.
The first one is the school extension, of course.
How do you explain drawings and engineering to people who are neither able to read nor write?
I started to build a prototype like that.
The innovation was to build a clay vault.
So then, I jumped on the top like that, with my team, and it works.
The community is looking. It still works.
So we can build. (Laughter) And we kept building, and that is the result.
The kids are happy, and they love it.
The community is very proud. We made it.
And even animals, like these donkeys, love our buildings.
(Laughter) The next project is the library in Gando.
And see now, we tried to introduce different ideas in our buildings, but we often don't have so much material.
Something we have in Gando are clay pots.
We wanted to use them to create openings.
So we just bring them like you can see to the building site.
we start cutting them, and then we place them on top of the roof before we pour the concrete, and you have this result.
The openings are letting the hot air out and light in.
Very simple.
My most recent project in Gando is a high school project.
I would like to share with you this.
The innovation in this project is to cast mud like you cast concrete.
How do you cast mud?
We start making a lot of mortars, like you can see, and when everything is ready, when you know what is the best recipe and the best form, you start working with the community.
And sometimes I can leave.
They will do it themselves.
I came to speak to you like that.
Another factor in Gando is rain.
When the rains come, we hurry up to protect our fragile walls against the rain.
Don't confound with Christo and Jeanne-Claude.
It is simply how we protect our walls.
(Laughter) The rain in Burkina comes very fast, and after that, you have floods everywhere in the country.
But for us, the rain is good.
It brings sand and gravel to the river we need to use to build.
We just wait for the rain to go.
We take the sand, we mix it with clay, and we keep building.
That is it.
The Gando project was always connected to training the people, because I just wanted, one day when I fall down and die, that at least one person from Gando keeps doing this work.
But you will be surprised. I'm still alive.
(Laughter) And my people now can use their skills to earn money themselves.
Usually, for a young man from Gando to earn money, you have to leave the country to the city, sometimes leave the country and some never come back, making the community weaker.
But now they can stay in the country and work on different building sites and earn money to feed their family.
There's a new quality in this work.
Yes, you know it.
I have won a lot of awards through this work.
For sure, it has opened opportunities.
I have become myself known.
But the reason why I do what I do is my community.
When I was a kid, I was going to school, I was coming back every holiday to Gando.
By the end of every holidays, I had to say goodbye to the community, going from one compound to another one.
All women in Gando will open their clothes like that and give me the last penny.
In my culture, this is a symbol of deep affection.
As a seven-year-old guy, I was impressed.
I just asked my mother one day, "Why do all these women love me so much?"
(Laughter) She just answered, "They are contributing to pay for your education hoping that you will be successful and one day come back and help improve the quality of life of the community."
I hope now that I was able to make my community proud through this work, and I hope I was able to prove you the power of community, and to show you that architecture can be inspiring for communities to shape their own future.
Merci beaucoup. (Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. (Applause)
So how many of you have ever been in a cave before?
Okay, a few of you.
When you think of a cave, most of you think of a tunnel going through solid rock, and in fact, that's how most caves are.
Around this half of the country, most of your caves are made of limestone.
Back where I'm from, most of our caves are made of lava rock, because we have a lot of volcanoes out there.
But the caves I want to share with you today are made completely of ice, specifically glacier ice that's formed in the side of the tallest mountain in the state of Oregon, called Mount Hood.
Now Mount Hood's only one hour's drive from Portland, the largest city in Oregon, where over two million people live.
Now the most exciting thing for a cave explorer is to find a new cave and be the first human to ever go into it.
The second most exciting thing for a cave explorer is to be the first one to make a map of a cave.
Now these days, with so many people hiking around, it's pretty hard to find a new cave, so you can imagine how excited we were to find three new caves within sight of Oregon's largest city and realize that they had never been explored or mapped before.
It was kind of like being an astronaut, because we were getting to see things and go places that no one had ever seen or gone to before.
So what is a glacier?
Well, those of you who have ever seen or touched snow, you know that it's really light, because it's just a bunch of tiny ice crystals clumped together, and it's mostly air.
If you squish a handful of snow to make a snowball, it gets really small, hard and dense.
Well, on a mountain like Hood, where it snows over 20 feet a year, it crushes the air out of it and gradually forms it into hard blue ice.
Now each year, more and more ice stacks up on top of it, and eventually it gets so heavy that it starts to slide down the mountain under its own weight, forming a slow-moving river of ice.
When ice packed like that starts to move, we call it a glacier, and we give it a name.
The name of the glacier these caves are formed in is the Sandy Glacier.
Now each year, as new snow lands on the glacier, it melts in the summer sun, and it forms little rivers of water on the flow along the ice, and they start to melt and bore their way down through the glacier, forming big networks of caves, sometimes going all the way down to the underlying bedrock.
Now the crazy thing about glacier caves is that each year, new tunnels form.
Different waterfalls pop up or move around from place to place inside the cave.
Warm water from the top of the ice is boring its way down, and warm air from below the mountain actually rises up, gets into the cave, and melts the ceilings back taller and taller.
But the weirdest thing about glacier caves is that the entire cave is moving, because it's formed inside a block of ice the size of a small city that's slowly sliding down the mountain.
Now this is Brent McGregor, my cave exploration partner.
He and I have both been exploring caves a long time and we've been climbing mountains a long time, but neither one of us had ever really explored a glacier cave before.
Back in 2011, Brent saw a YouTube video of a couple of hikers that stumbled across the entrance to one of these caves.
There were no GPS coordinates for it, and all we knew was that it was somewhere out on the Sandy Glacier.
So in July of that year, we went out on the glacier, and we found a big crack in the ice.
We had to build snow and ice anchors so that we could tie off ropes and rappel down into the hole.
This is me looking into the entrance crevasse.
At the end of this hole, we found a huge tunnel going right up the mountain underneath thousands of tons of glacier ice.
We followed this cave back for about a half mile until it came to an end, and then with the help of our survey tools we made a three-dimensional map of the cave on our way back out.
So how do you map a cave?
Well, cave maps aren't like trail maps or road maps because they have pits and holes going to overlapping levels.
To make a cave map, you have to set up survey stations every few feet inside the cave, and you use a laser to measure the distance between those stations.
Then you use a compass and an inclinometer to measure the direction the cave is headed and measure the slope of the floor and the ceilings.
Now those of you taking trigonometry, that particular type of math is very useful for making maps like this because it allows you to measure heights and distances without actually having to go there.
In fact, the more I mapped and studied caves, the more useful I found all that math that I originally hated in school to be.
So when you're done surveying, you take all this data and you punch it into a computer and you find someone that can draw really well, and you have them draft up a map that looks something like this, and it'll show you both a bird's-eye view of the passage as well as a profile view of the passage, kind of like an ant farm view.
We named this cave Snow Dragon Cave because it was like a big dragon sleeping under the snow.
Now later this summer, as more snow melted off the glacier, we found more caves, and we realized they were all connected.
Not long after we mapped Snow Dragon, Brent discovered this new cave not very far away.
The inside of it was coated with ice, so we had to wear big spikes on our feet called crampons so we could walk around without slipping.
This cave was amazing.
The ice in the ceiling was glowing blue anad green because the sunlight from far above was shining through the ice and lighting it all up.
And we couldn't understand why this cave was so much colder than Snow Dragon until we got to the end and we found out why.
There was a huge pit or shaft called a moulin going 130 feet straight up to the surface of the glacier.
Cold air from the top of the mountain was flowing down this hole and blasting through the cave, freezing everything inside of it.
And we were so excited about finding this new pit, we actually came back in January the following year so we could be the first ones to explore it.
It was so cold outside, we actually had to sleep inside the cave.
There's our camp on the left side of this entrance room.
The next morning, we climbed out of the cave and hiked all the way to the top of the glacier, where we finally rigged and rappelled this pit for the very first time.
Brent named this cave Pure Imagination, I think because the beautiful sights we saw in there were beyond what we could have ever imagined.
So besides really cool ice, what else is inside these caves?
Well not too much lives in them because they're so cold and the entrance is actually covered up with snow for about eight months of the year.
But there are some really cool things in there.
There's weird bacteria living in the water that actually eat and digest rocks to make their own food to live under this ice.
In fact, this past summer, scientists collected samples of water and ice specifically to see if things called extremophiles, tiny lifeforms that are evolved to live in completely hostile conditions, might be living under the ice, kind of like what they hope to find on the polar icecaps of Mars someday.
Another really cool things is that, as seeds and birds land on the surface of the glacier and die, they get buried in the snow and gradually become part of the glacier, sinking deeper and deeper into the ice.
As these caves form and melt their way up into the ice, they make these artifacts rain down from the ceiling and fall onto the cave floor, where we end up finding them.
For example, this is a noble fir seed we found.
It's been frozen in the ice for over 100 years, and it's just now starting to sprout.
This mallard duck feather was found over 1,800 feet in the back of Snow Dragon Cave.
This duck died on the surface of the glacier long, long ago, and its feathers have finally made it down through over 100 feet of ice before falling inside the cave.
And this beautiful quartz crystal was also found in the back of Snow Dragon.
Even now, Brent and I find it hard to believe that all these discoveries were essentially in our own backyard, hidden away, just waiting to be found.
Like I said earlier, the idea of discovering in this busy world we live in kind of seems like something you can only do with space travel now, but that's not true.
Every year, new caves get discovered that no one has ever been in before.
So it's actually not too late for one of you to become a discoverer yourself.
You just have to be willing to look and go where people don't often go and focus your eyes and your mind to recognize the discovery when you see it, because it might be in your own backyard.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'd like to do pretty much what I did the first time, which is to choose a lighthearted theme.
Last time, I talked about death and dying.
(Laughter) This time, I'm going to talk about mental illness.
(Laughter) But it has to be technological, so I'll talk about electroshock therapy.
(Laughter) You know, ever since man had any notion that some of his other people, his colleagues, could be different, could be strange, could be severely depressed or what we now recognize as schizophrenia, he was certain that this kind of illness had to come from evil spirits getting into the body.
So the way of treating these diseases in early times was to, in some way or other, exorcise those evil spirits.
And this is still going on, as you know.
But it wasn't enough to use the priests.
When medicine became somewhat scientific, in about 450 BC, with Hippocrates and those boys, they tried to look for herbs, plants that would literally shake the bad spirits out.
So they found certain plants that could cause convulsions.
And the herbals, the botanical books of up to the late Middle Ages, the Renaissance, are filled with prescriptions for causing convulsions to shake the evil spirits out.
Finally, in about the 16th century, a physician whose name was Theophrastus Bombastus Aureolus von Hohenheim -- called Paracelsus, a name probably familiar to some people here -- (Laughter) good old Paracelsus -- found that he could predict the degree of convulsion by using a measured amount of camphor to produce the convulsion.
Can you imagine going to your closet, pulling out a mothball and chewing on it if you're feeling depressed?
It's better than Prozac, but I wouldn't recommend it.
(Laughter) So, what we see in the 17th, 18th century is the continued search for medications other than camphor that'll do the trick.
Well, along comes Benjamin Franklin, and he comes close to convulsing himself with a bolt of electricity off the end of his kite.
And so people begin thinking in terms of electricity to produce convulsions.
And then we fast-forward to about 1932, when three Italian psychiatrists who were largely treating depression began to notice among their patients, who were also epileptics, that if they had a series of epileptic fits, a lot of them in a row -- the depression would very frequently lift.
Not only would it lift, but it might never return.
So they got very interested in producing convulsions, measured types of convulsions.
And they thought, "Well, we've got electricity, we'll plug somebody into the wall.
That always makes hair stand up and people shake a lot."
So they tried it on a few pigs, and none of the pigs were killed.
So they went to the police and they said, "We know that at the Rome railroad station, there are all these lost souls wandering around, muttering gibberish.
Someone who is, as the Italians say, "gagootz."
So they found this "gagootz" guy, a 39-year-old man who was really hopelessly schizophrenic, who was known, had been known for months, to be literally defecating on himself, talking nothing that made any sense, and they brought him into the hospital.
So these three psychiatrists, after about two or three weeks of observation, laid him down on a table, connected his temples to a very small source of current.
They thought, "Well, we'll try 55 volts, two-tenths of a second.
That's not going to do anything terrible to him."
So they did that.
Well, I have the following from a firsthand observer, who told me this about 35 years ago, when I was thinking about these things for some research project of mine.
He said, "This fellow" -- remember, he wasn't even put to sleep -- "after this major grand mal convulsion, sat right up, looked at these three fellas and said, 'What the fuck are you assholes trying to do?'" (Laughter) If I could only say that in Italian.
(Laughter) Well, they were happy as could be, because he hadn't said a rational word in the weeks of observation.
(Laughter) So they plugged him in again, and this time, they used 110 volts for half a second.
And to their amazement, after it was over, he began speaking like he was perfectly well.
He relapsed a little bit, they gave him a series of treatments, and he was essentially cured.
But of course, having schizophrenia, within a few months, it returned.
But they wrote a paper about this, and everybody in the western world began using electricity to convulse people who were either schizophrenic or severely depressed.
It didn't work very well on the schizophrenics, but it was pretty clear in the '30s and by the middle of the '40s that electroconvulsive therapy was very, very effective in the treatment of depression.
And of course, in those days, there were no antidepressant drugs, and it became very, very popular.
They would anesthetize people, convulse them ...
So people would have a real grand mal seizure.
Bones were broken; especially in old, fragile people, you couldn't use it.
And then in the late 1950s, the so-called "muscle relaxants" were developed by pharmacologists, and it got so that you could induce a complete convulsion, an electroencephalographic convulsion -- you could see it on the brain waves -- without causing any convulsion in the body except a little bit of twitching of the toes.
So again, it was very, very popular and very, very useful.
Well, you know, in the middle '60s, the first antidepressants came out.
Tofranil was the first.
In the late '70s, early '80s, there were others, and they were very effective.
And patients' rights groups seemed to get very upset about the kinds of things that they would witness, so the whole idea of electroconvulsive, electroshock therapy disappeared, but has had a renaissance in the last 10 years.
And the reason that it has had a renaissance is that probably about 10 percent of the people, severe depressives, do not respond, regardless of what is done for them.
Now why am I telling you this story at this meeting?
I'm telling you this story because, actually, ever since Richard called me and asked me to talk about -- as he asked all of his speakers -- to talk about something that would be new to this audience that we had never talked about, never written about.
I've been planning this moment.
This reason really is that I am a man who, almost 30 years ago, had his life saved by two long courses of electroshock therapy.
And let me tell you this story.
I was, in the 1960s, in a marriage.
To use the word "bad" would be perhaps the understatement of the year.
It was dreadful.
There are, I'm sure, enough divorced people in this room to know about the hostility, the anger, who knows what.
Being someone who had had a very difficult childhood, a very difficult adolescence -- it had to do with not quite poverty, but close.
It had to do with being brought up in a family where no one spoke English, no one could read or write English.
It had to do with death and disease and lots of other things.
I was a little prone to depression.
So, as things got worse, as we really began to hate each other, I became progressively depressed over a period of a couple of years trying to save this marriage, which was inevitably not to be saved.
Finally, I would schedule -- all my major surgical cases, I was scheduling them for 12, one o'clock in the afternoon, because I couldn't get out of bed before about 11 o'clock.
Anybody who's been depressed here knows what that's like.
I couldn't even pull the covers off myself.
Well, you're in a university medical center, where everybody knows everybody.
And it's perfectly clear to my colleagues, so my referrals began to decrease.
As my referrals began to decrease, I clearly became increasingly depressed, until I thought, "My God, I can't work anymore."
And, in fact, it didn't make any difference, because I didn't have any patients anymore.
So, with the advice of my physician, I had myself admitted to the acute care psychiatric unit of our university hospital.
And my colleagues, who had known me since medical school, in that place, said, "Don't worry, Shep.
Well, you know what bovine stercus is?
That proved to be a lot of bovine stercus.
(Laughter) I know some people who got tenure in that place with lies like that.
(Laughter) (Laughter and applause) So I was one of their failures.
But it wasn't that simple, because by the time I got out of that unit, I was not functional at all.
I could hardly see five feet in front of myself.
I shuffled when I walked. I was bowed over.
I rarely bathed.
It was dreadful.
And it was clear -- not to me, because nothing was clear to me at that time anymore -- that I would need long-term hospitalization in that awful place called a "mental hospital."
So I was admitted, in the spring of 1973, to the Institute of Living, which used to be called the Hartford Retreat.
It was founded in the 18th century, the largest psychiatric hospital in the state of Connecticut, other than the huge public hospitals that existed at that time.
And they tried everything they had.
They tried the usual psychotherapy.
They tried every medication available in those days.
And they did have Tofranil and other things -- Mellaril, who knows what.
Nothing happened except that I got jaundiced from one of these things.
And finally, because I was well-known in Connecticut, they decided they better have a meeting of the senior staff.
All the senior staff got together, and I later found out what happened.
They put all their heads together, and they decided that there was nothing that could be done for this surgeon who had essentially separated himself from the world, who by that time had become so overwhelmed, not just with depression and feelings of worthlessness and inadequacy, but with obsessional thinking, obsessional thinking about coincidences.
And there were particular numbers that every time I saw them, just got me dreadfully upset, all kinds of ritualistic observances ...
just awful, awful stuff.
Remember when you were a kid, and you had to step on every line?
Well, I was a grown man who had all of these rituals, and it got so there was a throbbing, there was a ferocious fear in my head.
You've seen this painting by Edvard Munch, "The Scream."
So they decided there was no therapy, there was no treatment.
But there was one treatment, which actually had been pioneered at the Hartford Hospital in the early 1940s, and you can imagine what it was: it was prefrontal lobotomy.
(Imitates a popping sound) So they decided -- I didn't know this, again, I found this out later -- that the only thing that could be done was for this 43-year-old man to have a prefrontal lobotomy.
Well, as in all hospitals, there was a resident assigned to my case.
He was 27 years old, and he would meet with me two or three times a week.
And of course, I had been there, what, three or four months at the time.
He asked to meet with the senior staff, and they agreed to meet with him, because he was very well thought of in that place.
And he dug in his heels and said, "No. I know this man better than any of you.
I have met with him over and over again.
You've just seen him from time to time. You've read reports and so forth.
I really honestly believe that the basic problem here is pure depression, and all of the obsessional thinking comes out of it.
And you know, of course, what'll happen if you do a prefrontal lobotomy.
Any of the results along the spectrum, from pretty bad to terrible, terrible, terrible, is going to happen.
If he does the best he can, he will have no further obsessions, probably no depression, but his affect will be dulled, he will never go back to surgery, he will never be the loving father that he was to his two children, his life will be changed.
If he has the usual result, he'll end up like 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.' And you know about that, just essentially in a stupor the rest of his life."
"Well," he said, "can't we try a course of electroshock therapy?"
And you know why they agreed?
They just thought, "Well, we'll give a course of 10.
So we'll lose a little time. Big deal. It doesn't make any difference."
So they gave the course of 10, and the first -- the usual course, incidentally, was six to eight, and still is six to eight -- plugged me into the wires, put me to sleep, gave me the muscle relaxant.
Six didn't work. Seven didn't work. Eight didn't work.
At nine, I noticed -- it's wonderful that I could notice anything -- I noticed a change.
And he went back to them, and they agreed to do another 10.
Again, not a single one of them -- I think there are about seven or eight of them -- thought this would do any good.
They thought this was a temporary change.
But, lo and behold, by 16, by 17, there were demonstrable differences in the way I felt.
By 18 and 19, I was sleeping through the night.
And by 20, I had the sense, I really had the sense, that I could overcome this, that I was now strong enough that by an act of will, I could blow the obsessional thinking away.
I could blow the depression away.
And I've never forgotten -- I never will forget -- standing in the kitchen of the unit -- it was a Sunday morning in January of 1974 -- standing in the kitchen by myself and thinking, "I've got the strength now to do this."
It was as though those tightly coiled wires in my head had been disconnected, and I could think clearly.
But I need a formula.
I need some thing to say to myself when I begin thinking obsessionally, obsessively.
Well, the Gilbert and Sullivan fans in this room will remember "Ruddigore," and they will remember Mad Margaret, and they will remember that she was married to a fella named Sir Despard Murgatroyd.
And she used to go nuts every five minutes or so in the play.
And he said to her, "We must have a word to bring you back to reality, and the word, my dear, will be 'Basingstoke.'" So every time she got a little nuts, he would say, "Basingstoke!"
And she would say, "Basingstoke, it is!" And she'd be fine for a little while.
(Laughter) Well, you know, I'm from the Bronx. I can't say "Basingstoke."
(Laughter) But I had something better.
And it was very simple.
It was, "Ah, fuck it!"
(Laughter) Much better than "Basingstoke," at least for me.
Every time I would begin thinking obsessionally -- again, once more, after 20 shock treatments -- I would say, "Ah, fuck it."
And things got better and better, and within three or four months, I was discharged from that hospital.
I joined a group of surgeons, where I could work with other people, in a community, not in New Haven, but fairly close by.
At the end of three years, I went back to New Haven, had remarried by that time.
I brought my wife with me, actually, to make sure I could get through this.
My children came back to live with us.
We had two more children after that.
Resuscitated the career, even better than it had been before.
Went right back into the university and began to write books.
Well, you know, it's been a wonderful life.
I stopped doing surgery about six years ago and became a full-time writer, as many people know.
But it's been very exciting. It's been very happy.
Every once in a while, I have to say, "Ah, fuck it."
Every once in a while, I get somewhat depressed and a little obsessional.
So, I'm not free of all of this.
But it's worked. It's always worked.
Why have I chosen, after never, ever talking about this, to talk about it now?
Well, those of you who know some of these books know that one is about death and dying, one is about the human body and the human spirit, one is about the way mystical thoughts are constantly in our minds.
And they have always to do with my own personal experiences.
One might think reading these books -- and I've gotten thousands of letters about them by people who do think this -- that, based on my life's history as I portray it in the books, my early life's history, I am someone who has overcome adversity, that I am someone who has drunk -- drank? -- drunk of the bitter dregs of near-disaster in childhood and emerged not just unscathed but strengthened.
I really have it figured out so that I can advise people about death and dying, so that I can talk about mysticism and the human spirit.
And I've always felt guilty about that.
I've always felt that somehow I was an impostor, because my readers don't know what I have just told you.
It's known by some people in New Haven, obviously, but it is not generally known.
So one of the reasons that I have come here to talk about this today is to -- frankly, selfishly -- unburden myself and let it be known that this is not an untroubled mind that has written all of these books.
But more importantly, I think, is the fact that a very significant proportion of people in this audience are under 30, and there are many, of course, who are well over 30.
For people under 30, and it looks to me like almost all of you, I would say all of you, are either on the cusp of a magnificent and exciting career or right into a magnificent and exciting career: anything can happen to you.
Things change.
Accidents happen.
Something from childhood comes back to haunt you.
You can be thrown off the track.
I hope it happens to none of you, but it will probably happen to a small percentage of you.
To those to whom it doesn't happen, there will be adversities.
If I, with the bleakness of spirit -- with no spirit -- that I had in the 1970s, and no possibility of recovery as far as that group of very experienced psychiatrists thought, if I can find my way back from this, believe me, anybody can find their way back from any adversity that exists in their lives.
And for those who are older, who have lived through perhaps not something as bad as this, but who have lived through difficult times, perhaps where they lost everything, as I did, and started out all over again: some of these things will seem very familiar.
There is recovery.
There is redemption.
There are resurrection themes in every society that has ever been studied, and it is because not just only do we fantasize about the possibility of resurrection and recovery, but it actually happens.
Perhaps the most popular resurrection theme, outside of specifically religious ones, is the one about the phoenix, the ancient story of the phoenix, who, every 500 years, resurrects itself from its own ashes to go on to live a life that is even more beautiful than it was before.
Richard, thanks very much.
I'm a man who's trying to live from his heart, and so just before I get going, I wanted to tell you as a South African that one of the men who has inspired me most passed away a few hours ago.
Nelson Mandela has come to the end of his long walk to freedom.
And so this talk is going to be for him.
I grew up in wonder.
I grew up amongst those animals.
I grew up in the wild eastern part of South Africa at a place called Londolozi Game Reserve.
It's a place where my family has been in the safari business for four generations.
Now for as long as I can remember, my job has been to take people out into nature, and so I think it's a lovely twist of fate today to have the opportunity to bring some of my experiences out in nature in to this gathering.
Africa is a place where people still sit under starlit skies and around campfires and tell stories, and so what I have to share with you today is the simple medicine of a few campfire stories, stories about heroes of heart.
Now my stories are not the stories that you'll hear on the news, and while it's true that Africa is a harsh place, I also know it to be a place where people, animals and ecosystems teach us about a more interconnected world.
When I was nine years old, President Mandela came to stay with my family.
He had just been released from his 27 years of incarceration, and was in a period of readjustment to his sudden global icon status.
Members of the African National Congress thought that in the bush he would have time to rest and recuperate away from the public eye, and it's true that lions tend to be a very good deterrent to press and paparazzi.
(Laughter) But it was a defining time for me as a young boy.
I would take him breakfast in bed, and then, in an old track suit and slippers, he would go for a walk around the garden.
At night, I would sit with my family around the snowy, bunny-eared TV, and watch images of that same quiet man from the garden surrounded by hundreds and thousands of people as scenes from his release were broadcast nightly.
He was bringing peace to a divided and violent South Africa, one man with an unbelievable sense of his humanity.
Mandela said often that the gift of prison was the ability to go within and to think, to create in himself the things he most wanted for South Africa: peace, reconciliation, harmony.
Through this act of immense open-heartedness, he was to become the embodiment of what in South Africa we call "ubuntu."
Ubuntu: I am because of you.
Or, people are not people without other people.
It's not a new idea or value but it's one that I certainly think at these times is worth building on.
In fact, it is said that in the collective consciousness of Africa, we get to experience the deepest parts of our own humanity through our interactions with others.
Ubuntu is at play right now.
You are holding a space for me to express the deepest truth of who I am.
Without you, I'm just a guy talking to an empty room, and I spent a lot of time last week doing that, and it's not the same as this.
(Laughter) If Mandela was the national and international embodiment, then the man who taught me the most about this value personally was this man, Solly Mhlongo.
Solly was born under a tree 60 kilometers from where I grew up in Mozambique.
He would never have a lot of money, but he was to be one of the richest men I would ever meet.
Solly grew up tending to his father's cattle.
Now, I can tell you, I don't know what it is about people who grow up looking after cattle, but it makes for über-resourcefulness.
The first job that he ever got in the safari business was fixing the safari trucks.
Where he had learned to do that out in the bush I have no idea, but he could do it.
He then moved across into what we called the habitat team.
These were the people on the reserve who were responsible for its well-being.
He fixed roads, he mended wetlands, he did some anti-poaching.
And then one day we were out together, and he came across the tracks of where a female leopard had walked.
And it was an old track, but for fun he turned and he began to follow it, and I tell you, I could tell by the speed at which he moved on those pad marks that this man was a Ph.D.-level tracker.
If you drove past Solly somewhere out on the reserve, you look up in your rearview mirror, you'd see he'd stopped the car 20, 50 meters down the road just in case you need help with something.
The only accusation I ever heard leveled at him was when one of our clients said, "Solly, you are pathologically helpful."
(Laughter) When I started professionally guiding people out into this environment, Solly was my tracker.
We worked together as a team.
And the first guests we ever got were a philanthropy group from your East Coast, and they said to Solly, on the side, they said, "Before we even go out to see lions and leopards, we want to see where you live."
So we took them up to his house, and this visit of the philanthropist to his house coincided with a time when Solly's wife, who was learning English, was going through a phase where she would open the door by saying, "Hello, I love you.
Welcome, I love you." (Laughter) And there was something so beautifully African about it to me, this small house with a huge heart in it.
Now on the day that Solly saved my life, he was already my hero.
It was a hot day, and we found ourselves down by the river.
Because of the heat, I took my shoes off, and I rolled up my pants, and I walked into the water.
Solly remained on the bank.
The water was clear running over sand, and we turned and we began to make our way upstream.
And a few meters ahead of us, there was a place where a tree had fallen out of the bank, and its branches were touching the water, and it was shadowy.
And if had been a horror movie, people in the audience would have started saying, "Don't go in there. Don't go in there." (Laughter) And of course, the crocodile was in the shadows.
Now the first thing that you notice when a crocodile hits you is the ferocity of the bite.
Wham! It hits me by my right leg.
It pulls me. It turns. I throw my hand up. I'm able to grab a branch.
It's shaking me violently.
It's a very strange sensation having another creature try and eat you, and there are few things that promote vegetarianism like that.
(Laughter) Solly on the bank sees that I'm in trouble.
He turns. He begins to make his way to me.
The croc again continues to shake me.
It goes to bite me a second time.
I notice a slick of blood in the water around me that gets washed downstream.
As it bites the second time, I kick.
My foot goes down its throat. It spits me out.
I pull myself up into the branches, and as I come out of the water, I look over my shoulder.
My leg from the knee down is mangled beyond description.
The bone is cracked.
The meat is torn up.
I make an instant decision that I'll never look at that again.
As I come out of the water, Solly arrives at a deep section, a channel between us.
He knows, he sees the state of my leg, he knows that between him and I there is a crocodile, and I can tell you this man doesn't slow down for one second.
He comes straight into the channel.
He wades in to above his waist.
He gets to me. He grabs me.
I'm still in a vulnerable position.
He picks me and puts me on his shoulder.
This is the other thing about Solly, he's freakishly strong.
He turns. He walks me up the bank.
He lays me down. He pulls his shirt off.
He wraps it around my leg, picks me up a second time, walks me to a vehicle, and he's able to get me to medical attention.
And I survive.
Now — (Applause) Now I don't know how many people you know that go into a deep channel of water that they know has a crocodile in it to come and help you, but for Solly, it was as natural as breathing.
And he is one amazing example of what I have experienced all over Africa.
In a more collective society, we realize from the inside that our own well-being is deeply tied to the well-being of others.
Danger is shared. Pain is shared.
Joy is shared. Achievement is shared.
Houses are shared. Food is shared.
Ubuntu asks us to open our hearts and to share, and what Solly taught me that day is the essence of this value, his animated, empathetic action in every moment.
Now although the root word is about people, I thought that maybe ubuntu was only about people.
And then I met this young lady.
Her name was Elvis.
In fact, Solly gave her the name Elvis because he said she walked like she was doing the Elvis the pelvis dance.
She was born with very badly deformed back legs and pelvis.
She arrived at our reserve from a reserve east of us on her migratory route.
When I first saw her, I thought she would be dead in a matter of days.
And yet, for the next five years she returned in the winter months.
And we would be so excited to be out in the bush and to come across this unusual track.
It looked like an inverted bracket, and we would drop whatever we were doing and we would follow, and then we would come around the corner, and there she would be with her herd.
And that outpouring of emotion from people on our safari trucks as they saw her, it was this sense of kinship.
And it reminded me that even people who grow up in cities feel a natural connection with the natural world and with animals.
And yet still I remained amazed that she was surviving.
And then one day we came across them at this small water hole.
It was sort of a hollow in the ground.
And I watched as the matriarch drank, and then she turned in that beautiful slow motion of elephants, looks like the arm in motion, and she began to make her way up the steep bank.
The rest of the herd turned and began to follow.
And I watched young Elvis begin to psych herself up for the hill.
She got visibly -- ears came forward, she had a full go of it and halfway up, her legs gave way, and she fell backwards.
She attempted it a second time, and again, halfway up, she fell backwards.
And on the third attempt, an amazing thing happened.
Halfway up the bank, a young teenage elephant came in behind her, and he propped his trunk underneath her, and he began to shovel her up the bank.
And it occurred to me that the rest of the herd was in fact looking after this young elephant.
The next day I watched again as the matriarch broke a branch and she would put it in her mouth, and then she would break a second one and drop it on the ground.
And a consensus developed between all of us who were guiding people in that area that that herd was in fact moving slower to accommodate that elephant.
What Elvis and the herd taught me caused me to expand my definition of ubuntu, and I believe that in the cathedral of the wild, we get to see the most beautiful parts of ourselves reflected back at us.
And it is not only through other people that we get to experience our humanity but through all the creatures that live on this planet.
If Africa has a gift to share, it's a gift of a more collective society.
And while it's true that ubuntu is an African idea, what I see is the essence of that value being invented here.
Thank you.
(Applause) Pat Mitchell: So Boyd, we know that you knew President Mandela from early childhood and that you heard the news as we all did today, and deeply distraught and know the tragic loss that it is to the world.
But I just wondered if you wanted to share any additional thoughts, because we know that you heard that news just before coming in to do this session.
Boyd Varty: Well thanks, Pat.
I'm so happy because it was time for him to pass on.
He was suffering.
And so of course there's the mixed emotions.
But I just think of so many occurrences like the time he went on the Oprah show and asked her what the show would be about.
(Laughter) And she was like, "Well, it'll be about you."
I mean, that's just incredible humility.
(Laughter) He was the father of our nation and we've got a road to walk in South Africa.
And everything, they used to call it Madiba magic.
You know, he used to go to a rugby match and we would win.
Anywhere he went, things went well.
But I think that magic will be with us, and the important thing is that we carry what he stood for.
And so that's what I'm going to try and do, and that's what people all over South Africa are trying to do.
PM: And that's what you've done today. BV: Oh, thank you.
PM: Thank you. BV: Thank you. Thanks very much.
(Applause)
I have a question: Who here remembers when they first realized they were going to die?
I do. I was a young boy, and my grandfather had just died, and I remember a few days later lying in bed at night trying to make sense of what had happened.
What did it mean that he was dead?
Where had he gone?
It was like a hole in reality had opened up and swallowed him.
But then the really shocking question occurred to me: If he could die, could it happen to me too?
Could that hole in reality open up and swallow me?
Would it open up beneath my bed and swallow me as I slept?
Well, at some point, all children become aware of death.
It can happen in different ways, of course, and usually comes in stages.
Our idea of death develops as we grow older.
And if you reach back into the dark corners of your memory, you might remember something like what I felt when my grandfather died and when I realized it could happen to me too, that sense that behind all of this the void is waiting.
And this development in childhood reflects the development of our species.
Just as there was a point in your development as a child when your sense of self and of time became sophisticated enough for you to realize you were mortal, so at some point in the evolution of our species, some early human's sense of self and of time became sophisticated enough for them to become the first human to realize, "I'm going to die."
This is, if you like, our curse.
It's the price we pay for being so damn clever.
We have to live in the knowledge that the worst thing that can possibly happen one day surely will, the end of all our projects, our hopes, our dreams, of our individual world.
We each live in the shadow of a personal apocalypse.
And that's frightening. It's terrifying.
And so we look for a way out.
And in my case, as I was about five years old, this meant asking my mum.
Now when I first started asking what happens when we die, the grown-ups around me at the time answered with a typical English mix of awkwardness and half-hearted Christianity, and the phrase I heard most often was that granddad was now "up there looking down on us," and if I should die too, which wouldn't happen of course, then I too would go up there, which made death sound a lot like an existential elevator.
Now this didn't sound very plausible.
I used to watch a children's news program at the time, and this was the era of space exploration.
There were always rockets going up into the sky, up into space, going up there.
But none of the astronauts when they came back ever mentioned having met my granddad or any other dead people.
But I was scared, and the idea of taking the existential elevator to see my granddad sounded a lot better than being swallowed by the void while I slept.
And so I believed it anyway, even though it didn't make much sense.
And this thought process that I went through as a child, and have been through many times since, including as a grown-up, is a product of what psychologists call a bias.
Now a bias is a way in which we systematically get things wrong, ways in which we miscalculate, misjudge, distort reality, or see what we want to see, and the bias I'm talking about works like this: Confront someone with the fact that they are going to die and they will believe just about any story that tells them it isn't true and they can, instead, live forever, even if it means taking the existential elevator.
Now we can see this as the biggest bias of all.
It has been demonstrated in over 400 empirical studies.
Now these studies are ingenious, but they're simple.
They work like this.
You take two groups of people who are similar in all relevant respects, and you remind one group that they're going to die but not the other, then you compare their behavior.
So you're observing how it biases behavior when people become aware of their mortality.
And every time, you get the same result: People who are made aware of their mortality are more willing to believe stories that tell them they can escape death and live forever.
So here's an example: One recent study took two groups of agnostics, that is people who are undecided in their religious beliefs.
Now, one group was asked to think about being dead.
The other group was asked to think about being lonely.
They were then asked again about their religious beliefs.
Those who had been asked to think about being dead were afterwards twice as likely to express faith in God and Jesus.
Twice as likely.
Even though the before they were all equally agnostic.
But put the fear of death in them, and they run to Jesus.
Now, this shows that reminding people of death biases them to believe, regardless of the evidence, and it works not just for religion, but for any kind of belief system that promises immortality in some form, whether it's becoming famous or having children or even nationalism, which promises you can live on as part of a greater whole.
This is a bias that has shaped the course of human history.
Now, the theory behind this bias in the over 400 studies is called terror management theory, and the idea is simple. It's just this.
We develop our worldviews, that is, the stories we tell ourselves about the world and our place in it, in order to help us manage the terror of death.
And these immortality stories have thousands of different manifestations, but I believe that behind the apparent diversity there are actually just four basic forms that these immortality stories can take.
And we can see them repeating themselves throughout history, just with slight variations to reflect the vocabulary of the day.
Now I'm going to briefly introduce these four basic forms of immortality story, and I want to try to give you some sense of the way in which they're retold by each culture or generation using the vocabulary of their day.
Now, the first story is the simplest.
We want to avoid death, and the dream of doing that in this body in this world forever is the first and simplest kind of immortality story, and it might at first sound implausible, but actually, almost every culture in human history has had some myth or legend of an elixir of life or a fountain of youth or something that promises to keep us going forever.
Ancient Egypt had such myths, ancient Babylon, ancient India.
Throughout European history, we find them in the work of the alchemists, and of course we still believe this today, only we tell this story using the vocabulary of science.
So 100 years ago, hormones had just been discovered, and people hoped that hormone treatments were going to cure aging and disease, and now instead we set our hopes on stem cells, genetic engineering, and nanotechnology.
But the idea that science can cure death is just one more chapter in the story of the magical elixir, a story that is as old as civilization.
But betting everything on the idea of finding the elixir and staying alive forever is a risky strategy.
When we look back through history at all those who have sought an elixir in the past, the one thing they now have in common is that they're all dead.
So we need a backup plan, and exactly this kind of plan B is what the second kind of immortality story offers, and that's resurrection.
And it stays with the idea that I am this body, I am this physical organism.
It accepts that I'm going to have to die but says, despite that, I can rise up and I can live again.
In other words, I can do what Jesus did.
Jesus died, he was three days in the [tomb], and then he rose up and lived again.
And the idea that we can all be resurrected to live again is orthodox believe, not just for Christians but also Jews and Muslims.
But our desire to believe this story is so deeply embedded that we are reinventing it again for the scientific age, for example, with the idea of cryonics.
That's the idea that when you die, you can have yourself frozen, and then, at some point when technology has advanced enough, you can be thawed out and repaired and revived and so resurrected.
And so some people believe an omnipotent god will resurrect them to live again, and other people believe an omnipotent scientist will do it.
But for others, the whole idea of resurrection, of climbing out of the grave, it's just too much like a bad zombie movie.
They find the body too messy, too unreliable to guarantee eternal life, and so they set their hopes on the third, more spiritual immortality story, the idea that we can leave our body behind and live on as a soul.
Now, the majority of people on Earth believe they have a soul, and the idea is central to many religions.
But even though, in its current form, in its traditional form, the idea of the soul is still hugely popular, nonetheless we are again reinventing it for the digital age, for example with the idea that you can leave your body behind by uploading your mind, your essence, the real you, onto a computer, and so live on as an avatar in the ether.
But of course there are skeptics who say if we look at the evidence of science, particularly neuroscience, it suggests that your mind, your essence, the real you, is very much dependent on a particular part of your body, that is, your brain.
And such skeptics can find comfort in the fourth kind of immortality story, and that is legacy, the idea that you can live on through the echo you leave in the world, like the great Greek warrior Achilles, who sacrificed his life fighting at Troy so that he might win immortal fame.
And the pursuit of fame is as widespread and popular now as it ever was, and in our digital age, it's even easier to achieve.
You don't need to be a great warrior like Achilles or a great king or hero.
All you need is an Internet connection and a funny cat. (Laughter) But some people prefer to leave a more tangible, biological legacy -- children, for example.
Or they like, they hope, to live on as part of some greater whole, a nation or a family or a tribe, their gene pool.
But again, there are skeptics who doubt whether legacy really is immortality.
Woody Allen, for example, who said, "I don't want to live on in the hearts of my countrymen.
I want to live on in my apartment."
So those are the four basic kinds of immortality stories, and I've tried to give just some sense of how they're retold by each generation with just slight variations to fit the fashions of the day.
And the fact that they recur in this way, in such a similar form but in such different belief systems, suggests, I think, that we should be skeptical of the truth of any particular version of these stories.
The fact that some people believe an omnipotent god will resurrect them to live again and others believe an omnipotent scientist will do it suggests that neither are really believing this on the strength of the evidence.
Rather, we believe these stories because we are biased to believe them, and we are biased to believe them because we are so afraid of death.
So the question is, are we doomed to lead the one life we have in a way that is shaped by fear and denial, or can we overcome this bias?
Well the Greek philosopher Epicurus thought we could.
He argued that the fear of death is natural, but it is not rational.
"Death," he said, "is nothing to us, because when we are here, death is not, and when death is here, we are gone."
Now this is often quoted, but it's difficult to really grasp, to really internalize, because exactly this idea of being gone is so difficult to imagine.
So 2,000 years later, another philosopher, Ludwig Wittgenstein, put it like this: "Death is not an event in life: We do not live to experience death.
And so," he added, "in this sense, life has no end."
So it was natural for me as a child to fear being swallowed by the void, but it wasn't rational, because being swallowed by the void is not something that any of us will ever live to experience.
Now, overcoming this bias is not easy because the fear of death is so deeply embedded in us, yet when we see that the fear itself is not rational, and when we bring out into the open the ways in which it can unconsciously bias us, then we can at least start to try to minimize the influence it has on our lives.
Now, I find it helps to see life as being like a book: Just as a book is bounded by its covers, by beginning and end, so our lives are bounded by birth and death, and even though a book is limited by beginning and end, it can encompass distant landscapes, exotic figures, fantastic adventures.
And even though a book is limited by beginning and end, the characters within it know no horizons.
They only know the moments that make up their story, even when the book is closed.
And so the characters of a book are not afraid of reaching the last page.
Long John Silver is not afraid of you finishing your copy of "Treasure Island."
And so it should be with us.
Imagine the book of your life, its covers, its beginning and end, and your birth and your death.
You can only know the moments in between, the moments that make up your life.
It makes no sense for you to fear what is outside of those covers, whether before your birth or after your death.
And you needn't worry how long the book is, or whether it's a comic strip or an epic.
The only thing that matters is that you make it a good story.
Thank you.
(Applause)
By 2010, Detroit had become the poster child for an American city in crisis.
There was a housing collapse, an auto industry collapse, and the population had plummeted by 25 percent between 2000 and 2010, and many people were beginning to write it off, as it had topped the list of American shrinking cities.
By 2010, I had also been asked by the Kresge Foundation and the city of Detroit to join them in leading a citywide planning process for the city to create a shared vision for its future.
I come to this work as an architect and an urban planner, and I've spent my career working in other contested cities, like Chicago, my hometown; Harlem, which is my current home; Washington, D.C.; and Newark, New Jersey.
All of these cities, to me, still had a number of unresolved issues related to urban justice, issues of equity, inclusion and access.
Now by 2010, as well, popular design magazines were also beginning to take a closer look at cities like Detroit, and devoting whole issues to "fixing the city."
I was asked by a good friend, Fred Bernstein, to do an interview for the October issue of Architect magazine, and he and I kind of had a good chuckle when we saw the magazine released with the title, "Can This Planner Save Detroit?"
So I'm smiling with a little bit of embarrassment right now, because obviously, it's completely absurd that a single person, let alone a planner, could save a city.
But I'm also smiling because I thought it represented a sense of hopefulness that our profession could play a role in helping the city to think about how it would recover from its severe crisis.
So I'd like to spend a little bit of time this afternoon and tell you a little bit about our process for fixing the city, a little bit about Detroit, and I want to do that through the voices of Detroiters.
So we began our process in September of 2010.
It's just after a special mayoral election, and word has gotten out that there is going to be this citywide planning process, which brings a lot of anxiety and fears among Detroiters.
We had planned to hold a number of community meetings in rooms like this to introduce the planning process, and people came out from all over the city, including areas that were stable neighborhoods, as well as areas that were beginning to see a lot of vacancy.
And most of our audience was representative of the 82 percent African-American population in the city at that time.
So obviously, we have a Q&amp;A portion of our program, and people line up to mics to ask questions.
Many of them step very firmly to the mic, put their hands across their chest, and go, "I know you people are trying to move me out of my house, right?"
So that question is really powerful, and it was certainly powerful to us in the moment, when you connect it to the stories that some Detroiters had, and actually a lot of African-Americans' families have had that are living in Midwestern cities like Detroit.
Many of them told us the stories about how they came to own their home through their grandparents or great-grandparents, who were one of 1.6 million people who migrated from the rural South to the industrial North, as depicted in this painting by Jacob Lawrence, "The Great Migration."
They came to Detroit for a better way of life.
Many found work in the automobile industry, the Ford Motor Company, as depicted in this mural by Diego Rivera in the Detroit Institute of Art.
The fruits of their labors would afford them a home, for many the first piece of property that they would ever know, and a community with other first-time African-American home buyers.
The first couple of decades of their life in the North is quite well, up until about 1950, which coincides with the city's peak population at 1.8 million people.
Now it's at this time that Detroit begins to see a second kind of migration, a migration to the suburbs.
Between 1950 and 2000, the region grows by 30 percent.
But this time, the migration leaves African-Americans in place, as families and businesses flee the city, leaving the city pretty desolate of people as well as jobs.
During that same period, between 1950 and 2000, 2010, the city loses 60 percent of its population, and today it hovers at above 700,000.
The audience members who come and talk to us that night tell us the stories of what it's like to live in a city with such depleted population.
Many tell us that they're one of only a few homes on their block that are occupied, and that they can see several abandoned homes from where they sit on their porches.
Citywide, there are 80,000 vacant homes.
They can also see vacant property.
They're beginning to see illegal activities on these properties, like illegal dumping, and they know that because the city has lost so much population, their costs for water, electricity, gas are rising, because there are not enough people to pay property taxes to help support the services that they need.
Citywide, there are about 100,000 vacant parcels.
Now, to quickly give you all a sense of a scale, because I know that sounds like a big number, but I don't think you quite understand until you look at the city map.
So the city is 139 square miles.
You can fit Boston, San Francisco, and the island of Manhattan within its footprint.
So if we take all of that vacant and abandoned property and we smush it together, it looks like about 20 square miles, and that's roughly equivalent to the size of the island we're sitting on today, Manhattan, at 22 square miles.
So it's a lot of vacancy.
Now some of our audience members also tell us about some of the positive things that are happening in their communities, and many of them are banding together to take control of some of the vacant lots, and they're starting community gardens, which are creating a great sense of community stewardship, but they're very, very clear to tell us that this is not enough, that they want to see their neighborhoods return to the way that their grandparents had found them.
Now there's been a lot of speculation since 2010 about what to do with the vacant property, and a lot of that speculation has been around community gardening, or what we call urban agriculture.
So many people would say to us, "What if you just take all that vacant land and you could make it farmland?
It can provide fresh foods, and it can put Detroiters back to work too."
When I hear that story, I always imagine the folks from the Great Migration rolling over in their graves, because you can imagine that they didn't sacrifice moving from the South to the North to create a better life for their families, only to see their great-grandchildren return to an agrarian lifestyle, especially in a city where they came with little less than a high school education or even a grammar school education and were able to afford the basic elements of the American dream: steady work and a home that they owned.
Now, there's a third wave of migration happening in Detroit: a new ascendant of cultural entrepreneurs.
These folks see that same vacant land and those same abandoned homes as opportunity for new, entrepreneurial ideas and profit, so much so that former models can move to Detroit, buy property, start successful businesses and restaurants, and become successful community activists in their neighborhood, bringing about very positive change.
Similarly, we have small manufacturing companies making conscious decisions to relocate to the city.
This company, Shinola, which is a luxury watch and bicycle company, deliberately chose to relocate to Detroit, and they quote themselves by saying they were drawn to the global brand of Detroit's innovation.
And they also knew that they can tap into a workforce that was still very skilled in how to make things.
Now we have community stewardship happening in neighborhoods, we have cultural entrepreneurs making decisions to move to the city and create enterprises, and we have businesses relocating, and this is all in the context of what is no secret to us all, a city that's under the control of an emergency manager, and just this July filed for Chapter 9 bankruptcy.
So 2010, we started this process, and by 2013, we released Detroit Future City, which was our strategic plan to guide the city into a better and more prosperous and more sustainable existence -- not what it was, but what it could be, looking at new ways of economic growth, new forms of land use, more sustainable and denser neighborhoods, a reconfigured infrastructure and city service system, and a heightened capacity for civic leaders to take action and implement change.
Three key imperatives were really important to our work.
One was that the city itself wasn't necessarily too large, but the economy was too small.
There are only 27 jobs per 100 people in Detroit, very different from a Denver or an Atlanta or a Philadelphia that are anywhere between 35 to 70 jobs per 100 people.
Secondly, there had to be an acceptance that we were not going to be able to use all of this vacant land in the way that we had before and maybe for some time to come.
It wasn't going to be our traditional residential neighborhoods as we had before, and urban agriculture, while a very productive and successful intervention happening in Detroit, was not the only answer, that what we had to do is look at these areas where we had significant vacancy but still had a significant number of population of what could be new, productive, innovative, and entrepreneurial uses that could stabilize those communities, where still nearly 300,000 residents lived.
So we came up with one neighborhood typology -- there are several -- called a live-make neighborhood, where folks could reappropriate abandoned structures and turn them into entrepreneurial enterprises, with a specific emphasis on looking at the, again, majority 82 percent African-American population.
So they, too, could take businesses that they maybe were doing out of their home and grow them to more prosperous industries and actually acquire property so they were actually property owners as well as business owners in the communities with which they resided.
Then we also wanted to look at other ways of using land in addition to growing food and transforming landscape into much more productive uses, so that it could be used for storm water management, for example, by using surface lakes and retention ponds, that created neighborhood amenities, places of recreation, and actually helped to elevate adjacent property levels.
Or we could use it as research plots, where we can use it to remediate contaminated soils, or we could use it to generate energy.
So the descendants of the Great Migration could either become precision watchmakers at Shinola, like Willie H., who was featured in one of their ads last year, or they can actually grow a business that would service companies like Shinola.
The good news is, there is a future for the next generation of Detroiters, both those there now and those that want to come.
So no thank you, Mayor Menino, who recently was quoted as saying, "I'd blow up the place and start over."
There are very important people, business and land assets in Detroit, and there are real opportunities there.
So while Detroit might not be what it was, Detroit will not die.
Thank you.
(Applause)
NASA's always on the lookout for possible asteroid collision hazards, so the Pan-STARRS telescope is scanning the sky every night.
Each morning, candidate objects are examined by Pan-STARRS staff and usually discovered to be no big deal.
But on October 19, 2017, Pan-STARRS spotted an object moving rapidly between the stars, and this time the usual follow-up measurements of position and speed showed something completely different.
By October 22nd, we had enough data to realize that this object wasn't from our solar system.
Holy cow.
That's when I got the phone call, the phone call that all solar system astronomers are waiting for.
Let me tell you how exciting this was.
(Laughter) NASA's been expecting to see an interstellar comet pass through the solar system since the 1970s, but until now, we'd never seen anything.
Our own solar system is huge, so even getting a package from the nearest star system 4.4 light years away would take over 50,000 years.
So this is a really big deal.
The interstellar visitor entered our solar system from above the plane of the planets, coming from the direction of the constellation Lyra, and it passed closest to the Sun on September 9th, passing inside the orbit of Mercury.
Now this isn't a particularly close approach or unusual distance.
It's just much easier to see objects close by.
On October 14th, before we discovered it, it made its closest approach to the Earth, within about 15 million miles.
This is really close by astronomical standards.
Now rather than call this by its unwieldy catalog name, we briefly called it "Rama," after the cylindrical spacecraft that passed through the solar system in Arthur C. Clarke's classic science fiction story in 1973.
But this wasn't quite right either, so in honor of it being discovered by a telescope in Hawaii, we consulted two experts on Hawaiian culture -- a Hawaiian navigator and a linguist -- to propose a name.
And they suggested "'Oumuamua," which means scout or messenger from the distant past reaching out to us.
Now this discovery was important for many reasons, but to me the most significant is for what 'Oumuamua can tell us about the past of our solar system.
The process of the birth of a new solar system and the growth of planets can be a violent and messy business.
Leftover icy and rocky debris gets ejected from the new solar system as the giant planets migrate through the dusty disk out of which they're formed.
Now have you ever felt an emotional chill, something that's so exciting that a shiver runs up and down your spine?
Or something that's very emotionally moving?
Well this was it for me.
This was my wow moment.
We actually had a piece of material from another solar system coming close enough for us to observe.
So what would you like to know about 'Oumuamua, the very first visitor from another star system?
Well, I could think of a million things, but there's what you want and what you can have, and 'Oumuamua was moving away and fading very rapidly.
In the span of about a week, it had dropped in brightness by a factor of [10].
So this is about all the time we were going to have to study it easily.
So we had to distill the process of getting telescope time -- normally a very competitive, peer-reviewed proposal process that can take up to months -- down to less than a few days.
So began a "polite" competition for resources.
OK, let me not mince words. It was a fierce battle.
We dropped everything, working around the clock, trying to craft perfectly crafted proposal words to send to the observatory directors.
Well, good news. We got the time.
Now, from a perfectly selfish point of view, the first thing we might like to know is how massive 'Oumuamua is.
Because after all, it passed very close to the Earth, and we didn't know about it until afterwards.
How bad would this have been had it not missed the Earth?
Well, the impact energy depends on the square of the velocity times its mass, and the mass depends on how big it is and what it's made of.
So how big is 'Oumuamua, and what's its shape?
Well, we can get this from its brightness.
Now, if you don't believe me, think of comparing the brightness of a firefly in your backyard to the navigation lights on a distant airplane.
You know the airplane is much brighter -- it just appears faint because it's so far away.
We're also going to need to know how reflective the surface of 'Oumuamua is, and we don't have any clue, but it's reasonable to assume it's very similar to small asteroids and comets in our solar system, or in technical terms, something between the reflectivity of charcoal and wet sand.
Nowadays, most of the big telescopes are used in what's called a service mode, meaning we have to carefully develop all the instructions and send them to the telescope operator, and then anxiously wait for the data to come back, praying to the weather gods.
Now I bet most of you don't have careers that critically depend on whether or not it's cloudy last night.
Well, we weren't going to get any second chances here.
Because the weather was great, 'Oumuamua decided not to be.
Its brightness wasn't constant.
Now here we see 'Oumuamua racing between the stars.
It's centered in the middle.
The stars are trailed out because the telescope is following its motion.
It started faint and then it got brighter, fainter, brighter, and fainter again, as sunlight is reflected off of four sides of an oblong object.
The extreme brightness change led us to an unbelievable conclusion about its shape.
As shown in this artist's impression, 'Oumuamua is apparently very long and narrow, with an axis ratio of about 10 to one.
Assuming it's dark, this means it's about half a mile long.
Nothing else in our solar system looks like this.
We only have a handful of objects that even have an axis ratio bigger than five to one.
So we don't know how this forms, but it may be part of its birth process in its home solar system.
'Oumuamua was varying in brightness every 7.34 hours, or so we thought.
As more data started to come in from other teams, they were reporting different numbers.
Why is it the more we learn about something, the harder it gets to interpret?
Well, it turns out that 'Oumuamua is not rotating in a simple way.
It's wobbling like a top.
So while it is rotating around its short axis, it's also rolling around the long axis and nodding up and down.
This very energetic, excited motion is almost certainly the result of it being violently tossed out of its home solar system.
Now how we interpret the shape from its brightness depends very critically on how it's spinning, so now we have to rethink what it may look like, and as shown in this beautiful painting by space artist Bill Hartmann, we think that 'Oumuamua may be more of a flattened oval.
So let's get back to the energetics.
What is it made of?
Well, ideally we would love to have a piece of 'Oumuamua into the laboratory, so we could study it in detail.
But since even private industry can't manage to launch a spacecraft within a week to something like this, astronomers have to rely on remote observations.
So astronomers will look at how the light interacts with the surface.
Some colors may get absorbed, giving it a chemical fingerprint, whereas other colors may not.
On the other hand, some substances may just reflect more blue or red light efficiently.
In the case of 'Oumuamua, it reflected more red light, making it look very much like the organic rich surface of the comet recently visited by the Rosetta spacecraft.
But not everything that looks reddish has the same composition.
In fact, minerals that have tiny little bits of iron in the surface can also look red, as does the dark side of Saturn's moon Iapetus, shown in these images from the Cassini spacecraft.
Nickel-iron meteorites, in other words, metal, can also look red.
So while we don't know what's on the surface, we know even less about what's on the inside.
However, we do know that it must at least be strong enough to not fly apart as it rotates, so it probably has a density similar to that of rocky asteroids; perhaps even denser, like metal.
Well, at the very least, I want to show you one of the beautiful color images that we got from one of the ground-based telescopes.
All right, I admit, it's not all that spectacular.
(Laughter) We just don't have the resolution.
Even Hubble Space Telescope doesn't present a much better view.
But the importance of the Hubble data was not because of the images, but because it extended our observations out to two and a half months from the discovery, meaning we get more positions along the orbit, which will hopefully let us figure out where 'Oumuamua came from.
So what exactly is 'Oumuamua?
We firmly believe it's likely to be a leftover archaeological remnant from the process of the birth of another planetary system, some celestial driftwood.
Some scientists think that maybe 'Oumuamua formed very close to a star that was much denser than our own, and the star's tidal forces shredded planetary material early in the solar system's history.
Still others suggest that maybe this is something that formed during the death throes of a star, perhaps during a supernova explosion, as planetary material got shredded.
Whatever it is, we believe it's a natural object, but we can't actually prove that it's not something artificial.
The color, the strange shape, the tumbling motion could all have other explanations.
Now while we don't believe this is alien technology, why not do the obvious experiment and search for a radio signal?
That's exactly what the Breakthrough Listen project did, but so far, 'Oumuamua has remained completely quiet.
Now could we send a spacecraft to 'Oumuamua and answer this question once and for all?
Yes, we do actually have the technology, but it would be a long and expensive voyage, and we would get there so far from the Sun that the final approach trajectory would be very difficult.
So I think 'Oumuamua probably has many more things to teach us, and in fact there might be more surprises in store as scientists such as myself continue to work with the data.
More importantly, I think this visitor from afar has really brought home the point that our solar system isn't isolated.
We're part of a much larger environment, and in fact, we may even be surrounded by interstellar visitors and not even know it.
This unexpected gift has perhaps raised more questions than its provided answers, but we were the first to say hello to a visitor from another solar system.
Thank you.
(Applause) Jedidah Isler: Thanks, Karen.
I of course enjoyed that talk very much. Thank you.
As I recall, we found it pretty late in its journey towards us.
Will future technologies like the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope help us detect these things sooner?
Karen Meech: Yeah. We're hoping that we'll start to see a lot of these things, and ideally, you'd love to find one as it's approaching the Sun, because you want to have time to do all the science, or even more ideal, you'd get a spacecraft ready to go, parked somewhere in the L4 or L5 position, somewhere near Earth, so that when something comes by, you can chase it.
JI: Awesome, thanks so much. Let's thank Karen again.
(Applause)
Einstein said that "I never think about the future — it comes soon enough."
And he was right, of course.
So today, I'm here to ask you to think of how the future is happening now.
Over the past 200 years, the world has experienced two major waves of innovation.
First, the Industrial Revolution brought us machines and factories, railways, electricity, air travel, and our lives have never been the same.
Then the Internet revolution brought us computing power, data networks, unprecedented access to information and communication, and our lives have never been the same.
Now we are experiencing another metamorphic change: the industrial Internet.
It brings together intelligent machines, advanced analytics, and the creativity of people at work.
It's the marriage of minds and machines.
And our lives will never be the same.
In my current role, I see up close how technology is beginning to transform industrial sectors that play a huge role in our economy and in our lives: energy, aviation, transportation, health care.
For an economist, this is highly unusual, and it's extremely exciting, because this is a transformation as powerful as the Industrial Revolution and more, and before the Industrial Revolution, there was no economic growth to speak of.
So what is this industrial Internet?
Industrial machines are being equipped with a growing number of electronic sensors that allow them to see, hear, feel a lot more than ever before, generating prodigious amounts of data.
Increasingly sophisticated analytics then sift through the data, providing insights that allow us to operate the machines in entirely new ways, a lot more efficiently.
And not just individual machines, but fleets of locomotives, airplanes, entire systems like power grids, hospitals.
It is asset optimization and system optimization.
Of course, electronic sensors have been around for some time, but something has changed: a sharp decline in the cost of sensors and, thanks to advances in cloud computing, a rapid decrease in the cost of storing and processing data.
So we are moving to a world where the machines we work with are not just intelligent; they are brilliant.
They are self-aware, they are predictive, reactive and social.
It's jet engines, locomotives, gas turbines, medical devices, communicating seamlessly with each other and with us.
It's a world where information itself becomes intelligent and comes to us automatically when we need it without having to look for it.
We are beginning to deploy throughout the industrial system embedded virtualization, multi-core processor technology, advanced cloud-based communications, a new software-defined machine infrastructure which allows machine functionality to become virtualized in software, decoupling machine software from hardware, and allowing us to remotely and automatically monitor, manage and upgrade industrial assets.
Why does any of this matter at all?
Well first of all, it's already allowing us to shift towards preventive, condition-based maintenance, which means fixing machines just before they break, without wasting time servicing them on a fixed schedule.
And this, in turn, is pushing us towards zero unplanned downtime, which means there will be no more power outages, no more flight delays.
So let me give you a few examples of how these brilliant machines work, and some of the examples may seem trivial, some are clearly more profound, but all of them are going to have a very powerful impact.
Let's start with aviation.
Today, 10 percent of all flights cancellations and delays are due to unscheduled maintenance events.
Something goes wrong unexpectedly.
This results in eight billion dollars in costs for the airline industry globally every year, not to mention the impact on all of us: stress, inconvenience, missed meetings as we sit helplessly in an airport terminal.
So how can the industrial Internet help here?
We've developed a preventive maintenance system which can be installed on any aircraft.
It's self-learning and able to predict issues that a human operator would miss.
The aircraft, while in flight, will communicate with technicians on the ground.
By the time it lands, they will already know if anything needs to be serviced.
Just in the U.S., a system like this can prevent over 60,000 delays and cancellations every year, helping seven million passengers get to their destinations on time.
Or take healthcare.
Today, nurses spend an average of 21 minutes per shift looking for medical equipment.
That seems trivial, but it's less time spent caring for patients.
St. Luke's Medical Center in Houston, Texas, which has deployed industrial Internet technology to electronically monitor and connect patients, staff and medical equipment, has reduced bed turnaround times by nearly one hour.
If you need surgery, one hour matters.
It means more patients can be treated, more lives can be saved.
Another medical center, in Washington state, is piloting an application that allows medical images from city scanners and MRIs to be analyzed in the cloud, developing better analytics at a lower cost.
Imagine a patient who has suffered a severe trauma, and needs the attention of several specialists: a neurologist, a cardiologist, an orthopedic surgeon.
If all of them can have instantaneous and simultaneous access to scans and images as they are taken, they will be able to deliver better healthcare faster.
So all of this translates into better health outcomes, but it can also deliver substantial economic benefits.
Just a one-percent reduction in existing inefficiencies could yield savings of over 60 billion dollars to the healthcare industry worldwide, and that is just a drop in the sea compared to what we need to do to make healthcare affordable on a sustainable basis.
Similar advances are happening in energy, including renewable energy.
Wind farms equipped with new remote monitorings and diagnostics that allow wind turbines to talk to each other and adjust the pitch of their blades in a coordinated way, depending on how the wind is blowing, can now produce electricity at a cost of less than five cents per kilowatt/hour.
Ten years ago, that cost was 30 cents, six times as much.
The list goes on, and it will grow fast, because industrial data are now growing exponentially.
By 2020, they will account for over 50 percent of all digital information.
But this is not just about data, so let me switch gears and tell you how this is impacting already the jobs we do every day, because this new wave of innovation is bringing about new tools and applications that will allow us to collaborate in a smarter and faster way, making our jobs not just more efficient but more rewarding.
Imagine a field engineer arriving at the wind farm with a handheld device telling her which turbines need servicing.
She already has all the spare parts, because the problems were diagnosed in advanced.
And if she faces an unexpected issue, the same handheld device will allow her to communicate with colleagues at the service center, let them see what she sees, transmit data that they can run through diagnostics, and they can stream videos that will guide her, step by step, through whatever complex procedure is needed to get the machines back up and running.
And their interaction gets documented and stored in a searchable database.
Let's stop and think about this for a minute, because this is a very important point.
This new wave of innovation is fundamentally changing the way we work.
And I know that many of you will be concerned about the impact that innovation might have on jobs.
Unemployment is already high, and there is always a fear that innovation will destroy jobs.
And innovation is disruptive.
But let me stress two things here.
First, we've already lived through mechanization of agriculture, automation of industry, and employment has gone up, because innovation is fundamentally about growth.
It makes products more affordable.
It creates new demand, new jobs.
Second, there is a concern that in the future, there will only be room for engineers, data scientists, and other highly-specialized workers.
And believe me, as an economist, I am also scared.
But think about it: Just as a child can easily figure out how to operate an iPad, so a new generation of mobile and intuitive industrial applications will make life easier for workers of all skill levels.
The worker of the future will be more like Iron Man than the Charlie Chaplin of "Modern Times."
And to be sure, new high-skilled jobs will be created: mechanical digital engineers who understand both the machines and the data; managers who understand their industry and the analytics and can reorganize the business to take full advantage of the technology.
But now let's take a step back.
Let's look at the big picture.
There are people who argue that today's innovation is all about social media and silly games, with nowhere near the transformational power of the Industrial Revolution.
They say that all the growth-enhancing innovations are behind us.
And every time I hear this, I can't help thinking that even back in the Stone Age, there must have been a group of cavemen sitting around a fire one day looking very grumpy, and looking disapprovingly at another group of cavemen rolling a stone wheel up and down a hill, and saying to each other, "Yeah, this wheel thing, cool toy, sure, but compared to fire, it will have no impact.
The big discoveries are all behind us."
(Laughter) This technological revolution is as inspiring and transformational as anything we have ever seen.
Human creativity and innovation have always propelled us forward.
They've created jobs.
They've raised living standards.
They've made our lives healthier and more rewarding.
And the new wave of innovation which is beginning to sweep through industry is no different.
In the U.S. alone, the industrial Internet could raise average income by 25 to 40 percent over the next 15 years, boosting growth to rates we haven't seen in a long time, and adding between 10 and 15 trillion dollars to global GDP.
That is the size of the entire U.S. economy today.
But this is not a foregone conclusion.
We are just at the beginning of this transformation, and there will be barriers to break, obstacles to overcome.
We will need to invest in the new technologies.
We will need to adapt organizations and managerial practices.
We will need a robust cybersecurity approach that protects sensitive information and intellectual property and safeguards critical infrastructure from cyberattacks.
And the education system will need to evolve to ensure students are equipped with the right skills.
It's not going to be easy, but it is going to be worth it.
The economic challenges facing us are hard, but when I walk the factory floor, and I see how humans and brilliant machines are becoming interconnected, and I see the difference this makes in a hospital, in an airport, in a power generation plant, I'm not just optimistic, I'm enthusiastic.
This new technological revolution is upon us.
So think about the future — it will be here soon enough.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"I felt a Funeral, in my Brain, and Mourners to and fro kept treading -- treading -- till [it seemed] that Sense was breaking through -- And when they all were seated, a Service, like a Drum -- kept beating -- beating -- till I [thought] my Mind was going numb -- And then I heard them lift a Box and creak across my Soul with those same Boots of Lead, again, then Space -- began to toll, As [all] the Heavens were a Bell, and Being, [but] an Ear, and I, and Silence, some strange Race, wrecked, solitary, here -- [And] then a Plank in Reason, broke, and I fell down and down -- and hit a World, at every plunge, and Finished knowing -- then --" We know depression through metaphors.
Emily Dickinson was able to convey it in language, Goya in an image.
Half the purpose of art is to describe such iconic states.
As for me, I had always thought myself tough, one of the people who could survive if I'd been sent to a concentration camp.
In 1991, I had a series of losses.
My mother died, a relationship I'd been in ended, I moved back to the United States from some years abroad, and I got through all of those experiences intact.
But in 1994, three years later, I found myself losing interest in almost everything.
I didn't want to do any of the things I had previously wanted to do, and I didn't know why.
The opposite of depression is not happiness, but vitality.
And it was vitality that seemed to seep away from me in that moment.
Everything there was to do seemed like too much work.
I would come home and I would see the red light flashing on my answering machine, and instead of being thrilled to hear from my friends, I would think, "What a lot of people that is to have to call back."
Or I would decide I should have lunch, and then I would think, but I'd have to get the food out and put it on a plate and cut it up and chew it and swallow it, and it felt to me like the Stations of the Cross.
And one of the things that often gets lost in discussions of depression is that you know it's ridiculous.
You know it's ridiculous while you're experiencing it.
You know that most people manage to listen to their messages and eat lunch and organize themselves to take a shower and go out the front door and that it's not a big deal, and yet you are nonetheless in its grip and you are unable to figure out any way around it.
And so I began to feel myself doing less and thinking less and feeling less.
It was a kind of nullity.
And then the anxiety set in.
If you told me that I'd have to be depressed for the next month, I would say, "As long I know it'll be over in November, I can do it."
But if you said to me, "You have to have acute anxiety for the next month," I would rather slit my wrist than go through it.
It was the feeling all the time like that feeling you have if you're walking and you slip or trip and the ground is rushing up at you, but instead of lasting half a second, the way that does, it lasted for six months.
It's a sensation of being afraid all the time but not even knowing what it is that you're afraid of.
And it was at that point that I began to think that it was just too painful to be alive, and that the only reason not to kill oneself was so as not to hurt other people.
And finally one day, I woke up and I thought perhaps I'd had a stroke, because I lay in bed completely frozen, looking at the telephone, thinking, "Something is wrong and I should call for help," and I couldn't reach out my arm and pick up the phone and dial.
And finally, after four full hours of my lying and staring at it, the phone rang, and somehow I managed to pick it up, and it was my father, and I said, "I'm in serious trouble. We need to do something."
The next day I started with the medications and the therapy.
And I also started reckoning with this terrible question: If I'm not the tough person who could have made it through a concentration camp, then who am I?
And if I have to take medication, is that medication making me more fully myself, or is it making me someone else?
And how do I feel about it if it's making me someone else?
I had two advantages as I went into the fight.
The first is that I knew that, objectively speaking, I had a nice life, and that if I could only get well, there was something at the other end that was worth living for.
And the other was that I had access to good treatment.
But I nonetheless emerged and relapsed, and emerged and relapsed, and emerged and relapsed, and finally understood I would have to be on medication and in therapy forever.
And I thought, "But is it a chemical problem or a psychological problem?
And does it need a chemical cure or a philosophical cure?"
And I couldn't figure out which it was.
And then I understood that actually, we aren't advanced enough in either area for it to explain things fully.
The chemical cure and the psychological cure both have a role to play, and I also figured out that depression was something that was braided so deep into us that there was no separating it from our character and personality.
I want to say that the treatments we have for depression are appalling.
They're not very effective.
They're extremely costly.
They come with innumerable side effects.
They're a disaster.
But I am so grateful that I live now and not 50 years ago, when there would have been almost nothing to be done.
I hope that 50 years hence, people will hear about my treatments and be appalled that anyone endured such primitive science.
Depression is the flaw in love.
If you were married to someone and thought, "Well, if my wife dies, I'll find another one," it wouldn't be love as we know it.
There's no such thing as love without the anticipation of loss, and that specter of despair can be the engine of intimacy.
There are three things people tend to confuse: depression, grief and sadness.
Grief is explicitly reactive.
If you have a loss and you feel incredibly unhappy, and then, six months later, you are still deeply sad, but you're functioning a little better, it's probably grief, and it will probably ultimately resolve itself in some measure.
If you experience a catastrophic loss, and you feel terrible, and six months later you can barely function at all, then it's probably a depression that was triggered by the catastrophic circumstances.
The trajectory tells us a great deal.
People think of depression as being just sadness.
It's much, much too much sadness, much too much grief at far too slight a cause.
As I set out to understand depression, and to interview people who had experienced it, I found that there were people who seemed, on the surface, to have what sounded like relatively mild depression who were nonetheless utterly disabled by it.
And there were other people who had what sounded as they described it like terribly severe depression who nonetheless had good lives in the interstices between their depressive episodes.
And I set out to find out what it is that causes some people to be more resilient than other people.
What are the mechanisms that allow people to survive?
And I went out and I interviewed person after person who was suffering with depression.
One of the first people I interviewed described depression as a slower way of being dead, and that was a good thing for me to hear early on because it reminded me that that slow way of being dead can lead to actual deadness, that this is a serious business.
It's the leading disability worldwide, and people die of it every day.
One of the people I talked to when I was trying to understand this was a beloved friend who I had known for many years, and who had had a psychotic episode in her freshman year of college, and then plummeted into a horrific depression.
She had bipolar illness, or manic depression, as it was then known.
And then she did very well for many years on lithium, and then eventually, she was taken off her lithium to see how she would do without it, and she had another psychosis, and then plunged into the worst depression that I had ever seen in which she sat in her parents' apartment, more or less catatonic, essentially without moving, day after day after day.
And when I interviewed her about that experience some years later -- she's a poet and psychotherapist named Maggie Robbins -- when I interviewed her, she said, "I was singing 'Where Have All The Flowers Gone,' over and over, to occupy my mind.
I was singing to blot out the things my mind was saying, which were, 'You are nothing. You are nobody.
You don't even deserve to live.' And that was when I really started thinking about killing myself."
You don't think in depression that you've put on a gray veil and are seeing the world through the haze of a bad mood.
You think that the veil has been taken away, the veil of happiness, and that now you're seeing truly.
It's easier to help schizophrenics who perceive that there's something foreign inside of them that needs to be exorcised, but it's difficult with depressives, because we believe we are seeing the truth.
But the truth lies.
I became obsessed with that sentence: "But the truth lies."
And I discovered, as I talked to depressive people, that they have many delusional perceptions.
People will say, "No one loves me."
And you say, "I love you, your wife loves you, your mother loves you."
You can answer that one pretty readily, at least for most people.
But people who are depressed will also say, "No matter what we do, we're all just going to die in the end."
Or they'll say, "There can be no true communion between two human beings.
Each of us is trapped in his own body."
To which you have to say, "That's true, but I think we should focus right now on what to have for breakfast."
(Laughter) A lot of the time, what they are expressing is not illness, but insight, and one comes to think what's really extraordinary is that most of us know about those existential questions and they don't distract us very much.
There was a study I particularly liked in which a group of depressed and a group of non-depressed people were asked to play a video game for an hour, and at the end of the hour, they were asked how many little monsters they thought they had killed.
The depressive group was usually accurate to within about 10 percent, and the non-depressed people guessed between 15 and 20 times as many little monsters -- (Laughter) as they had actually killed.
A lot of people said, when I chose to write about my depression, that it must be very difficult to be out of that closet, to have people know.
They said, "Do people talk to you differently?"
I said, "Yes, people talk to me differently.
They talk to me differently insofar as they start telling me about their experience, or their sister's experience, or their friend's experience.
Things are different because now I know that depression is the family secret that everyone has.
I went a few years ago to a conference, and on Friday of the three-day conference, one of the participants took me aside, and she said, "I suffer from depression and I'm a little embarrassed about it, but I've been taking this medication, and I just wanted to ask you what you think?"
And so I did my best to give her such advice as I could.
And then she said, "You know, my husband would never understand this.
He's really the kind of guy to whom this wouldn't make any sense, so, you know, it's just between us."
And I said, "Yes, that's fine."
On Sunday of the same conference, her husband took me aside, (Laughter) and he said, "My wife wouldn't think that I was really much of a guy if she knew this, but I've been dealing with this depression and I'm taking some medication, and I wondered what you think?"
They were hiding the same medication in two different places in the same bedroom.
(Laughter) And I said that I thought communication within the marriage might be triggering some of their problems.
(Laughter) But I was also struck by the burdensome nature of such mutual secrecy.
Depression is so exhausting.
It takes up so much of your time and energy, and silence about it, it really does make the depression worse.
And then I began thinking about all the ways people make themselves better.
I'd started off as a medical conservative.
I thought there were a few kinds of therapy that worked, it was clear what they were -- there was medication, there were certain psychotherapies, there was possibly electroconvulsive treatment, and that everything else was nonsense.
But then I discovered something.
If you have brain cancer, and you say that standing on your head for 20 minutes every morning makes you feel better, it may make you feel better, but you still have brain cancer, and you'll still probably die from it.
But if you say that you have depression, and standing on your head for 20 minutes every day makes you feel better, then it's worked, because depression is an illness of how you feel, and if you feel better, then you are effectively not depressed anymore.
So I became much more tolerant of the vast world of alternative treatments.
And I get letters, I get hundreds of letters from people writing to tell me about what's worked for them.
Someone was asking me backstage today about meditation.
My favorite of the letters that I got was the one that came from a woman who wrote and said that she had tried therapy, medication, she had tried pretty much everything, and she had found a solution and hoped I would tell the world, and that was making little things from yarn.
(Laughter) She sent me some of them.
(Laughter) And I'm not wearing them right now.
(Laughter) I suggested to her that she also should look up obsessive compulsive disorder in the DSM.
And yet, when I went to look at alternative treatments, I also gained perspective on other treatments.
I went through a tribal exorcism in Senegal that involved a great deal of ram's blood and that I'm not going to detail right now, but a few years afterwards I was in Rwanda, working on a different project, and I happened to describe my experience to someone, and he said, "Well, that's West Africa, and we're in East Africa, and our rituals are in some ways very different, but we do have some rituals that have something in common with what you're describing."
And he said, "But we've had a lot of trouble with Western mental health workers, especially the ones who came right after the genocide."
I said, "What kind of trouble did you have?"
And he said, "Well, they would do this bizarre thing.
They didn't take people out in the sunshine where you begin to feel better.
They didn't include drumming or music to get people's blood going.
They didn't involve the whole community.
They didn't externalize the depression as an invasive spirit.
Instead what they did was they took people one at a time into dingy little rooms and had them talk for an hour about bad things that had happened to them."
(Laughter) (Applause) He said, "We had to ask them to leave the country."
(Laughter) Now at the other end of alternative treatments, let me tell you about Frank Russakoff.
Frank Russakoff had the worst depression perhaps that I've ever seen in a man.
He was constantly depressed.
He was, when I met him, at a point at which every month, he would have electroshock treatment.
Then he would feel sort of disoriented for a week.
Then he would feel okay for a week.
Then he would have a week of going downhill.
And then he would have another electroshock treatment.
And he said to me when I met him, "It's unbearable to go through my weeks this way.
I can't go on this way, and I've figured out how I'm going to end it if I don't get better."
"But," he said to me, "I heard about a protocol at Mass General for a procedure called a cingulotomy, which is a brain surgery, and I think I'm going to give that a try."
And I remember being amazed at that point to think that someone who clearly had so many bad experiences with so many different treatments still had buried in him, somewhere, enough optimism to reach out for one more.
And he had the cingulotomy, and it was incredibly successful.
He's now a friend of mine.
He has a lovely wife and two beautiful children.
He wrote me a letter the Christmas after the surgery, and he said, "My father sent me two presents this year, First, a motorized CD rack from The Sharper Image that I didn't really need, but I knew he was giving it to me to celebrate the fact that I'm living on my own and have a job I seem to love.
And the other present was a photo of my grandmother, who committed suicide.
As I unwrapped it, I began to cry, and my mother came over and said, 'Are you crying because of the relatives you never knew?' And I said, 'She had the same disease I have.' I'm crying now as I write to you.
It's not that I'm so sad, but I get overwhelmed, I think, because I could have killed myself, but my parents kept me going, and so did the doctors, and I had the surgery.
I'm alive and grateful.
We live in the right time, even if it doesn't always feel like it."
I was struck by the fact that depression is broadly perceived to be a modern, Western, middle-class thing, and I went to look at how it operated in a variety of other contexts, and one of the things I was most interested in was depression among the indigent.
And so I went out to try to look at what was being done for poor people with depression.
And what I discovered is that poor people are mostly not being treated for depression.
Depression is the result of a genetic vulnerability, which is presumably evenly distributed in the population, and triggering circumstances, which are likely to be more severe for people who are impoverished.
And yet it turns out that if you have a really lovely life but feel miserable all the time, you think, "Why do I feel like this?
I must have depression."
And you set out to find treatment for it.
But if you have a perfectly awful life, and you feel miserable all the time, the way you feel is commensurate with your life, and it doesn't occur to you to think, "Maybe this is treatable."
And so we have an epidemic in this country of depression among impoverished people that's not being picked up and that's not being treated and that's not being addressed, and it's a tragedy of a grand order.
And so I found an academic who was doing a research project in slums outside of D.C., where she picked up women who had come in for other health problems and diagnosed them with depression, and then provided six months of the experimental protocol.
One of them, Lolly, came in, and this is what she said the day she came in.
She said, and she was a woman, by the way, who had seven children.
She said, "I used to have a job but I had to give it up because I couldn't go out of the house.
I have nothing to say to my children.
In the morning, I can't wait for them to leave, and then I climb in bed and pull the covers over my head, and three o'clock when they come home, it just comes so fast."
She said, "I've been taking a lot of Tylenol, anything I can take so that I can sleep more.
My husband has been telling me I'm stupid, I'm ugly.
I wish I could stop the pain."
Well, she was brought into this experimental protocol, and when I interviewed her six months later, she had taken a job working in childcare for the U.S. Navy, she had left the abusive husband, and she said to me, "My kids are so much happier now."
She said, "There's one room in my new place for the boys and one room for the girls, but at night, they're just all up on my bed, and we're doing homework all together and everything.
One of them wants to be a preacher, one of them wants to be a firefighter, and one of the girls says she's going to be a lawyer.
They don't cry like they used to, and they don't fight like they did.
That's all I need now, is my kids.
Things keep on changing, the way I dress, the way I feel, the way I act.
I can go outside not being afraid anymore, and I don't think those bad feelings are coming back, and if it weren't for Dr. Miranda and that, I would still be at home with the covers pulled over my head, if I were still alive at all.
I asked the Lord to send me an angel, and He heard my prayers."
I was really moved by these experiences, and I decided that I wanted to write about them not only in a book I was working on, but also in an article, and I got a commission from The New York Times Magazine to write about depression among the indigent.
And I turned in my story, and my editor called me and said, "We really can't publish this."
And I said, "Why not?"
And she said, "It just is too far-fetched.
These people who are sort of at the very bottom rung of society and then they get a few months of treatment and they're virtually ready to run Morgan Stanley?
It's just too implausible."
She said, "I've never even heard of anything like it."
And I said, "The fact that you've never heard of it is an indication that it is news."
(Laughter) (Applause) "And you are a news magazine."
So after a certain amount of negotiation, they agreed to it.
But I think a lot of what they said was connected in some strange way to this distaste that people still have for the idea of treatment, the notion that somehow if we went out and treated a lot of people in indigent communities, that would be exploitative, because we would be changing them.
There is this false moral imperative that seems to be all around us, that treatment of depression, the medications and so on, are an artifice, and that it's not natural.
And I think that's very misguided.
It would be natural for people's teeth to fall out, but there is nobody militating against toothpaste, at least not in my circles.
People then say, "But isn't depression part of what people are supposed to experience?
Didn't we evolve to have depression?
Isn't it part of your personality?"
To which I would say, mood is adaptive.
Being able to have sadness and fear and joy and pleasure and all of the other moods that we have, that's incredibly valuable.
And major depression is something that happens when that system gets broken.
It's maladaptive.
People will come to me and say, "I think, though, if I just stick it out for another year, I think I can just get through this."
And I always say to them, "You may get through it, but you'll never be 37 again.
Life is short, and that's a whole year you're talking about giving up.
Think it through."
It's a strange poverty of the English language, and indeed of many other languages, that we use this same word, depression, to describe how a kid feels when it rains on his birthday, and to describe how somebody feels the minute before they commit suicide.
People say to me, "Well, is it continuous with normal sadness?"
And I say, in a way it's continuous with normal sadness.
There is a certain amount of continuity, but it's the same way there's continuity between having an iron fence outside your house that gets a little rust spot that you have to sand off and do a little repainting, and what happens if you leave the house for 100 years and it rusts through until it's only a pile of orange dust.
And it's that orange dust spot, that orange dust problem, that's the one we're setting out to address.
So now people say, "You take these happy pills, and do you feel happy?"
And I don't.
But I don't feel sad about having to eat lunch, and I don't feel sad about my answering machine, and I don't feel sad about taking a shower.
I feel more, in fact, I think, because I can feel sadness without nullity.
I feel sad about professional disappointments, about damaged relationships, about global warming.
Those are the things that I feel sad about now.
And I said to myself, well, what is the conclusion?
How did those people who have better lives even with bigger depression manage to get through?
What is the mechanism of resilience?
And what I came up with over time was that the people who deny their experience, and say, "I was depressed a long time ago, I never want to think about it again, I'm not going to look at it and I'm just going to get on with my life," ironically, those are the people who are most enslaved by what they have.
Shutting out the depression strengthens it.
While you hide from it, it grows.
And the people who do better are the ones who are able to tolerate the fact that they have this condition.
Those who can tolerate their depression are the ones who achieve resilience.
So Frank Russakoff said to me, "If I had a do-over, I suppose I wouldn't do it this way, but in a strange way, I'm grateful for what I've experienced.
I'm glad to have been in the hospital 40 times.
It taught me so much about love, and my relationship with my parents and my doctors has been so precious to me, and will be always."
And Maggie Robbins said, "I used to volunteer in an AIDS clinic, and I would just talk and talk and talk, and the people I was dealing with weren't very responsive, and I thought, 'That's not very friendly or helpful of them.'" (Laughter) "And then I realized, I realized that they weren't going to do more than make those first few minutes of small talk.
It was simply going to be an occasion where I didn't have AIDS and I wasn't dying, but could tolerate the fact that they did and they were.
Our needs are our greatest assets.
It turns out I've learned to give all the things I need."
Valuing one's depression does not prevent a relapse, but it may make the prospect of relapse and even relapse itself easier to tolerate.
The question is not so much of finding great meaning and deciding your depression has been very meaningful.
It's of seeking that meaning and thinking, when it comes again, "This will be hellish, but I will learn something from it."
I have learned in my own depression how big an emotion can be, how it can be more real than facts, and I have found that that experience has allowed me to experience positive emotion in a more intense and more focused way.
The opposite of depression is not happiness, but vitality, and these days, my life is vital, even on the days when I'm sad.
I felt that funeral in my brain, and I sat next to the colossus at the edge of the world, and I have discovered something inside of myself that I would have to call a soul that I had never formulated until that day 20 years ago when hell came to pay me a surprise visit.
I think that while I hated being depressed and would hate to be depressed again, I've found a way to love my depression.
I love it because it has forced me to find and cling to joy.
I love it because each day I decide, sometimes gamely, and sometimes against the moment's reason, to cleave to the reasons for living.
And that, I think, is a highly privileged rapture.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Nine years ago, I worked for the U.S. government in Iraq, helping rebuild the electricity infrastructure.
And I was there, and I worked in that job because I believe that technology can improve people's lives.
One afternoon, I had tea with a storekeeper at the Al Rasheed Hotel in Baghdad, and he said to me, "You Americans, you can put a man on the moon, but when I get home tonight, I won't be able to turn on my lights."
At the time, the U.S. government had spent more than two billion dollars on electricity reconstruction.
How do you ensure technology reaches users?
How do you put it in their hands so that it is useful?
So those are the questions that my colleagues and I at D-Rev ask ourselves.
And D-Rev is short for Design Revolution.
And I took over the organization four years ago and really focused it on developing products that actually reach users, and not just any users, but customers who live on less than four dollars a day.
One of the key areas we've been working on recently is medical devices, and while it may not be obvious that medical devices have something in common with Iraq's electricity grid then, there are some commonalities.
Despite the advanced technology, it's not reaching the people who need it most.
So I'm going to tell you about one of the projects we've been working on, the ReMotion Knee, and it's a prosthetic knee for above-knee amputees.
And this project started when the Jaipur Foot Organization, the largest fitter of prosthetic limbs in the world, came to the Bay Area and they said, "We need a better knee."
Chances are, if you're living on less than four dollars a day, and you're an amputee, you've lost your limb in a vehicle accident.
Most people think it's land mines, but it's a vehicle accident.
You're walking by the side of the road and you're hit by a truck, or you're trying to to jump on a moving train, you're late for work, and your pant leg gets caught.
And the reality is that if you don't have much money, like this young named Kamal right here, the option you really have is a bamboo staff to get around.
And how big a problem is this?
There's over three million amputees every year who need a new or replacement knee.
And what are their options?
This is a high-end. This is what we'd call a "smart knee."
It's got a microprocessor inside.
It can pretty much do anything, but it's 20,000 dollars, and to give you a sense of who wears this, veterans, American veterans coming back from Afghanistan or Iraq would be fit with something like this.
This is a low-end titanium knee.
It's a polycentric knee, and all that that means is the mechanism, is a four-bar mechanism, that mimics a natural human knee.
But at 1,400 dollars, it's still too expensive for people like Kamal.
And lastly, here you see a low-end knee.
This is a knee that's been designed specifically for poor people.
And while you have affordability, you've lost on functionality.
The mechanism here is a single axis, and a single axis is like a door hinge.
So you can think about how unstable that would be.
And this is the type of mechanism that the Jaipur Foot Organization was using when they were looking for a better knee, and I just wanted to give you a sense of what a leg system looks like, because I'm showing you all these knees and I imagine it's hard to think how it all fits together.
So at the top you have a socket, and this fits over someone's residual limb, and everyone's residual limb is a little bit different.
And then you have the knee, and here I've got a single axis on the knee so you can see how it rotates, and then a pylon, and then a foot.
And we've been able to develop a knee, a polycentric knee, so that type of knee that acts like a human knee, mimics human gait, for 80 dollars retail.
(Applause) But the key is, you can have this great invention, you can have this great design, but how do you get it to the people who most need it?
How do you ensure it gets to them and it improves their lives?
So at D-Rev, we've done some other projects, and we looked at three things that we really believe gets technologies to customers, to users, to people who need it.
And the first thing is that the product needs to be world class.
It needs to perform on par or better than the best products on the market.
Regardless of your income level, you want the most beautiful, the best product that there is.
I'm going to show you a video now of a man named Ash. You can see him walking.
He's wearing the same knee system here with a single axis knee.
And he's doing a 10-meter walk test.
And you'll notice that he's struggling with stability as he's walking.
And something that's not obvious, that you can't see, is that it's psychologically draining to walk and to be preventing yourself from falling.
Now this is a video of Kamal.
You remember Kamal earlier, holding the bamboo staff.
He's wearing one of the earlier versions of our knee, and he's doing that same 10-meter walk test.
And you can see his stability is much better.
So world class isn't just about technical performance.
It's also about human performance.
And most medical devices, we've learned, as we've dug in, are really designed for Westerners, for wealthier economies.
But the reality is our users, our customers, they do different things. They sit cross-legged more.
We see that they squat. They kneel in prayer.
And we designed our knee to have the greatest range of motion of almost any other knee on the market.
So the second thing we learned, and this leads into my second point, which is that we believe that products need to be designed to be user-centric.
And at D-Rev, we go one step further and we say you need to be user-obsessed.
So it's not just the end user that you're thinking about, but everyone who interacts with the product, so, for example, the prosthetist who fits the knee, but also the context in which the knee is being fit.
What is the local market like?
How do all these components get to the clinic?
Do they all get there on time? The supply chain.
Everything that goes into ensuring that this product gets to the end user, and it goes in as part of the system, and it's used.
So I wanted to show you some of the iterations we did between the first version, the Jaipur Knee, so this is it right here.
(Clicking) Notice anything about it?
It clicks.
We'd seen that users had actually modified it.
So do you see that black strip right there?
That's a homemade noise dampener.
We also saw that our users had modified it in other ways.
You can see there that that particular amputee, he had wrapped bandages around the knee.
He'd made a cosmesis.
And if you look at the knee, it's got those pointy edges, right?
So if you're wearing it under pants or a skirt or a sari, it's really obvious that you're wearing a prosthetic limb, and in societies where there's social stigma around being disabled, people are particularly acute about this.
So I'm going to show you some of the modifications we did.
We did a lot of iterations, not just around this, but some other things.
But here we have the version three, the ReMotion Knee, but if you look in here, you can see the noise dampener. It's quieter.
The other thing we did is that we smoothed the profile.
We made it thinner.
And something that's not obvious is that we designed it for mass production.
And this goes into my last point.
We really, truly believe that if a product is going to reach users at the scale that it's needed, it needs to be market-driven, and market-driven means that products are sold.
They're not donated. They're not heavily subsidized.
Our product needs to be designed to offer value to the end user.
It also has to be designed to be very affordable.
But a product that is valued by a customer is used by a customer, and use is what creates impact.
And we believe that as designers, it holds us accountable to our customers.
And with centralized manufacturing, you can control the quality control, and you can hit that $80 price point with profit margins built in.
And now, those profit margins are critical, because if you want to scale, if you want to reach all the people in the world who possibly need a knee, it needs to be economically sustainable.
So I want to give you a sense of where we are at.
We have fit over 5,000 amputees, and one of the big indicators we're looking at, of course, is, does it improve lives?
Well, the standard is, is someone still wearing their knee six months later?
The industry average is about 65 percent.
Ours is 79 percent, and we're hoping to get that higher.
Right now, our knees are worn in 12 countries.
This is where we want to get, though, in the next three years.
We'll double the impact in 2015, and we'll double it each of the following years after that.
But then we hit a new challenge, and that's the number of skilled prosthetists who are able to fit knees.
So I want to end with a story of Pournima.
Pournima was 18 years old when she was in a car accident where she lost her leg, and she traveled 12 hours by train to come to the clinic to be fit with a knee, and while all of the amputees who wear our knees affect us as the designers, she's particularly meaningful to me as an engineer and as a woman, because she was in school, she had just started school to study engineering.
And she said, "Well, now that I can walk again, I can go back and complete my studies."
And to me she represents the next generation of engineers solving problems and ensuring meaningful technologies reach their users.
So thank you.
(Applause)
It's the fifth time I stand on this shore, the Cuban shore, looking out at that distant horizon, believing, again, that I'm going to make it all the way across that vast, dangerous wilderness of an ocean.
Not only have I tried four times, but the greatest swimmers in the world have been trying since 1950, and it's still never been done.
The team is proud of our four attempts.
It's an expedition of some 30 people.
Bonnie is my best friend and head handler, who somehow summons will, that last drop of will within me, when I think it's gone, after many, many hours and days out there.
The shark experts are the best in the world -- large predators below.
The box jellyfish, the deadliest venom in all of the ocean, is in these waters, and I have come close to dying from them on a previous attempt.
The conditions themselves, besides the sheer distance of over 100 miles in the open ocean -- the currents and whirling eddies and the Gulf Stream itself, the most unpredictable of all of the planet Earth.
And by the way -- it's amusing to me that journalists and people, before these attempts, often ask me, "Well, are you going to go with any boats or any people or anything?"
(Laughter) And I'm thinking, what are they imagining?
That I'll just sort of do some celestial navigation -- (Laughter) And carry a bowie knife in my mouth, and I'll hunt fish and skin them alive and eat them, and maybe drag a desalinization plant behind me for fresh water.
(Laughter) Yes, I have a team.
(Laughter) And the team is expert, and the team is courageous, and brimming with innovation and scientific discovery, as is true of any major expedition on the planet.
And we've been on a journey.
And the debate has raged, hasn't it, since the Greeks, of isn't it what it's all about?
Isn't life about the journey, not really the destination?
And here we've been on this journey, and the truth is, it's been thrilling.
We haven't reached that other shore, and still, our sense of pride and commitment, unwavering commitment.
When I turned 60, the dream was still alive from having tried this in my 20s -- dreamed it and imagined it.
The most famous body of water on the Earth today, I imagine, Cuba to Florida.
And it was deep. It was deep in my soul.
When I turned 60, it wasn't so much about the athletic accomplishment, it wasn't the ego of "I want to be the first."
That's always there and it's undeniable.
But it was deeper.
Let's face it -- we're all on a one-way street, aren't we?
And what are we going to do?
What are we going to do as we go forward, to have no regrets looking back?
And all this past year in training, I had that Teddy Roosevelt quote to paraphrase it, floating around in my brain.
It says, "You go ahead.
You go ahead and sit back in your comfortable chair and you be the critic, you be the observer, while the brave one gets in the ring and engages and gets bloody and gets dirty and fails over and over and over again, but yet isn't afraid and isn't timid and lives life in a bold way."
And so of course I want to make it across.
It is the goal, and I should be so shallow to say that this year, the destination was even sweeter than the journey.
(Laughter) (Applause) But the journey itself was worthwhile taking.
And at this point, by this summer, everybody -- scientists, sports scientists, endurance experts, neurologists, my own team, Bonnie -- said it's impossible.
It just simply can't be done, and Bonnie said to me, "But if you're going to take the journey, I'm going to see you through to the end of it, so I'll be there."
And now we're there.
As we're looking out, kind of a surreal moment before the first stroke, standing on the rocks at Marina Hemingway, the Cuban flag is flying above, all my team is out in their boats, hands up in the air, "We're here!
Bonnie and I look at each other and say, this year, the mantra is -- and I've been using it in training -- Find a way.
You have a dream and you have obstacles in front of you, as we all do.
None of us ever get through this life without heartache, without turmoil, and if you believe and you have faith and you can get knocked down and get back up again and you believe in perseverance as a great human quality, you find your way.
And Bonnie grabbed my shoulders, and she said, "Let's find our way to Florida."
And we started, and for the next 53 hours, it was an intense, unforgettable life experience.
The highs were high, the awe -- I'm not a religious person, but I'll tell you, to be in the azure blue of the Gulf Stream as if, as you're breathing, you're looking down miles and miles and miles, to feel the majesty of this blue planet we live on -- it's awe-inspiring.
I have a playlist of about 85 songs, and especially in the middle of the night ...
That night, because we use no lights -- lights attract jellyfish, lights attract sharks, lights attract baitfish that attract sharks, so we go in the pitch black of the night.
You've never seen black this black.
You can't see the front of your hand, and the people on the boat, Bonnie and my team on the boat -- they just hear the slapping of the arms, and they know where I am, because there's no visual at all.
And I'm out there kind of tripping out on my little playlist.
(Laughter) I've got tight rubber caps, I don't hear a thing.
I've got goggles and I'm turning my head 50 times a minute, and I'm singing ...
(Singing) Imagine there's no heaven (Laughter) doo doo doo doo doo It's easy if you try doo doo doo doo doo And I can sing that song a thousand times in a row.
(Laughter) Now there's a talent unto itself.
(Laughter) (Applause) And each time I get done with, (Singing) Oh, you may say I'm a dreamer but I'm not the only one 222.
(Singing) Imagine there's no heaven (Laughter) And when I get through the end of a thousand of John Lennon's "Imagine," I have swum nine hours and 45 minutes ...
exactly.
(Laughter) And then there are the crises.
And the vomiting starts, the seawater -- you're not well.
You're wearing a jellyfish mask for the ultimate protection.
It's difficult to swim in.
It's causing abrasions on the inside of the mouth, but the tentacles can't get you.
And the hypothermia sets in.
The water's 85 degrees, and yet you're losing weight and using calories.
And as you come over toward the side of the boat -- not allowed to touch it, not allowed to get out, but Bonnie and her team hand me nutrition and ask me how I'm doing, am I all right.
I am seeing the Taj Mahal -- (Laughter) Over here.
I'm in a very different state -- (Laughter) And I'm thinking, "Wow!
I never thought I'd be running into the Taj Mahal out here.
It's gorgeous!
I mean, how long did it take them to build that?
It's just ...
(Laughter) We kind of have a cardinal rule that I'm never told how far it is, because we don't know how far it is.
What's going to happen to you between this point and that point?
What's going to happen to the weather and the currents and, God forbid, you're stung, when you don't think you could be stung in all this armor.
Bonnie made a decision coming into that third morning that I was suffering, and I was hanging on by a thread.
And she said, "Come here," and I came close to the boat, and she said, "Look, look out there."
And I saw light, because the day is easier than the night, and I thought we were coming into day.
I saw a stream of white light along the horizon, and I said, "It's going to be morning soon."
And she said, "No, those are the lights of Key West."
It was 15 more hours, which for most swimmers would be a long time.
(Laughter) (Applause) You have no idea how many 15-hour training swims I had done.
So here we go, and I somehow, without a decision, went into no counting of strokes and no singing and no quoting Stephen Hawking on the parameters of the universe.
I just went into thinking about this dream, and why and how.
As I said, when I turned 60, it wasn't about that concrete "Can you do it?"
That's the everyday machinations.
That's the discipline, and it's the preparation, and there's a pride in that.
But I decided to think, as I went along, about -- you know, the phrase usually is, "reaching for the stars."
And in my case, it's reaching for the horizon.
And when you reach for the horizon, as I've proven, you may not get there.
But what a tremendous build of character and spirit that you lay down; what a foundation you lay down in reaching for those horizons.
And now, the shore is coming.
And there's just a little part of me that's sad.
The epic journey is going to be over.
So many people come up to me now and say, "What's next?"
(Laughter) "That little tracker on the computer?
When are you going to do the next one?
We can't wait to follow the next one."
Well, they were just there for 53 hours, and I was there for years.
And so there won't be another epic journey in the ocean.
But the point is, and the point was, that every day of our lives is epic.
And I'll tell you, when I walked up onto that beach, staggered up onto that beach ...
I had so many times, in a very puffed-up ego way, rehearsed what I would say ...
(Laughter) on the beach.
When Bonnie thought the back of my throat was swelling up, she brought the medical team over to our boat to say, "She's really beginning to have trouble breathing; another 12, 24 hours in the saltwater ..." -- the whole thing -- I just thought, in my hallucinatory moment, that I heard the word "tracheotomy."
(Laughter) Bonnie said to the doctor, "I'm not worried about her not breathing.
If she can't talk when she gets to the shore, she's going to be pissed off."
(Laughter) But the truth is, all those orations that I had practiced, just to get myself through some training swims as motivation -- it wasn't like that.
It was a very real moment, with that crowd, with my team.
We did it. I didn't do it. We did it.
And we'll never forget it. It'll always be part of us.
The three things I did sort of blurt out when we got there, was first: Never, ever give up.
I live it.
Diana Nyad: To be is to do.
So I don't stand up and say, "Don't ever give up."
I didn't give up.
The second is: You can chase your dreams at any age; you're never too old.
Sixty-four; a thing no one, at any age, any gender, could ever do has done it.
And there's no doubt in my mind that I am at the prime of my life today.
(Applause) Yeah.
(Applause) Thank you.
And the third thing I said on that beach was, it looks like the most solitary endeavor in the world, and in many ways, of course, it is.
And in other ways, and the most important ways, it's a team.
And if you think I'm a badass, you want to meet Bonnie.
(Laughter) Bonnie, where are you?
Where are you?
There's Bonnie Stoll.
(Applause) My buddy.
(Applause) The Henry David Thoreau quote goes, "When you achieve your dreams, it's not so much what you get as who you have become in achieving them."
And yeah, I stand before you now.
In the three months since that swim ended, I've sat down with Oprah, and I've been in President Obama's Oval Office; I've been invited to speak in front of esteemed groups such as yourselves; I've signed a wonderful major book contract.
All of that's great, and I don't denigrate it.
I'm proud of it all, but the truth is, I'm walking around tall because I am that bold, fearless person, and I will be, every day, until it's time for these days to be done.
Thank you very much and enjoy the conference.
Thank you. Thank you!
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you! Thank you.
(Applause) Find a way!
I want you to, for a moment, think about playing a game of Monopoly.
Except in this game, that combination of skill, talent and luck that helped earn you success in games, as in life, has been rendered irrelevant, because this game's been rigged, and you've got the upper hand.
You've got more money, more opportunities to move around the board, and more access to resources.
And as you think about that experience, I want you to ask yourself: How might that experience of being a privileged player in a rigged game change the way you think about yourself and regard that other player?
So, we ran a study on the UC Berkeley campus to look at exactly that question.
We brought in more than 100 pairs of strangers into the lab, and with the flip of a coin, randomly assigned one of the two to be a rich player in a rigged game.
They got two times as much money; when they passed Go, they collected twice the salary; and they got to roll both dice instead of one, so they got to move around the board a lot more.
(Laughter) And over the course of 15 minutes, we watched through hidden cameras what happened.
What I want to do today, for the first time, is show you a little bit of what we saw.
You'll to have to pardon the sound quality, because again, these were hidden cameras.
So we've provided subtitles.
[Video] Rich Player: How many 500s did you have?
Poor Player: Just one.
RP: Are you serious? PP: Yeah.
RP: I have three. (Laughs) I don't know why they gave me so much.
Paul Piff: So it was quickly apparent to players that something was up.
One person clearly has a lot more money than the other person, and yet, as the game unfolded, we saw very notable differences, dramatic differences begin to emerge between the two players.
The rich player started to move around the board louder, literally smacking the board with the piece as he went around.
(Game piece smacks board) We were more likely to see signs of dominance and nonverbal signs, displays of power and celebration among the rich players.
We had a bowl of pretzels positioned off to the side.
It's on the bottom right corner.
That allowed us to watch participants' consummatory behavior.
So we're just tracking how many pretzels participants eat.
[Video] RP: Are those pretzels a trick?
PP: I don't know.
Paul Piff: OK, so no surprises, people are on to us.
They wonder what that bowl of pretzels is doing there in the first place.
One even asks, like you just saw, "Is that bowl of pretzels there as a trick?"
And yet, despite that, the power of the situation seems to inevitably dominate, and those rich players start to eat more pretzels.
(Laughter) [Video] RP: I love pretzels.
(Laughter) Paul Piff: And as the game went on, one of the really interesting and dramatic patterns that we observed begin to emerge was that the rich players actually started to become ruder toward the other person -- less and less sensitive to the plight of those poor, poor players, and more and more demonstrative of their material success, more likely to showcase how well they're doing.
[Video] RP: I have money ...
PP: How much is that?
RP: You owe me 24 dollars.
You're going to lose all your money soon.
I'll buy it. I have so much money.
I have so much money, it takes me forever.
RP 2: I'm going to buy out this whole board.
RP 3: You're going to run out of money soon.
I'm pretty much untouchable at this point.
(Laughter) Paul Piff: And here's what I think was really, really interesting: it's that, at the end of the 15 minutes, we asked the players to talk about their experience during the game.
And when the rich players talked about why they had inevitably won in this rigged game of Monopoly ...
(Laughter) They talked about what they'd done to buy those different properties and earn their success in the game.
(Laughter) And they became far less attuned to all those different features of the situation -- including that flip of a coin -- that had randomly gotten them into that privileged position in the first place.
And that's a really, really incredible insight into how the mind makes sense of advantage.
Now, this game of Monopoly can be used as a metaphor for understanding society and its hierarchical structure, wherein some people have a lot of wealth and a lot of status, and a lot of people don't; they have a lot less wealth and a lot less status and a lot less access to valued resources.
And what my colleagues and I for the last seven years have been doing is studying the effects of these kinds of hierarchies.
What we've been finding across dozens of studies and thousands of participants across this country is that as a person's levels of wealth increase, their feelings of compassion and empathy go down, and their feelings of entitlement, of deservingness, and their ideology of self-interest increase.
In surveys, we've found that it's actually wealthier individuals who are more likely to moralize greed being good, and that the pursuit of self-interest is favorable and moral.
Now, what I want to do today is talk about some of the implications of this ideology self-interest, talk about why we should care about those implications, and end with what might be done.
Some of the first studies that we ran in this area looked at helping behavior, something social psychologists call "pro-social behavior."
And we were really interested in who's more likely to offer help to another person: someone who's rich or someone who's poor.
In one of the studies, we bring rich and poor members of the community into the lab, and give each of them the equivalent of 10 dollars.
We told the participants they could keep these 10 dollars for themselves, or they could share a portion of it, if they wanted to, with a stranger, who's totally anonymous.
They'll never meet that stranger; the stranger will never meet them.
And we just monitor how much people give.
Individuals who made 25,000, sometimes under 15,000 dollars a year, gave 44 percent more of their money to the stranger than did individuals making 150,000, 200,000 dollars a year.
We've had people play games to see who's more or less likely to cheat to increase their chances of winning a prize.
In one of the games, we actually rigged a computer so that die rolls over a certain score were impossible -- You couldn't get above 12 in this game, and yet ...
the richer you were, the more likely you were to cheat in this game to earn credits toward a $50 cash prize -- sometimes by three to four times as much.
We ran another study where we looked at whether people would be inclined to take candy from a jar of candy that we explicitly identified as being reserved for children -- (Laughter) I'm not kidding -- I know it sounds like I'm making a joke.
We explicitly told participants: "This candy is for children participating in a developmental lab nearby.
They're in studies. This is for them."
And we just monitored how much candy participants took.
Participants who felt rich took two times as much candy as participants who felt poor.
We've even studied cars.
Not just any cars, but whether drivers of different kinds of cars are more or less inclined to break the law.
In one of these studies, we looked at whether drivers would stop for a pedestrian that we had posed waiting to cross at a crosswalk.
Now in California, as you all know, because I'm sure we all do this, it's the law to stop for a pedestrian who's waiting to cross.
So here's an example of how we did it.
That's our confederate off to the left, posing as a pedestrian.
He approaches as the red truck successfully stops.
In typical California fashion, it's overtaken by the bus who almost runs our pedestrian over.
(Laughter) Now here's an example of a more expensive car, a Prius, driving through, and a BMW doing the same.
So we did this for hundreds of vehicles on several days, just tracking who stops and who doesn't.
What we found was as the expensiveness of a car increased ...
(Laughter) the drivers' tendencies to break the law increased as well.
None of the cars -- none of the cars -- in our least expensive car category broke the law.
Close to 50 percent of the cars in our most expensive vehicle category broke the law.
We've run other studies, finding that wealthier individuals are more likely to lie in negotiations, to endorse unethical behavior at work, like stealing cash from the cash register, taking bribes, lying to customers.
Now, I don't mean to suggest that it's only wealthy people who show these patterns of behavior.
Not at all -- in fact, I think that we all, in our day-to-day, minute-by-minute lives, struggle with these competing motivations of when or if to put our own interests above the interests of other people.
And that's understandable, because the American dream is an idea in which we all have an equal opportunity to succeed and prosper, as long as we apply ourselves and work hard.
And a piece of that means that sometimes, you need to put your own interests above the interests and well-being of other people around you.
But what we're finding is that the wealthier you are, the more likely you are to pursue a vision of personal success, of achievement and accomplishment, to the detriment of others around you.
Here I've plotted for you the mean household income received by each fifth and top five percent of the population over the last 20 years.
In 1993, the differences between the different quintiles of the population, in terms of income, are fairly egregious.
It's not difficult to discern that there are differences.
But over the last 20 years, that significant difference has become a Grand Canyon of sorts between those at the top and everyone else.
In fact, the top 20 percent of our population own close to 90 percent of the total wealth in this country.
We're at unprecedented levels of economic inequality.
What that means is that wealth is not only becoming increasingly concentrated in the hands of a select group of individuals, but the American dream is becoming increasingly unattainable for an increasing majority of us.
And if it's the case, as we've been finding, that the wealthier you are, the more entitled you feel to that wealth, and the more likely you are to prioritize your own interests above the interests of other people, and be willing to do things to serve that self-interest, well, then, there's no reason to think that those patterns will change.
In fact, there's every reason to think that they'll only get worse, and that's what it would look like if things just stayed the same, at the same linear rate, over the next 20 years.
Now inequality -- economic inequality -- is something we should all be concerned about, and not just because of those at the bottom of the social hierarchy, but because individuals and groups with lots of economic inequality do worse ...
not just the people at the bottom, everyone.
There's a lot of really compelling research coming out from top labs all over the world, showcasing the range of things that are undermined as economic inequality gets worse.
Social mobility, things we really care about, physical health, social trust, all go down as inequality goes up.
Similarly, negative things in social collectives and societies, things like obesity, and violence, imprisonment, and punishment, are exacerbated as economic inequality increases.
Again, these are outcomes not just experienced by a few, but that resound across all strata of society.
Even people at the top experience these outcomes.
So what do we do?
This cascade of self-perpetuating, pernicious, negative effects could seem like something that's spun out of control, and there's nothing we can do about it, certainly nothing we as individuals could do.
But in fact, we've been finding in our own laboratory research that small psychological interventions, small changes to people's values, small nudges in certain directions, can restore levels of egalitarianism and empathy.
For instance, reminding people of the benefits of cooperation or the advantages of community, cause wealthier individuals to be just as egalitarian as poor people.
In one study, we had people watch a brief video, just 46 seconds long, about childhood poverty that served as a reminder of the needs of others in the world around them.
And after watching that, we looked at how willing people were to offer up their own time to a stranger presented to them in the lab, who was in distress.
After watching this video, an hour later, rich people became just as generous of their own time to help out this other person, a stranger, as someone who's poor, suggesting that these differences are not innate or categorical, but are so malleable to slight changes in people's values, and little nudges of compassion and bumps of empathy.
And beyond the walls of our lab, we're even beginning to see signs of change in society.
Bill Gates, one of our nation's wealthiest individuals, in his Harvard commencement speech, talked about the problem of inequality facing society as being the most daunting challenge, and talked about what must be done to combat it, saying, "Humanity's greatest advances are not in its discoveries -- but in how those discoveries are applied to reduce inequity."
And there's the Giving Pledge, in which more than 100 of our nation's wealthiest individuals are pledging half of their fortunes to charity.
And there's the emergence of dozens of grassroots movements, like "We are the 1 percent," "Resource Generation," or "Wealth for Common Good," in which the most privileged members of the population, members of the one percent and elsewhere, people who are wealthy, are using their own economic resources, adults and youth alike -- that's what's most striking to me -- leveraging their own privilege, their own economic resources, to combat inequality by advocating for social policies, changes in social values and changes in people's behavior that work against their own economic interests, but that may ultimately restore the American dream.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hello, TEDWomen, what's up.
(Cheering) Not good enough.
Hello, TEDWomen, what is up?
(Loud cheering) My name is Maysoon Zayid, and I am not drunk, but the doctor who delivered me was.
He cut my mom six different times in six different directions, suffocating poor little me in the process.
As a result, I have cerebral palsy, which means I shake all the time.
Look.
It's exhausting.
I'm like Shakira, Shakira meets Muhammad Ali.
(Laughter) CP is not genetic.
It's not a birth defect. You can't catch it.
No one put a curse on my mother's uterus, and I didn't get it because my parents are first cousins, which they are.
(Laughter) It only happens from accidents, like what happened to me on my birth day.
Now, I must warn you, I'm not inspirational.
(Laughter) And I don't want anyone in this room to feel bad for me, because at some point in your life, you have dreamt of being disabled.
Come on a journey with me.
It's Christmas Eve, you're at the mall, you're driving around in circles looking for parking, and what do you see?
Sixteen empty handicapped spaces.
(Laughter) And you're like, "God, can't I just be a little disabled?"
(Laughter) Also, I've got to tell you, I've got 99 problems, and palsy is just one.
(Laughter) If there was an Oppression Olympics, I would win the gold medal.
I'm Palestinian, Muslim, I'm female, I'm disabled, and I live in New Jersey.
(Laughter) (Applause) If you don't feel better about yourself, maybe you should.
(Laughter) Cliffside Park, New Jersey is my hometown.
I have always loved the fact that my hood and my affliction share the same initials.
I also love the fact that if I wanted to walk from my house to New York City, I could.
A lot of people with CP don't walk, but my parents didn't believe in "can't."
My father's mantra was, "You can do it, yes you can can."
(Laughter) So, if my three older sisters were mopping, I was mopping.
If my three older sisters went to public school, my parents would sue the school system and guarantee that I went too, and if we didn't all get A's, we all got my mother's slipper.
(Laughter) My father taught me how to walk when I was five years old by placing my heels on his feet and just walking.
Another tactic that he used is he would dangle a dollar bill in front of me and have me chase it.
(Laughter) My inner stripper was very strong.
(Laughter) Yeah.
No, by the first day of kindergarten, I was walking like a champ who had been punched one too many times.
(Laughter) Growing up, there were only six Arabs in my town, and they were all my family.
(Laughter) Now there are 20 Arabs in town, and they are still all my family.
(Laughter) I don't think anyone even noticed we weren't Italian.
(Laughter) (Applause) This was before 9/11 and before politicians thought it was appropriate to use "I hate Muslims" as a campaign slogan.
The people that I grew up with had no problem with my faith.
They did, however, seem very concerned that I would starve to death during Ramadan.
I would explain to them that I have enough fat to live off of for three whole months, so fasting from sunrise to sunset is a piece of cake.
(Laughter) I have tap-danced on Broadway.
Yeah, on Broadway. It's crazy.
(Applause) My parents couldn't afford physical therapy, so they sent me to dancing school.
I learned how to dance in heels, which means I can walk in heels.
And I'm from Jersey, and we are really concerned with being chic, so if my friends wore heels, so did I.
And when my friends went and spent their summer vacations on the Jersey Shore, I did not.
I spent my summers in a war zone, because my parents were afraid that if we didn't go back to Palestine every single summer, we'd grow up to be Madonna.
(Laughter) Summer vacations often consisted of my father trying to heal me, so I drank deer's milk, I had hot cups on my back, I was dunked in the Dead Sea, and I remember the water burning my eyes and thinking, "It's working! It's working!"
(Laughter) But one miracle cure we did find was yoga.
I have to tell you, it's very boring, but before I did yoga, I was a stand-up comedian who can't stand up.
And now I can stand on my head.
My parents reinforced this notion that I could do anything, that no dream was impossible, and my dream was to be on the daytime soap opera "General Hospital."
(Laughter) I went to college during affirmative action and got a sweet scholarship to ASU, Arizona State University, because I fit every single quota.
(Laughter) I was like the pet lemur of the theater department.
Everybody loved me.
I did all the less-than-intelligent kids' homework, I got A's in all of my classes, A's in all of their classes.
(Laughter) Every time I did a scene from "The Glass Menagerie," my professors would weep.
But I never got cast.
Finally, my senior year, ASU decided to do a show called "They Dance Real Slow in Jackson."
It's a play about a girl with CP.
I was a girl with CP.
So I start shouting from the rooftops, "I'm finally going to get a part!
I have cerebral palsy!
Free at last! Free at last!
Thank God almighty, I'm free at last!"
I didn't get the part.
(Laughter) Sherry Brown got the part.
I went racing to the head of the theater department crying hysterically, like someone shot my cat, to ask her why, and she said it was because they didn't think I could do the stunts.
I said, "Excuse me, if I can't do the stunts, neither can the character."
(Laughter) (Applause) This was a part that I was literally born to play they gave it to a non-palsy actress.
College was imitating life.
Hollywood has a sordid history of casting able-bodied actors to play disabled onscreen.
Upon graduating, I moved back home, and my first acting gig was as an extra on a daytime soap opera.
My dream was coming true.
And I knew that I would be promoted from "Diner Diner" to "Wacky Best Friend" in no time.
(Laughter) But instead, I remained a glorified piece of furniture that you could only recognize from the back of my head, and it became clear to me that casting directors didn't hire fluffy, ethnic, disabled actors.
They only hired perfect people.
But there were exceptions to the rule.
I grew up watching Whoopi Goldberg, Roseanne Barr, Ellen, and all of these women had one thing in common: they were comedians.
So I became a comic.
(Laughter) (Applause) My first gig was driving famous comics from New York City to shows in New Jersey, and I'll never forget the face of the first comic I ever drove when he realized that he was speeding down the New Jersey Turnpike with a chick with CP driving him.
(Laughter) I've performed in clubs all over America, and I've also performed in Arabic in the Middle East, uncensored and uncovered.
(Laughter) Some people say I'm the first stand-up comic in the Arab world.
I never like to claim first, but I do know that they never heard that nasty little rumor that women aren't funny, and they find us hysterical.
(Laughter) In 2003, my brother from another mother and father Dean Obeidallah and I started the New York Arab-American Comedy Festival, now in its 10th year.
Our goal was to change the negative image of Arab-Americans in media, while also reminding casting directors that South Asian and Arab are not synonymous.
(Laughter) Mainstreaming Arabs was much, much easier than conquering the challenge against the stigma against disability.
My big break came in 2010.
I was invited to be a guest on the cable news show "Countdown with Keith Olbermann."
I walked in looking like I was going to the prom, and they shuffle me into a studio and seat me on a spinning, rolling chair.
(Laughter) So I looked at the stage manager and I'm like, "Excuse me, can I have another chair?"
And she looked at me and she went, "Five, four, three, two ..."
And we were live, right?
So I had to grip onto the anchor's desk so that I wouldn't roll off the screen during the segment, and when the interview was over, I was livid.
I had finally gotten my chance and I blew it, and I knew I would never get invited back.
But not only did Mr. Olbermann invite me back, he made me a full-time contributor, and he taped down my chair.
(Laughter) (Applause) One fun fact I learned while on the air with Keith Olbermann was that humans on the Internet are scumbags.
(Laughter) People say children are cruel, but I was never made fun of as a child or an adult.
Suddenly, my disability on the world wide web is fair game.
I would look at clips online and see comments like, "Yo, why's she tweakin'?"
"Yo, is she retarded?"
And my favorite, "Poor Gumby-mouth terrorist.
What does she suffer from?
We should really pray for her."
One commenter even suggested that I add my disability to my credits: screenwriter, comedian, palsy.
Disability is as visual as race.
If a wheelchair user can't play Beyoncé, then Beyoncé can't play a wheelchair user.
The disabled are the largest — Yeah, clap for that, man. Come on.
(Applause) People with disabilities are the largest minority in the world, and we are the most underrepresented in entertainment.
The doctors said that I wouldn't walk, but I am here in front of you.
However, if I grew up with social media, I don't think I would be.
I hope that together, we can create more positive images of disability in the media and in everyday life.
Perhaps if there were more positive images, it would foster less hate on the Internet.
Or maybe not.
Maybe it still takes a village to teach our children well.
My crooked journey has taken me to some very spectacular places.
I got to walk the red carpet flanked by soap diva Susan Lucci and the iconic Loreen Arbus.
I got to act in a movie with Adam Sandler and work with my idol, the amazing Dave Matthews.
I toured the world as a headliner on Arabs Gone Wild.
I was a delegate representing the great state of New Jersey at the 2008 DNC.
And I founded Maysoon's Kids, a charity that hopes to give Palestinian refugee children a sliver of the chance my parents gave me.
But the one moment that stands out the most was when I got -- before this moment -- (Laughter) (Applause) But the one moment that stands out the most was when I got to perform for the man who floats like a butterfly and stings like a bee, has Parkinson's and shakes just like me, Muhammad Ali.
(Applause) (Applause ends) It was the only time that my father ever saw me perform live, and I dedicate this talk to his memory.
(Arabic) Allah yerhamak yaba.
(English) My name is Maysoon Zayid, and if I can can, you can can.
(Cheering) (Applause)
I don't know about you, but I haven't quite figured out exactly what technology means in my life.
I've spent the past year thinking about what it really should be about.
Should I be pro-technology? Should I embrace it full arms?
Should I be wary? Like you, I'm very tempted by the latest thing.
But at the other hand, a couple of years ago I gave up all of my possessions, sold all my technology -- except for a bicycle -- and rode across 3,000 miles on the U.S. back roads under the power of my one body, fuelled mostly by Twinkies and junk food.
(Laughter) And I've since then tried to keep technology at arm's length in many ways, so it doesn't master my life.
At the same time, I run a website on cool tools, where I issue a daily obsession of the latest things in technology.
So I'm still perplexed about what the true meaning of technology is as it relates to humanity, as it relates to nature, as it relates to the spiritual.
And I'm not even sure we know what technology is.
And one definition of technology is that which is first recorded.
This is the first example of the modern use of technology that I can find.
It was the suggested syllabus for dealing with the Applied Arts and Science at Cambridge University in 1829.
Before that, obviously, technology didn't exist. But obviously it did.
I like one of the definitions that Alan Kay has for technology.
He says technology is anything that was invented after you were born.
(Laughter) So it sums up a lot of what we're talking about.
Danny Hillis actually has an update on that -- he says technology is anything that doesn't quite work yet.
(Laughter) Which also, I think, gets into a little bit of our current idea.
But I was interested in another definition of technology.
Something, again, that went back to something more fundamental.
Something that was deeper. And as I struggled to understand that, I came up with a way of framing the question that seemed to work for me in my investigations.
And I'm, this morning, going to talk about this for the first time.
So this is a very rough attempt to think out loud.
The question that I came up with was this question: what does technology want? And by that, I don't mean, does it want chocolate or vanilla? By what it wants, I mean, what are its inherent trends and biases?
What are its tendencies over time? One way to think about this is thinking about biological organisms, which we've heard a lot about.
And the trick that Richard Dawkins does, which is to say, to look at them as simply as genes, as vehicles for genes.
So he's saying, what do genes want? The selfish gene.
And I'm applying a similar trick to say, what if we looked at the universe in our culture through the eyes of technology? What does technology want?
Obviously, this in an incomplete question, just as looking at an organism as only a gene is an incomplete way of looking at it.
But it's still very, very productive. So I'm attempting to say, if we take technology's view of the world, what does it want?
And I think once we ask that question we have to go back, actually, to life. Because obviously, if we keep extending the origins of technology far back, I think we come back to life at some point.
So that's where I want to begin my little exploration, is in life.
And like you heard from the previous speakers, we don't really know what life there is on Earth right now.
We have really no idea.
Craig Venter's tremendous and brilliant attempt to DNA sequence things in the ocean is great.
Brian Farrell's work is all part of this agenda to try and actually discover all the species on Earth.
And one of the things that we should do is just make a grid of the globe and randomly go and inspect all the places that the grid intersects, just to see what's on life. And if we did that with our little Martian probe, which we have not done on Earth, we would begin to see some incredible species.
This is not on another planet. These are things that are hidden away on our planet.
This is an ant that stores its colleagues' honey in its abdomen.
Each one of these organisms that we've described -- that you've seen from Jamie and others, these magnificent things -- what they're doing, each one of them, is they're hacking the rules of life.
I can't think of a single general principle of biology that does not have an exception somewhere by some organism.
Every single thing that we can think of -- and if you heard Olivia's talk about the sexual habits, you'll realize that there isn't anything we can say that's true for all life, because every single one of them is hacking something about it.
This is a solar-powered sea slug. It's a nudibranch that has incorporated chloroplast inside it to drive its energy.
This is another version of that. This is a sea dragon, and the one on the bottom, the blue one, is a juvenile that has not yet swallowed the acid, has not yet taken in the brown-green algae pond scum into its body to give it energy.
These are hacks, and if we looked at the general shape of the approaches to hacking life there are, current consensus, six kingdoms. Six different broad approaches: the plants, the animals, the fungi, the protests -- the little things -- the bacteria and the Archaea bacteria. The Archaeas.
Those are the general approaches to life. That's one way to look at life on Earth today.
But a more interesting way, the current way to take the long view, is to look at it in an evolutionary perspective.
And here we have a view of evolution where rather than having evolution go over the linear time, we have it coming out from the center.
So in the center is the most primitive, and this is a genealogical chart of all life on earth. This is all the same six kingdoms.
You see 4,000 representative species, and you can see where we are.
But what I like about this is it shows that every living organism on Earth today is equally evolved.
Those fungi and bacteria are as highly evolved as humans.
They've been around just as long and gone through just the same kind of trial and error to get here.
But we see that each one of these is actually hacking, and has a different way of finding out how to do life.
And if we take the long-term trends of life, if we begin to say, what does evolution want? There's several things that we see.
One of the things about evolution is that nowhere on Earth have we ever been where we don't find life.
We find life at the bottom of every long-term, long-distance drilling core into the center of rock that we bring up -- and there's bacteria in the pores of that rock.
And wherever life is, it never retreats. It's ubiquitous and it wants to be more.
More and more of the inert matter of the globe is being touched and animated by life.
The second thing is is we see diversity. We also see specialization.
We see the movement from a general-purpose cell to the more specific and specialized.
And we see a drift towards complexity that's very intuitive.
And actually, we have current data that does show that there is an actual drift towards complexity over time.
And the last thing, I bring back this nudibranch.
One of the things we see about life is that it moves from the inner to increasing sociability. And by that it means that there is more and more of life whose entire environment is other life.
Like those chloroplast cells -- they're completely surrounded by other life.
They never touch the inner matter. There is more and more co-evolution.
And so the general, long-term trends of evolution are roughly these five: ubiquity, diversity, specialization, complexity and socialization. Now, I took that and said, OK, what are the long-term trends in technology?
And again, my question is, what does technology want?
And so, remarkably, I discovered that there's also a drift toward specialization.
That we see there's a general hammer, and hammers become more and more specific over time.
There's obviously diversity. Huge numbers of things.
This is all the contents of a Japanese home.
I actually had my daughter -- gave her a tally counter, and I gave her an assignment last summer to go around and count the number of species of technology in our household.
And it came up with 6,000 different species of products.
I did some research and found out that the King of England, Henry VIII, had only about 7,000 items in his household.
And he was the King of England, and that was the entire wealth of England at the time.
So we're seeing huge numbers of diversity in the kinds of things.
This is a scene from Star Wars where the 3PO comes out and he sees machines making machines. How depraved!
Well, this is actually what we're headed towards: world machines.
And the technology is only being thrown out by other technologies.
Most machines will only ever be in contact with other technology and not non-technology, or even life.
And thirdly, the idea that machines are becoming biological and complex is at this point a cliche. And I'm happy to say, I was partly responsible for that cliche that machines are becoming biological, but that's pretty evident.
So the major trends in technology evolution actually are the same as in biological evolution. The same drives that we see towards ubiquity, towards diversity, towards socialization, towards complexity. That is maybe not a big surprise because if we map out, say, the evolution of armor, you can actually follow a sort of an evolutionary-type cladistic tree.
I suggest that, in fact, technology is the seventh kingdom of life.
That its operations and how it works is so similar that we can think of it as the seventh kingdom.
And so it would be sort of approximately up there, coming out of the animal kingdom. And if we were to do that, we would find out -- we could actually approach technology in this way.
This is Niles Eldredge. He was the co-developer with Stephen Jay Gould of the theory of punctuated equilibrium.
But as a sideline, he happens to collect cornets.
He has one of the world's largest collections -- about 500 of them.
And he has decided to treat them as if they were trilobites, or snails, and to do a morphological analysis, and try to derive their genealogical history over time.
This is his chart, which is not quite published yet.
But the most interesting aspect about this is that if you look at those red lines at the bottom, those indicate basically a parentage of a type of cornet that was no longer made. That does not happen in biology.
When something is extinct, you can't have it as your parent.
But that does happen in technology. And it turns out that that's so distinctive that you can actually look at this tree, and you can actually use it to determine that this is a technological system versus a biological system.
In fact, this idea of resurrecting the whole idea is so important that I began to think about what happens with old technology.
And it turns out that, in fact, technologies don't die.
So I suggested this to an historian of science, and he said, "Well, what about, you know, come on, what about steam cars?
They're not around anymore." Well actually, they are.
In fact, they're so around that you can buy new parts for a Stanley steam automobile.
And this is a website of a guy who's selling brand new parts for the Stanley automobile. And the thing that I liked is sort of this one-click, add-to-your-cart button -- (Laughter) -- for buying steam valves. I mean, it was just -- it was really there.
And so, I began to think about, well, maybe that's just a random sample.
Maybe I should do this sort of in a more conservative way.
So I took the great big 1895 Montgomery Ward's catalog and I randomly went through it. And I took a page -- not quite a random page -- I took a page that was actually more difficult than others because lots of the pages are filled with things that are still being made. But I took this page and I said, how many of these things are still being made?
And not antiques. I want to know how many of these things are still in production.
And the answer is: all of them.
All of them are still being produced. So you've got corn shellers.
I don't know who needs a corn sheller.
Be it corn shellers -- you've got ploughs; you've got fan mills; all these things -- and these are not, again, antiques. These are -- you can order these. You can go to the web and you can buy them now, brand-new made. So in a certain sense, technologies don't die.
In fact, you can buy, for 50 bucks, a stone-age knife made exactly the same way that they were made 10,000 years ago.
It's short, bone handle, 50 bucks. And in fact, what's important is that this information actually never died out.
It's not just that it was resurrected. It's continued all along.
And in Papua New Guinea, they were making stone axes until two decades ago, just as a course of practical matters.
Even when we try to get rid of a technology, it's actually very hard.
So we've all heard about the Amish giving up cars.
We've heard about the Japanese giving up guns.
We've heard about this and that. But I actually went back and took what I could find, the examples in history where there have been prohibitions against technology, and then I tried to find out when they came back in, because they always came back in. And it turns out that the time, the duration of when they were outlawed and prohibited, is decreasing over time. And that basically, you can delay technology, but you can't kill it. So this makes sense, because in a certain sense what culture is, is the accumulation of ideas.
That's what it's for. It's so that ideas don't die out.
And when we take that, we take this idea of what culture is doing and add it to what the long-term trajectory -- again, in life's evolution -- we find that each case -- each of the major transitions in life -- what they're really about is accelerating and changing the way in which evolution happens.
They're actually changing the way in which ideas are generated.
So all these steps in evolution are increasing, basically, the evolution of evolvability.
So what's happening over time in life is that the ways in which you generate these new ideas, these new hacks, are increasing. And the real tricks are ways in which you kind of explore the way of exploring.
And then what we see in the singularity, that prophesized by Kurzweil and others -- his idea that technology is accelerating evolution.
It's accelerating the way in which we search for ideas.
So if you have life hacking -- life means hacking, the game of survival -- then evolution is a way to extend the game by changing the rules of the game.
And what technology is really about is better ways to evolve.
That is what we call an "infinite game."
That's the definition of "infinite game." A finite game is play to win, and an infinite game is played to keep playing.
And I believe that technology is actually a cosmic force.
The origins of technology was not in 1829, but was actually at the beginning of the Big Bang, and at that moment the entire huge billions of stars in the universe were compressed. The entire universe was compressed into a little quantum dot, and it was so tight in there, there was no room for any difference at all.
That's the definition. There was no temperature.
There was no difference whatsoever. And at the Big Bang, what it expanded was the potential for difference.
So as it expands and as things expand what we have is the potential for differences, diversity, options, choices, opportunities, possibilities and freedoms.
Those are all basically the same thing.
And those are the things that technology brings us.
That's what technology is bringing us: choices, possibilities, freedoms.
That's what it's about. It's this expansion of room to make differences.
And so a hammer, when we grab a hammer, that's what we're grabbing.
And that's why we continue to grab technology -- because we want those things. Those things are good.
Differences, freedom, choices, possibilities.
And each time we make a new opportunity place, we're allowing a platform to make new ones.
And I think it's really important. Because if you can imagine Mozart before the technology of the piano was invented -- what a loss to society there would be.
Imagine Van Gogh being born before the technologies of cheap oil paints.
Imagine Hitchcock before the technologies of film.
Somewhere, today, there are millions of young children being born whose technology of self-expression has not yet been invented.
We have a moral obligation to invent technology so that every person on the globe has the potential to realize their true difference.
We want a trillion zillion species of one individuals.
That's what technology really wants.
I'm going to skip through some of the objections because I don't have answers to why there's deforestation.
I don't have an answer to the fact that there seem to be bad technologies. I don't have an answer to how this impacts on our dignity, other than to suggest that maybe the seventh kingdom, because it's so close to what life is about, maybe we can bring it back and have it help us monitor life.
Maybe in some ways the fact that what we're trying to do with technology is find a good home for it.
It's a terrible thing to spray DDT on cotton fields, but it's a really good thing to use to eliminate millions of cases of death due to malaria in a small village.
Our humanity is actually defined by technology.
All the things that we think that we really like about humanity is being driven by technology. This is the infinite game.
That's what we're talking about.
You see, technology is a way to evolve the evolution.
It's a way to explore possibilities and opportunities and create more.
And it's actually a way of playing the game, of playing all the games.
That's what technology wants.
And so when I think about what technology wants, I think that it has to do with the fact that every person here -- and I really believe this -- every person here has an assignment. And your assignment is to spend your life discovering what your assignment is.
That recursive nature is the infinite game.
And if you play that well, you'll have other people involved, so even that game extends and continues even when you're gone.
That is the infinite game. And what technology is is the medium in which we play that infinite game.
And so I think that we should embrace technology because it is an essential part of our journey in finding out who we are.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I live and work from Tokyo, Japan.
And I specialize in human behavioral research, and applying what we learn to think about the future in different ways, and to design for that future.
And you know, to be honest, I've been doing this for seven years, and I haven't got a clue what the future is going to be like.
But I've got a pretty good idea how people will behave when they get there.
This is my office. It's out there.
It's not in the lab, and it's increasingly in places like India, China, Brazil, Africa.
We live on a planet -- 6.3 billion people.
About three billion people, by the end of this year, will have cellular connectivity.
And it'll take about another two years to connect the next billion after that.
And I mention this because, if we want to design for that future, we need to figure out what those people are about.
And that's, kind of, where I see what my job is and what our team's job is.
Our research often starts with a very simple question.
So I'll give you an example. What do you carry?
If you think of everything in your life that you own, when you walk out that door, what do you consider to take with you?
When you're looking around, what do you consider?
Of that stuff, what do you carry?
And of that stuff, what do you actually use?
So this is interesting to us, because the conscious and subconscious decision process implies that the stuff that you do take with you and end up using has some kind of spiritual, emotional or functional value.
And to put it really bluntly, you know, people are willing to pay for stuff that has value, right?
So I've probably done about five years' research looking at what people carry.
I go in people's bags. I look in people's pockets, purses.
I go in their homes. And we do this worldwide, and we follow them around town with video cameras.
It's kind of like stalking with permission.
And we do all this -- and to go back to the original question, what do people carry?
And it turns out that people carry a lot of stuff.
OK, that's fair enough.
But if you ask people what the three most important things that they carry are -- across cultures and across gender and across contexts -- most people will say keys, money and, if they own one, a mobile phone.
And I'm not saying this is a good thing, but this is a thing, right?
I mean, I couldn't take your phones off you if I wanted to.
You'd probably kick me out, or something.
OK, it might seem like an obvious thing for someone who works for a mobile phone company to ask.
But really, the question is, why? Right?
So why are these things so important in our lives?
And it turns out, from our research, that it boils down to survival -- survival for us and survival for our loved ones.
So, keys provide an access to shelter and warmth -- transport as well, in the U.S. increasingly.
Money is useful for buying food, sustenance, among all its other uses.
And a mobile phone, it turns out, is a great recovery tool.
If you prefer this kind of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, those three objects are very good at supporting the lowest rungs in Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
Yes, they do a whole bunch of other stuff, but they're very good at this.
And in particular, it's the mobile phone's ability to allow people to transcend space and time.
And what I mean by that is, you know, you can transcend space by simply making a voice call, right?
And you can transcend time by sending a message at your convenience, and someone else can pick it up at their convenience.
And this is fairly universally appreciated, it turns out, which is why we have three billion plus people who have been connected.
And they value that connectivity.
But actually, you can do this kind of stuff with PCs.
And you can do them with phone kiosks.
And the mobile phone, in addition, is both personal -- and so it also gives you a degree of privacy -- and it's convenient.
You don't need to ask permission from anyone, you can just go ahead and do it, right?
However, for these things to help us survive, it depends on them being carried.
But -- and it's a pretty big but -- we forget.
We're human, that's what we do. It's one of our features.
I think, quite a nice feature.
So we forget, but we're also adaptable, and we adapt to situations around us pretty well.
And so we have these strategies to remember, and one of them was mentioned yesterday.
And it's, quite simply, the point of reflection.
And that's that moment when you're walking out of a space, and you turn around, and quite often you tap your pockets.
Even women who keep stuff in their bags tap their pockets.
And you turn around, and you look back into the space, and some people talk aloud.
And pretty much everyone does it at some point.
OK, the next thing is -- most of you, if you have a stable home life, and what I mean is that you don't travel all the time, and always in hotels, but most people have what we call a center of gravity.
And a center of gravity is where you keep these objects.
And these things don't stay in the center of gravity, but over time, they gravitate there.
It's where you expect to find stuff.
And in fact, when you're turning around, and you're looking inside the house, and you're looking for this stuff, this is where you look first, right?
OK, so when we did this research, we found the absolutely, 100 percent, guaranteed way to never forget anything ever, ever again.
And that is, quite simply, to have nothing to remember.
(Laughter) OK, now, that sounds like something you get on a Chinese fortune cookie, right?
But is, in fact, about the art of delegation.
And from a design perspective, it's about understanding what you can delegate to technology and what you can delegate to other people.
And it turns out, delegation -- if you want it to be -- can be the solution for pretty much everything, apart from things like bodily functions, going to the toilet.
You can't ask someone to do that on your behalf.
And apart from things like entertainment, you wouldn't pay for someone to go to the cinema for you and have fun on your behalf, or, at least, not yet.
Maybe sometime in the future, we will.
So, let me give you an example of delegation in practice, right.
So this is -- probably the thing I'm most passionate about is the research that we've been doing on illiteracy and how people who are illiterate communicate.
So, the U.N. estimated -- this is 2004 figures -- that there are almost 800 million people who can't read and write, worldwide.
So, we've been conducting a lot of research.
And one of the things we were looking at is -- if you can't read and write, if you want to communicate over distances, you need to be able to identify the person that you want to communicate with.
It could be a phone number, it could be an e-mail address, it could be a postal address.
Simple question: if you can't read and write, how do you manage your contact information?
And the fact is that millions of people do it.
Just from a design perspective, we didn't really understand how they did it, and so that's just one small example of the kind of research that we were doing.
And it turns out that illiterate people are masters of delegation.
So they delegate that part of the task process to other people, the stuff that they can't do themselves.
Let me give you another example of delegation.
This one's a little bit more sophisticated, and this is from a study that we did in Uganda about how people who are sharing devices, use those devices.
Sente is a word in Uganda that means money.
It has a second meaning, which is to send money as airtime. OK?
And it works like this.
So let's say, June, you're in a village, rural village.
I'm in Kampala and I'm the wage earner.
I'm sending money back, and it works like this.
So, in your village, there's one person in the village with a phone, and that's the phone kiosk operator.
And it's quite likely that they'd have a quite simple mobile phone as a phone kiosk.
So what I do is, I buy a prepaid card like this.
And instead of using that money to top up my own phone, I call up the local village operator.
And I read out that number to them, and they use it to top up their phone.
So, they're topping up the value from Kampala, and it's now being topped up in the village.
You take a 10 or 20 percent commission, and then you -- the kiosk operator takes 10 or 20 percent commission, and passes the rest over to you in cash.
OK, there's two things I like about this.
So the first is, it turns anyone who has access to a mobile phone -- anyone who has a mobile phone -- essentially into an ATM machine.
It brings rudimentary banking services to places where there's no banking infrastructure.
And even if they could have access to the banking infrastructure, they wouldn't necessarily be considered viable customers, because they're not wealthy enough to have bank accounts.
There's a second thing I like about this.
And that is that despite all the resources at my disposal, and despite all our kind of apparent sophistication, I know I could never have designed something as elegant and as totally in tune with the local conditions as this. OK?
And, yes, there are things like Grameen Bank and micro-lending.
But the difference between this and that is, there's no central authority trying to control this.
This is just street-up innovation.
So, it turns out the street is a never-ending source of inspiration for us.
And OK, if you break one of these things here, you return it to the carrier.
They'll give you a new one.
They'll probably give you three new ones, right?
I mean, that's buy three, get one free. That kind of thing.
If you go on the streets of India and China, you see this kind of stuff.
And this is where they take the stuff that breaks, and they fix it, and they put it back into circulation.
This is from a workbench in Jilin City, in China, and you can see people taking down a phone and putting it back together.
They reverse-engineer manuals.
This is a kind of hacker's manual, and it's written in Chinese and English.
They also write them in Hindi.
You can subscribe to these.
There are training institutes where they're churning out people for fixing these things as well.
But what I like about this is, it boils down to someone on the street with a small, flat surface, a screwdriver, a toothbrush for cleaning the contact heads -- because they often get dust on the contact heads -- and knowledge.
And it's all about the social network of the knowledge, floating around.
And I like this because it challenges the way that we design stuff, and build stuff, and potentially distribute stuff.
It challenges the norms.
OK, for me the street just raises so many different questions.
Like, this is Viagra that I bought from a backstreet sex shop in China.
And China is a country where you get a lot of fakes.
And I know what you're asking -- did I test it?
I'm not going to answer that, OK.
But I look at something like this, and I consider the implications of trust and confidence in the purchase process.
And we look at this and we think, well, how does that apply, for example, for the design of -- the lessons from this -- apply to the design of online services, future services in these markets?
This is a pair of underpants from -- (Laughter) -- from Tibet.
And I look at something like this, and honestly, you know, why would someone design underpants with a pocket, right?
And I look at something like this and it makes me question, if we were to take all the functionality in things like this, and redistribute them around the body in some kind of personal area network, how would we prioritize where to put stuff?
And yes, this is quite trivial, but actually the lessons from this can apply to that kind of personal area networks.
And what you see here is a couple of phone numbers written above the shack in rural Uganda.
This doesn't have house numbers. This has phone numbers.
So what does it mean when people's identity is mobile?
When those extra three billion people's identity is mobile, it isn't fixed?
Your notion of identity is out-of-date already, OK, for those extra three billion people.
This is how it's shifting.
And then I go to this picture here, which is the one that I started with.
And this is from Delhi.
It's from a study we did into illiteracy, and it's a guy in a teashop.
You can see the chai being poured in the background.
And he's a, you know, incredibly poor teashop worker, on the lowest rungs in the society.
And he, somehow, has the appreciation of the values of Livestrong.
And it's not necessarily the same values, but some kind of values of Livestrong, to actually go out and purchase them, and actually display them.
For me, this kind of personifies this connected world, where everything is intertwined, and the dots are -- it's all about the dots joining together.
OK, the title of this presentation is "Connections and Consequences," and it's really a kind of summary of five years of trying to figure out what it's going to be like when everyone on the planet has the ability to transcend space and time in a personal and convenient manner, right?
When everyone's connected.
And there are four things.
So, the first thing is the immediacy of ideas, the speed at which ideas go around.
And I know TED is about big ideas, but actually, the benchmark for a big idea is changing.
If you want a big idea, you need to embrace everyone on the planet, that's the first thing.
The second thing is the immediacy of objects.
And what I mean by that is, as these become smaller, as the functionality that you can access through this becomes greater -- things like banking, identity -- these things quite simply move very quickly around the world.
And so the speed of the adoption of things is just going to become that much more rapid, in a way that we just totally cannot conceive, when you get it to 6.3 billion and the growth in the world's population.
The next thing is that, however we design this stuff -- carefully design this stuff -- the street will take it, and will figure out ways to innovate, as long as it meets base needs -- the ability to transcend space and time, for example.
And it will innovate in ways that we cannot anticipate.
In ways that, despite our resources, they can do it better than us.
That's my feeling.
And if we're smart, we'll look at this stuff that's going on, and we'll figure out a way to enable it to inform and infuse both what we design and how we design.
And the last thing is that -- actually, the direction of the conversation.
With another three billion people connected, they want to be part of the conversation.
And I think our relevance and TED's relevance is really about embracing that and learning how to listen, essentially.
And we need to learn how to listen.
So thank you very, very much.
(Applause)
Three and a half years ago, I made one of the best decisions of my life.
As my New Year's resolution, I gave up dieting, stopped worrying about my weight, and learned to eat mindfully.
Now I eat whenever I'm hungry, and I've lost 10 pounds.
This was me at age 13, when I started my first diet.
I look at that picture now, and I think, you did not need a diet, you needed a fashion consult.
(Laughter) But I thought I needed to lose weight, and when I gained it back, of course I blamed myself.
And for the next three decades, I was on and off various diets.
No matter what I tried, the weight I'd lost always came back.
I'm sure many of you know the feeling.
As a neuroscientist, I wondered, why is this so hard?
Obviously, how much you weigh depends on how much you eat and how much energy you burn.
What most people don't realize is that hunger and energy use are controlled by the brain, mostly without your awareness.
Your brain does a lot of its work behind the scenes, and that is a good thing, because your conscious mind -- how do we put this politely? -- it's easily distracted.
It's good that you don't have to remember to breathe when you get caught up in a movie.
You don't forget how to walk because you're thinking about what to have for dinner.
Your brain also has its own sense of what you should weigh, no matter what you consciously believe.
This is called your set point, but that's a misleading term, because it's actually a range of about 10 or 15 pounds.
You can use lifestyle choices to move your weight up and down within that range, but it's much, much harder to stay outside of it.
The hypothalamus, the part of the brain that regulates body weight, there are more than a dozen chemical signals in the brain that tell your body to gain weight, more than another dozen that tell your body to lose it, and the system works like a thermostat, responding to signals from the body by adjusting hunger, activity and metabolism, to keep your weight stable as conditions change.
That's what a thermostat does, right?
It keeps the temperature in your house the same as the weather changes outside.
Now you can try to change the temperature in your house by opening a window in the winter, but that's not going to change the setting on the thermostat, which will respond by kicking on the furnace to warm the place back up.
Your brain works exactly the same way, responding to weight loss by using powerful tools to push your body back to what it considers normal.
If you lose a lot of weight, your brain reacts as if you were starving, and whether you started out fat or thin, your brain's response is exactly the same.
We would love to think that your brain could tell whether you need to lose weight or not, but it can't.
If you do lose a lot of weight, you become hungry, and your muscles burn less energy.
Dr. Rudy Leibel of Columbia University has found that people who have lost 10 percent of their body weight burn 250 to 400 calories less because their metabolism is suppressed.
That's a lot of food.
This means that a successful dieter must eat this much less forever than someone of the same weight who has always been thin.
From an evolutionary perspective, your body's resistance to weight loss makes sense.
When food was scarce, our ancestors' survival depended on conserving energy, and regaining the weight when food was available would have protected them against the next shortage.
Over the course of human history, starvation has been a much bigger problem than overeating.
This may explain a very sad fact: Set points can go up, but they rarely go down.
Now, if your mother ever mentioned that life is not fair, this is the kind of thing she was talking about.
(Laughter) Successful dieting doesn't lower your set point.
Even after you've kept the weight off for as long as seven years, your brain keeps trying to make you gain it back.
If that weight loss had been due to a long famine, that would be a sensible response.
In our modern world of drive-thru burgers, it's not working out so well for many of us.
That difference between our ancestral past and our abundant present is the reason that Dr. Yoni Freedhoff of the University of Ottawa would like to take some of his patients back to a time when food was less available, and it's also the reason that changing the food environment is really going to be the most effective solution to obesity.
Sadly, a temporary weight gain can become permanent.
If you stay at a high weight for too long, probably a matter of years for most of us, your brain may decide that that's the new normal.
Psychologists classify eaters into two groups, those who rely on their hunger and those who try to control their eating through willpower, like most dieters.
Let's call them intuitive eaters and controlled eaters.
The interesting thing is that intuitive eaters are less likely to be overweight, and they spend less time thinking about food.
Controlled eaters are more vulnerable to overeating in response to advertising, super-sizing, and the all-you-can-eat buffet.
And a small indulgence, like eating one scoop of ice cream, is more likely to lead to a food binge in controlled eaters.
Children are especially vulnerable to this cycle of dieting and then binging.
Several long-term studies have shown that girls who diet in their early teenage years are three times more likely to become overweight five years later, even if they started at a normal weight, and all of these studies found that the same factors that predicted weight gain also predicted the development of eating disorders.
The other factor, by the way, those of you who are parents, was being teased by family members about their weight.
So don't do that.
(Laughter) I left almost all my graphs at home, but I couldn't resist throwing in just this one, because I'm a geek, and that's how I roll.
(Laughter) This is a study that looked at the risk of death over a 14-year period based on four healthy habits: eating enough fruits and vegetables, exercise three times a week, not smoking, and drinking in moderation.
Let's start by looking at the normal weight people in the study.
The height of the bars is the risk of death, and those zero, one, two, three, four numbers on the horizontal axis are the number of those healthy habits that a given person had.
And as you'd expect, the healthier the lifestyle, the less likely people were to die during the study.
Now let's look at what happens in overweight people.
The ones that had no healthy habits had a higher risk of death.
Adding just one healthy habit pulls overweight people back into the normal range.
For obese people with no healthy habits, the risk is very high, seven times higher than the healthiest groups in the study.
But a healthy lifestyle helps obese people too.
In fact, if you look only at the group with all four healthy habits, you can see that weight makes very little difference.
You can take control of your health by taking control of your lifestyle, even If you can't lose weight and keep it off.
Diets don't have very much reliability.
Five years after a diet, most people have regained the weight.
Forty percent of them have gained even more.
If you think about this, the typical outcome of dieting is that you're more likely to gain weight in the long run than to lose it.
If I've convinced you that dieting might be a problem, the next question is, what do you do about it?
And my answer, in a word, is mindfulness.
I'm not saying you need to learn to meditate or take up yoga.
I'm talking about mindful eating: learning to understand your body's signals so that you eat when you're hungry and stop when you're full, because a lot of weight gain boils down to eating when you're not hungry.
How do you do it?
Give yourself permission to eat as much as you want, and then work on figuring out what makes your body feel good.
Sit down to regular meals without distractions.
Think about how your body feels when you start to eat and when you stop, and let your hunger decide when you should be done.
It took about a year for me to learn this, but it's really been worth it.
I am so much more relaxed around food than I have ever been in my life.
I often don't think about it.
I forget we have chocolate in the house.
It's like aliens have taken over my brain.
It's just completely different.
I should say that this approach to eating probably won't make you lose weight unless you often eat when you're not hungry, but doctors don't know of any approach that makes significant weight loss in a lot of people, and that is why a lot of people are now focusing on preventing weight gain instead of promoting weight loss.
Let's face it: If diets worked, we'd all be thin already.
(Laughter) Why do we keep doing the same thing and expecting different results?
Diets may seem harmless, but they actually do a lot of collateral damage.
At worst, they ruin lives: Weight obsession leads to eating disorders, especially in young kids.
In the U.S., we have 80 percent of 10-year-old girls say they've been on a diet.
Our daughters have learned to measure their worth by the wrong scale.
Even at its best, dieting is a waste of time and energy.
It takes willpower which you could be using to help your kids with their homework or to finish that important work project, and because willpower is limited, any strategy that relies on its consistent application is pretty much guaranteed to eventually fail you when your attention moves on to something else.
Let me leave you with one last thought.
What if we told all those dieting girls that it's okay to eat when they're hungry?
What if we taught them to work with their appetite instead of fearing it?
I think most of them would be happier and healthier, and as adults, many of them would probably be thinner.
I wish someone had told me that back when I was 13.
Thanks.
(Applause)
So this is a picture of my dad and me, at the beach in Far Rockaway, or actually Rockaway Park.
I'm the one with the blond hair.
My dad's the guy with the cigarette.
It was the 60's.
In the summer of 2009, my dad was diagnosed with lung cancer.
Cancer is one of those things that actually touches everybody.
If you're a man in the US, you've got about a one in two chance of being diagnosed with cancer during your lifetime.
If you're a woman, you've got about a one in three chance of being diagnosed with cancer.
Everybody knows somebody who's been diagnosed with cancer.
Now, my dad's doing better today, and part of the reason for that is that he was able to participate in the trial of an experimental new drug that happened to be specially formulated and very good for his particular kind of cancer.
There are over 200 kinds of cancer.
And what I want to talk about today is how we can help more people like my dad, because we have to change the way we think about raising money to fund cancer research.
So a while after my dad was diagnosed, I was having coffee with my friend Andrew Lo.
He's the head of the Laboratory for Financial Engineering at MIT, where I also have a position, and we were talking about cancer.
And Andrew had been doing his own bits of research, and one of the things that he had been told and that he'd learned from studying the literature was that there's actually a big bottleneck.
It's very difficult to develop new drugs, and the reason it's difficult to develop new drugs is because in the early stages of drug development, the drugs are very risky, and they're very expensive.
So Andrew asked me if I'd want to maybe work with him a bit, work on some of the math and the analytics and see if we could figure out something we could do.
Now I'm not a scientist.
You know, I don't know how to build a drug.
And none of my coauthors, Andrew Lo or Jose-Maria Fernandez or David Fagnan -- none of those guys are scientists either.
We don't know the first thing about how to make a cancer drug.
But we know a little bit about risk mitigation and a little bit about financial engineering, and so we started thinking, what could we do?
I'm going to tell you about some work we've been doing over the last couple years that we think could fundamentally change the way research for cancer and lots of other things gets done.
We want to let the research drive the funding, not the other way around.
So in order to get started, let me tell you how you get a drug financed.
Imagine that you're in your lab -- you're a scientist, you're not like me -- and you've developed a new compound that you think might be therapeutic for somebody with cancer.
Well, what you do is, you test in animals, you test in test tubes, but there's this notion of going from the bench to the bedside, and in order to get from the bench, the lab, to the bedside, to the patients, you've got to get the drug tested.
And the way the drug gets tested is through a series of, basically, experiments, through these large, they're called trials, that they do to determine whether the drug is safe and whether it works and all these things.
So the FDA has a very specific protocol.
In the first phase of this testing, which is called testing for toxicity, it's called Phase I.
In the first phase, you give the drug to healthy people and you see if it actually makes them sick.
In other words, are the side effects just so severe that no matter how much good it does, it's not going to be worth it?
Does it cause heart attacks, kill people, liver failure?
And it turns out, that's a pretty high hurdle.
About a third of all drugs drop out at that point.
In the next phase, you test to see if the drug's effective, and you give it to people with cancer and you see if it makes them better.
And that's also a higher hurdle. People drop out.
And in the third phase, you test it on a very large sample, and you're trying to determine what the right dose is, is it better than what's available today? If not, then why build it?
When you're done with all that, what you have is a very small percentage of drugs that start the process actually come out the other side.
So those blue bottles -- those blue bottles save lives, and they're also worth billions, sometimes billions a year.
So now here's a question: if I were to ask you, for example, to make a one-time investment of, say, 200 million dollars to buy one of those bottles, so 200 million dollars up front, one time, to buy one of those bottles, I won't tell you which one it is, and in 10 years, I'll tell you whether you have one of the blue ones.
Does that sound like a good deal for anybody?
No. No, right?
And of course, it's a very, very risky trial position, and that's why it's very hard to get funding, but to a first approximation, that's actually the proposal.
You have to fund these things from the early stages on.
So Andrew said to me, he said, "What if we stop thinking about these as drugs?
What if we start thinking about them as financial assets?"
They've got really weird payoff structures and all that, but let's throw everything we know about financial engineering at them.
Let's see if we can use all the tricks of the trade to figure out how to make these drugs work as financial assets.
Let's create a giant fund.
In finance, we know what to do with assets that are risky.
You put them in a portfolio and you try to smooth out the returns.
So we did some math, and it turned out you could make this work, but in order to make it work, you need about 80 to 150 drugs.
Now the good news is, there's plenty of drugs that are waiting to be tested.
We've been told that there's a backlog of about 20 years of drugs that are waiting to be tested but can't be funded.
In fact, that early stage of the funding process, that Phase I and preclinical stuff, that's actually, in the industry, called the Valley of Death because it's where drugs go to die.
It's very hard to for them to get through there, and of course, if you can't get through there, you can't get to the later stages.
So we did this math, and we figured out, OK, well, you need about 80 to, say, 150, or something like that, drugs.
And then we did a little more math, and we said, OK, well, that's a fund of about three to 15 billion dollars.
So we kind of created a new problem by solving the old one.
We got rid of the risk, but now we need a lot of capital, and you can only get that kind of capital in the capital markets.
Venture capitalists and philanthropies don't have it.
But we have to figure out how to get people in the capital markets, who traditionally don't invest in this, to want to invest in this stuff.
So again, financial engineering was helpful here.
Imagine the megafund starts empty, and what it does is it issues some debt and some equity, and that generates cash flow.
That cash flow is used, then, to buy that big portfolio of drugs that you need, and those drugs start working their way through that approval process, and each time they go through a phase of approval, they gain value.
Most of them don't make it, but a few of them do, and with the ones that gain value, you can sell some, and when you sell them, you have money to pay the interest on those bonds, but also to fund the next round of trials.
It's almost self-funding.
You do that for the course of the transaction, and when you're done, you liquidate the portfolio, pay back the bonds, and you can give the equity holders a nice return.
That was the theory, and we talked about it, we did a bunch of experiments, and then we said, let's really try to test it.
We spent the next two years doing research.
We talked to hundreds of experts in drug financing and venture capital.
We talked to people who have developed drugs.
We talked to pharmaceutical companies.
We actually looked at the data for drugs, over 2,000 drugs that had been approved or denied or withdrawn, and we also ran millions of simulations.
And all that actually took a lot of time.
But when we were done, we found something that was sort of surprising.
It was feasible to structure that fund such that when you were done structuring it, you could actually produce low-risk bonds that would be attractive to bond holders, that would give you yields of about five to eight percent, and you could produce equity that would give equity holders about a 12 percent return.
Now those returns aren't going to be attractive to a venture capitalist.
They want to make those big bets and get those billion dollar payoffs.
But it turns out there are lots of other folks that would be interested.
That's right in the investment sweet spot of pension funds and 401(k) plans and all this other stuff.
So we published some articles in the academic press, in medical journals, in finance journals.
But it wasn't until we actually got the popular press interested in this that we began to get some traction.
We wanted to do more than just make people aware of it.
We wanted people to get involved.
So we took all of our computer code and made that available online under an open-source license to anybody that wanted it.
And you guys can download it today if you want to run your own experiments to see if this would work.
And that was really effective, because people that didn't believe our assumptions could try their own and see how it would work.
Now there's an obvious problem, which is, is there enough money in the world to fund this?
I've told you there's enough drugs, but is there enough money?
There's 100 trillion dollars of capital currently invested in fixed-income securities.
That's a hundred thousand billion.
There's plenty of money.
(Laughter) But we realized it's more than just money that's required.
We had to get people motivated, involved, and get them to understand this.
And we started thinking about all the different things that could go wrong.
What are all the challenges that might get in the way?
And we had a long list.
We assigned a bunch of people, including ourselves, different pieces of this problem.
And we said, could you start a work stream on credit risk?
Could you start a work stream on the regulatory aspects?
Could you start a work stream on how you would manage so many projects?
And we had all these experts get together and do these different work streams, and then we held a conference.
The conference was held over this past summer.
It was an invitation-only conference.
It was sponsored by the American Cancer Society and done in collaboration with the National Cancer Institute.
We had experts from every field we thought would be important, including the government, and people that run research centers, and for two days they heard the reports from those five work streams, and talked about it.
It was the first time the people who could make this happen sat across the table from each other and had these conversations.
Now these conferences, it's typical to have a dinner, and at that dinner, you get to know each other, sort of like what we're doing here.
I happened to look out the window, and hand on my heart, on the night of this conference -- it was the summertime -- and that's what I saw, a double rainbow.
So I'd like to think it was a good sign.
Since the conference, we've got people working between Paris and San Francisco, lots of different folks working on this to try to see if we can really make it happen.
We're not looking to start a fund, but we want somebody else to do this.
Because, again, I'm not a scientist.
I can't build a drug.
I'm never going to have enough money to fund even one of those trials.
But all of us together, with our 401(k)s, with our 529 plans, with our pension plans, all of us together can actually fund hundreds of trials and get paid well for doing it and save millions of lives like my dad.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is an image of the planet Earth.
It looks very much like the Apollo pictures that are very well known.
There is something different; you can click on it, and if you click on it, you can zoom in on almost any place on the Earth.
For instance, this is a bird's-eye view of the EPFL campus.
In many cases, you can also see how a building looks from a nearby street.
This is pretty amazing.
But there's something missing in this wonderful tour: It's time.
i'm not really sure when this picture was taken.
I'm not even sure it was taken at the same moment as the bird's-eye view.
In my lab, we develop tools to travel not only in space but also through time.
The kind of question we're asking is Is it possible to build something like Google Maps of the past?
Can I add a slider on top of Google Maps and just change the year, seeing how it was 100 years before, 1,000 years before?
Is that possible?
Can I reconstruct social networks of the past?
Can I make a Facebook of the Middle Ages?
So, can I build time machines?
Maybe we can just say, "No, it's not possible."
Or, maybe, we can think of it from an information point of view.
This is what I call the information mushroom.
Vertically, you have the time.
and horizontally, the amount of digital information available.
Obviously, in the last 10 years, we have much information.
And obviously the more we go in the past, the less information we have.
If we want to build something like Google Maps of the past, or Facebook of the past, we need to enlarge this space, we need to make that like a rectangle.
How do we do that?
One way is digitization.
There's a lot of material available -- newspaper, printed books, thousands of printed books.
I can digitize all these.
I can extract information from these.
Of course, the more you go in the past, the less information you will have.
So, it might not be enough.
So, I can do what historians do.
I can extrapolate.
This is what we call, in computer science, simulation.
If I take a log book, I can consider, it's not just a log book of a Venetian captain going to a particular journey.
I can consider it is actually a log book which is representative of many journeys of that period.
I'm extrapolating.
If I have a painting of a facade, I can consider it's not just that particular building, but probably it also shares the same grammar of buildings where we lost any information.
So if we want to construct a time machine, we need two things.
We need very large archives, and we need excellent specialists.
The Venice Time Machine, the project I'm going to talk to you about, is a joint project between the EPFL and the University of Venice Ca'Foscari.
There's something very peculiar about Venice, that its administration has been very, very bureaucratic.
They've been keeping track of everything, almost like Google today.
At the Archivio di Stato, you have 80 kilometers of archives documenting every aspect of the life of Venice over more than 1,000 years.
You have every boat that goes out, every boat that comes in.
You have every change that was made in the city.
This is all there.
We are setting up a 10-year digitization program which has the objective of transforming this immense archive into a giant information system.
The type of objective we want to reach is 450 books a day that can be digitized.
Of course, when you digitize, that's not enough, because these documents, most of them are in Latin, in Tuscan, in Venetian dialect, so you need to transcribe them, to translate them in some cases, to index them, and this is obviously not easy.
In particular, traditional optical character recognition method that can be used for printed manuscripts, they do not work well on the handwritten document.
So the solution is actually to take inspiration from another domain: speech recognition.
This is a domain of something that seems impossible, which can actually be done, simply by putting additional constraints.
If you have a very good model of a language which is used, if you have a very good model of a document, how well they are structured.
And these are administrative documents.
They are well structured in many cases.
If you divide this huge archive into smaller subsets where a smaller subset actually shares similar features, then there's a chance of success.
If we reach that stage, then there's something else: we can extract from this document events.
Actually probably 10 billion events can be extracted from this archive.
And this giant information system can be searched in many ways.
You can ask questions like, "Who lived in this palazzo in 1323?"
"How much cost a sea bream at the Realto market in 1434?"
"What was the salary of a glass maker in Murano maybe over a decade?"
You can ask even bigger questions because it will be semantically coded.
And then what you can do is put that in space, because much of this information is spatial.
And from that, you can do things like reconstructing this extraordinary journey of that city that managed to have a sustainable development over a thousand years, managing to have all the time a form of equilibrium with its environment.
You can reconstruct that journey, visualize it in many different ways.
But of course, you cannot understand Venice if you just look at the city.
You have to put it in a larger European context.
So the idea is also to document all the things that worked at the European level.
We can reconstruct also the journey of the Venetian maritime empire, how it progressively controlled the Adriatic Sea, how it became the most powerful medieval empire of its time, controlling most of the sea routes from the east to the south.
But you can even do other things, because in these maritime routes, there are regular patterns.
You can go one step beyond and actually create a simulation system, create a Mediterranean simulator which is capable actually of reconstructing even the information we are missing, which would enable us to have questions you could ask like if you were using a route planner.
"If I am in Corfu in June 1323 and want to go to Constantinople, where can I take a boat?"
Probably we can answer this question with one or two or three days' precision.
"How much will it cost?"
"What are the chance of encountering pirates?"
Of course, you understand, the central scientific challenge of a project like this one is qualifying, quantifying and representing uncertainty and inconsistency at each step of this process.
There are errors everywhere, errors in the document, it's the wrong name of the captain, some of the boats never actually took to sea.
There are errors in translation, interpretative biases, and on top of that, if you add algorithmic processes, you're going to have errors in recognition, errors in extraction, so you have very, very uncertain data.
So how can we detect and correct these inconsistencies?
How can we represent that form of uncertainty?
It's difficult. One thing you can do is document each step of the process, not only coding the historical information but what we call the meta-historical information, how is historical knowledge constructed, documenting each step.
That will not guarantee that we actually converge toward a single story of Venice, but probably we can actually reconstruct a fully documented potential story of Venice.
Maybe there's not a single map.
Maybe there are several maps.
The system should allow for that, because we have to deal with a new form of uncertainty, which is really new for this type of giant databases.
And how should we communicate this new research to a large audience?
Again, Venice is extraordinary for that.
With the millions of visitors that come every year, it's actually one of the best places to try to invent the museum of the future.
Imagine, horizontally you see the reconstructed map of a given year, and vertically, you see the document that served the reconstruction, paintings, for instance.
Imagine an immersive system that permits to go and dive and reconstruct the Venice of a given year, some experience you could share within a group.
On the contrary, imagine actually that you start from a document, a Venetian manuscript, and you show, actually, what you can construct out of it, how it is decoded, how the context of that document can be recreated.
This is an image from an exhibit which is currently conducted in Geneva with that type of system.
So to conclude, we can say that research in the humanities is about to undergo an evolution which is maybe similar to what happened to life sciences 30 years ago.
It's really a question of scale.
We see projects which are much beyond any single research team can do, and this is really new for the humanities, which very often take the habit of working in small groups or only with a couple of researchers.
When you visit the Archivio di Stato, you feel this is beyond what any single team can do, and that should be a joint and common effort.
So what we must do for this paradigm shift is actually foster a new generation of "digital humanists" that are going to be ready for this shift.
I thank you very much.
(Applause)
(Music) For any of you who have visited or lived in New York City, these shots might start to look familiar.
This is Central Park, one of the most beautifully designed public spaces in America.
But to anyone who hasn't visited, these images can't really fully convey.
To really understand Central Park, you have to physically be there.
Well, the same is true of the music, which my brother and I composed and mapped specifically for Central Park.
(Music) I'd like to talk to you today a little bit about the work that my brother Hays and I are doing -- That's us there. That's both of us actually — specifically about a concept that we've been developing over the last few years, this idea of location-aware music.
Now, my brother and I, we're musicians and music producers.
We've been working together since, well, since we were kids, really.
But recently, we've become more and more interested in projects where art and technology intersect, from creating sight-specific audio and video installation to engineering interactive concerts.
But today I want to focus on this concept of composition for physical space.
But before I go too much further into that, let me tell you a little bit about how we got started with this idea.
My brother and I were living in New York City when the artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude did their temporary installation, The Gates, in Central Park.
Hundreds of these brightly-colored sculptures decorated the park for a number of weeks, and unlike work that's exhibited in a more neutral space, like on the walls of a gallery or a museum, this was work that was really in dialogue with this place, and in a lot of ways, The Gates was really a celebration of Frederick Olmsted's incredible design.
This was an experience that stayed with us for a long time, and years later, my brother and I moved back to Washington, D.C., and we started to ask the question, would it be possible, in the same way that The Gates responded to the physical layout of the park, to compose music for a landscape?
Which brought us to this.
(Music) On Memorial Day, we released "The National Mall," a location-aware album released exclusively as a mobile app that uses the device's built-in GPS functionality to sonically map the entire park in our hometown of Washington, D.C.
Hundreds of musical segments are geo-tagged throughout the entire park so that as a listener traverses the landscape, a musical score is actually unfolding around them.
So this is not a playlist or a list of songs intended for the park, but rather an array of distinct melodies and rhythms that fit together like pieces of a puzzle and blend seamlessly based on a listener's chosen trajectory.
So think of this as a choose-your-own-adventure of an album.
Let's take a closer look.
Let's look at one example here.
So using the app, as you make your way towards the grounds surrounding the Washington Monument, you hear the sounds of instruments warming up, which then gives way to the sound of a mellotron spelling out a very simple melody.
This is then joined by the sound of sweeping violins.
Keep walking, and a full choir joins in, until you finally reach the top of the hill and you're hearing the sound of drums and fireworks and all sorts of musical craziness, as if all of these sounds are radiating out from this giant obelisk that punctuates the center of the park.
But were you to walk in the opposite direction, this entire sequence happens in reverse.
And were you to actually exit the perimeter of the park, the music would fade to silence, and the play button would disappear.
We're sometimes contacted by people in other parts of the world who can't travel to the United States, but would like to hear this record.
Well, unlike a normal album, we haven't been able to accommodate this request.
When they ask for a C.D. or an MP3 version, we just can't make that happen, and the reason is because this isn't a promotional app or a game to promote or accompany the release of a traditional record.
In this case, the app is the work itself, and the architecture of the landscape is intrinsic to the listening experience.
Six months later, we did a location-aware album for Central Park, a park that is over two times the size of the National Mall, with music spanning from the Sheep's Meadow to the Ramble to the Reservoir.
Currently, my brother and I are working on projects all over the country, but last spring we started a project, here actually at Stanford's Experimental Media Art Department, where we're creating our largest location-aware album to date, one that will span the entirety of Highway 1 here on the Pacific Coast.
But what we're doing, integrating GPS with music, is really just one idea.
But it speaks to a larger vision for a music industry that's sometimes struggled to find its footing in this digital age, that they begin to see these new technologies not simply as ways of adding bells and whistles to an existing model, but to dream up entirely new ways for people to interact with and experience music.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The entire model of capitalism and the economic model that you and I did business in, and, in fact, continue to do business in, was built around what probably Milton Friedman put more succinctly.
And Adam Smith, of course, the father of modern economics actually said many, many years ago, the invisible hand, which is, "If you continue to operate in your own self-interest you will do the best good for society."
Now, capitalism has done a lot of good things and I've talked about a lot of good things that have happened, but equally, it has not been able to meet up with some of the challenges that we've seen in society.
The model that at least I was brought up in and a lot of us doing business were brought up in was one which talked about what I call the three G's of growth: growth that is consistent, quarter on quarter; growth that is competitive, better than the other person; and growth that is profitable, so you continue to make more and more shareholder value.
And I'm afraid this is not going to be good enough and we have to move from this 3G model to a model of what I call the fourth G: the G of growth that is responsible.
And it is this that has to become a very important part of creating value.
Of not just creating economic value but creating social value.
And companies that will thrive are those that will actually embrace the fourth G.
And the model of 4G is quite simple: Companies cannot afford to be just innocent bystanders in what's happening around in society.
They have to begin to play their role in terms of serving the communities which actually sustain them.
And we have to move to a model of an and/and model which is how do we make money and do good?
How do we make sure that we have a great business but we also have a great environment around us?
And that model is all about doing well and doing good.
But the question is easier said than done.
But how do we actually get that done?
And I do believe that the answer to that is going to be leadership.
It is going to be to redefine the new business models which understand that the only license to operate is to combine these things.
And for that you need businesses that can actually define their role in society in terms of a much larger purpose than the products and brands that they sell.
And companies that actually define a true north, things that are nonnegotiable whether times are good, bad, ugly -- doesn't matter.
There are things that you stand for.
Values and purpose are going to be the two drivers of software that are going to create the companies of tomorrow.
And I'm going to now shift to talking a little bit about my own experiences.
I joined Unilever in 1976 as a management trainee in India.
And on my first day of work I walked in and my boss tells me, "Do you know why you're here?"
I said, "I'm here to sell a lot of soap."
And he said, "No, you're here to change lives."
You're here to change lives.
You know, I thought it was rather facetious.
We are a company that sells soap and soup.
What are we doing about changing lives?
And it's then I realized that simple acts like selling a bar of soap can save more lives than pharmaceutical companies.
I don't know how many of you know that five million children don't reach the age of five because of simple infections that can be prevented by an act of washing their hands with soap.
We run the largest hand-washing program in the world.
We are running a program on hygiene and health that now touches half a billion people.
It's not about selling soap, there is a larger purpose out there.
And brands indeed can be at the forefront of social change.
And the reason for that is, when two billion people use your brands that's the amplifier.
Small actions can make a big difference.
Take another example, I was walking around in one of our villages in India.
Now those of you who have done this will realize that this is no walk in the park.
And we had this lady who was one of our small distributors -- beautiful, very, very modest, her home -- and she was out there, dressed nicely, her husband in the back, her mother-in-law behind and her sister-in-law behind her.
The social order was changing because this lady is part of our Project Shakti that is actually teaching women how to do small business and how to carry the message of nutrition and hygiene.
We have 60,000 such women now in India.
It's not about selling soap, it's about making sure that in the process of doing so you can change people's lives.
Small actions, big difference.
Our R&amp;D folks are not only working to give us some fantastic detergents, but they're working to make sure we use less water.
A product that we've just launched recently, One Rinse product that allows you to save water every time you wash your clothes.
And if we can convert all our users to using this, that's 500 billion liters of water.
By the way, that's equivalent to one month of water for a whole huge continent.
So just think about it.
There are small actions that can make a big difference.
And I can go on and on.
Our food chain, our brilliant products -- and I'm sorry I'm giving you a word from the sponsors -- Knorr, Hellman's and all those wonderful products.
We are committed to making sure that all our agricultural raw materials are sourced from sustainable sources, 100-percent sustainable sources.
We were the first to say we are going to buy all of our palm oil from sustainable sources.
I don't know how many of you know that palm oil, and not buying it from sustainable sources, can create deforestation that is responsible for 20 percent of the greenhouse gasses in the world.
We were the first to embrace that, and it's all because we market soap and soup.
And the point I'm making here is that companies like yours, companies like mine have to define a purpose which embraces responsibility and understands that we have to play our part in the communities in which we operate.
We introduced something called The Unilever Sustainable Living Plan, which said, "Our purpose is to make sustainable living commonplace, and we are gong to change the lives of one billion people over 2020."
Now the question here is, where do we go from here?
And the answer to that is very simple: We're not going to change the world alone.
There are plenty of you and plenty of us who understand this.
The question is, we need partnerships, we need coalitions and importantly, we need that leadership that will allow us to take this from here and to be the change that we want to see around us.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
It's a pleasure to be here in Edinburgh, Scotland, the birthplace of the needle and syringe.
Less than a mile from here in this direction, in 1853 a Scotsman filed his very first patent on the needle and syringe.
His name was Alexander Wood, and it was at the Royal College of Physicians.
This is the patent.
What blows my mind when I look at it even today is that it looks almost identical to the needle in use today.
Yet, it's 160 years old.
So we turn to the field of vaccines.
Most vaccines are delivered with the needle and syringe, this 160-year-old technology.
And credit where it's due -- on many levels, vaccines are a successful technology.
After clean water and sanitation, vaccines are the one technology that has increased our life span the most.
That's a pretty hard act to beat.
But just like any other technology, vaccines have their shortcomings, and the needle and syringe is a key part within that narrative -- this old technology.
So let's start with the obvious: Many of us don't like the needle and syringe.
I share that view.
However, 20 percent of the population have a thing called needle phobia.
That's more than disliking the needle; that is actively avoiding being vaccinated because of needle phobia.
And that's problematic in terms of the rollout of vaccines.
Now, related to this is another key issue, which is needlestick injuries.
And the WHO has figures that suggest about 1.3 million deaths per year take place due to cross-contamination with needlestick injuries.
These are early deaths that take place.
Now, these are two things that you probably may have heard of, but there are two other shortcomings of the needle and syringe you may not have heard about.
One is it could be holding back the next generation of vaccines in terms of their immune responses.
And the second is that it could be responsible for the problem of the cold chain that I'll tell you about as well.
I'm going to tell you about some work that my team and I are doing in Australia at the University of Queensland on a technology designed to tackle those four problems.
And that technology is called the Nanopatch.
Now, this is a specimen of the Nanopatch.
To the naked eye it just looks like a square smaller than a postage stamp, but under a microscope what you see are thousands of tiny projections that are invisible to the human eye.
And there's about 4,000 projections on this particular square compared to the needle.
And I've designed those projections to serve a key role, which is to work with the skin's immune system.
So that's a very important function tied in with the Nanopatch.
Now we make the Nanopatch with a technique called deep reactive ion etching.
And this particular technique is one that's been borrowed from the semiconductor industry, and therefore is low cost and can be rolled out in large numbers.
Now we dry-coat vaccines to the projections of the Nanopatch and apply it to the skin.
Now, the simplest form of application is using our finger, but our finger has some limitations, so we've devised an applicator.
And it's a very simple device -- you could call it a sophisticated finger.
It's a spring-operated device.
What we do is when we apply the Nanopatch to the skin as so -- (Click) -- immediately a few things happen.
So firstly, the projections on the Nanopatch breach through the tough outer layer and the vaccine is very quickly released -- within less than a minute, in fact.
Then we can take the Nanopatch off and discard it.
And indeed we can make a reuse of the applicator itself.
So that gives you an idea of the Nanopatch, and immediately you can see some key advantages.
We've talked about it being needle-free -- these are projections that you can't even see -- and, of course, we get around the needle phobia issue as well.
Now, if we take a step back and think about these other two really important advantages: One is improved immune responses through delivery, and the second is getting rid of the cold chain.
So let's start with the first one, this immunogenicity idea.
It takes a little while to get our heads around, but I'll try to explain it in simple terms.
So I'll take a step back and explain to you how vaccines work in a simple way.
So vaccines work by introducing into our body a thing called an antigen which is a safe form of a germ.
Now that safe germ, that antigen, tricks our body into mounting an immune response, learning and remembering how to deal with intruders.
When the real intruder comes along the body quickly mounts an immune response to deal with that vaccine and neutralizes the infection.
So it does that well.
Now, the way it's done today with the needle and syringe, most vaccines are delivered that way -- with this old technology and the needle.
But it could be argued that the needle is holding back our immune responses; it's missing our immune sweet spot in the skin.
To describe this idea, we need to take a journey through the skin, starting with one of those projections and applying the Nanopatch to the skin.
And we see this kind of data.
Now, this is real data -- that thing that we can see there is one projection from the Nanopatch that's been applied to the skin and those colors are different layers.
Now, to give you an idea of scale, if the needle was shown here, it would be too big.
It would be 10 times bigger than the size of that screen, going 10 times deeper as well.
It's off the grid entirely.
You can see immediately that we have those projections in the skin.
That red layer is a tough outer layer of dead skin, but the brown layer and the magenta layer are jammed full of immune cells.
As one example, in the brown layer there's a certain type of cell called a Langerhans cell -- every square millimeter of our body is jammed full of those Langerhans cells, those immune cells, and there's others shown as well that we haven't stained in this image.
But you can immediately see that the Nanopatch achieves that penetration indeed.
We target thousands upon thousands of these particular cells just residing within a hair's width of the surface of the skin.
Now, as the guy that's invented this thing and designed it to do that, I found that exciting. But so what?
So what if you've targeted cells?
In the world of vaccines, what does that mean?
The world of vaccines is getting better.
It's getting more systematic.
However, you still don't really know if a vaccine is going to work until you roll your sleeves up and vaccinate and wait.
It's a gambler's game even today.
So, we had to do that gamble.
We obtained an influenza vaccine, we applied it to our Nanopatches and we applied the Nanopatches to the skin, and we waited -- and this is in the live animal.
We waited a month, and this is what we found out.
This is a data slide showing the immune responses that we've generated with a Nanopatch compared to the needle and syringe into muscle.
So on the horizontal axis we have the dose shown in nanograms.
On the vertical axis we have the immune response generated, and that dashed line indicates the protection threshold.
If we're above that line it's considered protective; if we're below that line it's not.
So the red line is mostly below that curve and indeed there's only one point that is achieved with the needle that's protective, and that's with a high dose of 6,000 nanograms.
But notice immediately the distinctly different curve that we achieve with the blue line.
That's what's achieved with the Nanopatch; the delivered dose of the Nanopatch is a completely different immunogenicity curve.
That's a real fresh opportunity.
Suddenly we have a brand new lever in the world of vaccines.
We can push it one way, where we can take a vaccine that works but is too expensive and can get protection with a hundredth of the dose compared to the needle.
That can take a vaccine that's suddenly 10 dollars down to 10 cents, and that's particularly important within the developing world.
But there's another angle to this as well -- you can take vaccines that currently don't work and get them over that line and get them protective.
And certainly in the world of vaccines that can be important.
Let's consider the big three: HIV, malaria, tuberculosis.
They're responsible for about 7 million deaths per year, and there is no adequate vaccination method for any of those.
So potentially, with this new lever that we have with the Nanopatch, we can help make that happen.
We can push that lever to help get those candidate vaccines over the line.
Now, of course, we've worked within my lab with many other vaccines that have attained similar responses and similar curves to this, what we've achieved with influenza.
I'd like to now switch to talk about another key shortcoming of today's vaccines, and that is the need to maintain the cold chain.
As the name suggests -- the cold chain -- it's the requirements of keeping a vaccine right from production all the way through to when the vaccine is applied, to keep it refrigerated.
Now, that presents some logistical challenges but we have ways to do it.
This is a slightly extreme case in point but it helps illustrate the logistical challenges, in particular in resource-poor settings, of what's required to get vaccines refrigerated and maintain the cold chain.
If the vaccine is too warm the vaccine breaks down, but interestingly it can be too cold and the vaccine can break down as well.
Now, the stakes are very high.
The WHO estimates that within Africa, up to half the vaccines used there are considered to not be working properly because at some point the cold chain has fallen over.
So it's a big problem, and it's tied in with the needle and syringe because it's a liquid form vaccine, and when it's liquid it needs the refrigeration.
A key attribute of our Nanopatch is that the vaccine is dry, and when it's dry it doesn't need refrigeration.
Within my lab we've shown that we can keep the vaccine stored at 23 degrees Celsius for more than a year without any loss in activity at all.
That's an important improvement.
(Applause) We're delighted about it as well.
And the thing about it is that we have well and truly proven the Nanopatch within the laboratory setting.
And as a scientist, I love that and I love science.
However, as an engineer, as a biomedical engineer and also as a human being, I'm not going to be satisfied until we've rolled this thing out, taken it out of the lab and got it to people in large numbers and particularly the people that need it the most.
So we've commenced this particular journey, and we've commenced this journey in an unusual way.
We've started with Papua New Guinea.
Now, Papua New Guinea is an example of a developing world country.
It's about the same size as France, but it suffers from many of the key barriers existing within the world of today's vaccines.
There's the logistics: Within this country there are only 800 refrigerators to keep vaccines chilled.
Many of them are old, like this one in Port Moresby, many of them are breaking down and many are not in the Highlands where they are required.
That's a challenge.
But also, Papua New Guinea has the world's highest incidence of HPV, human papillomavirus, the cervical cancer [risk factor].
Yet, that vaccine is not available in large numbers because it's too expensive.
So for those two reasons, with the attributes of the Nanopatch, we've got into the field and worked with the Nanopatch, and taken it to Papua New Guinea and we'll be following that up shortly.
Now, doing this kind of work is not easy.
It's challenging, but there's nothing else in the world I'd rather be doing.
And as we look ahead I'd like to share with you a thought: It's the thought of a future where the 17 million deaths per year that we currently have due to infectious disease is a historical footnote.
And it's a historical footnote that has been achieved by improved, radically improved vaccines.
Now standing here today in front of you at the birthplace of the needle and syringe, a device that's 160 years old, I'm presenting to you an alternative approach that could really help make that happen -- and it's the Nanopatch with its attributes of being needle-free, pain-free, the ability for removing the cold chain and improving the immunogenicity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Pat Mitchell: Your first time back on the TEDWomen stage.
Sheryl Sandberg: First time back. Nice to see everyone. It's always so nice to look out and see so many women.
It's so not my regular experience, as I know anyone else's.
PM: So when we first started talking about, maybe the subject wouldn't be social media, which we assumed it would be, but that you had very much on your mind the missing leadership positions, particularly in the sector of technology and social media.
But how did that evolve for you as a thought, and end up being the TED Talk that you gave?
SS: So I was really scared to get on this stage and talk about women, because I grew up in the business world, as I think so many of us did.
You never talk about being a woman, because someone might notice that you're a woman, right?
They might notice. Or worse, if you say "woman," people on the other end of the table think you're asking for special treatment, or complaining.
Or worse, about to sue them. And so I went through -- (Laughter) Right? I went through my entire business career, and never spoke about being a woman, never spoke about it publicly.
But I also had noticed that it wasn't working.
I came out of college over 20 years ago, and I thought that all of my peers were men and women, all the people above me were all men, but that would change, because your generation had done such an amazing job fighting for equality, equality was now ours for the taking. And it wasn't.
Because year after year, I was one of fewer and fewer, and now, often the only woman in a room.
And I talked to a bunch of people about, should I give a speech at TEDWomen about women, and they said, oh no, no.
It will end your business career. You cannot be a serious business executive and speak about being a woman. You'll never be taken seriously again.
But fortunately, there were the few, the proud -- like you -- who told me I should give the speech, and I asked myself the question Mark Zuckerberg might -- the founder of Facebook and my boss -- asks all of us, which is, what would I do if I wasn't afraid?
And the answer to what would I do if I wasn't afraid is I would get on the TED stage, and talk about women, and leadership. And I did, and survived. (Applause) PM: I would say, not only survived. I'm thinking of that moment, Sheryl, when you and I were standing backstage together, and you turned to me, and you told me a story.
And I said -- very last minute -- you know, you really should share that story.
SS: Oh, yeah. PM: What was that story?
SS: Well, it's an important part of the journey. So I had -- TEDWomen -- the original one was in D.C. -- so I live here, so I had gotten on a plane the day before, and my daughter was three, she was clinging to my leg: "Mommy, don't go."
And Pat's a friend, and so, not related to the speech I was planning on giving, which was chock full of facts and figures, and nothing personal, I told Pat the story. I said, well, I'm having a hard day.
Yesterday my daughter was clinging to my leg, and "Don't go."
And you looked at me and said, you have to tell that story.
I said, on the TED stage? Are you kidding?
I'm going to get on a stage and admit my daughter was clinging to my leg?
And you said yes, because if you want to talk about getting more women into leadership roles, you have to be honest about how hard it is.
And I did. And I think that's a really important part of the journey.
The same thing happened when I wrote my book. I started writing the book. I wrote a first chapter, I thought it was fabulous. It was chock-full of data and figures, I had three pages on matrilineal Maasai tribes, and their sociological patterns.
My husband read it and he was like, this is like eating your Wheaties. (Laughter) No one -- and I apologize to Wheaties if there's someone -- no one, no one will read this book.
And I realized through the process that I had to be more honest and more open, and I had to tell my stories. My stories of still not feeling as self-confident as I should, in many situations. My first and failed marriage. Crying at work.
Felling like I didn't belong there, feeling guilty to this day.
And part of my journey, starting on this stage, going to "Lean In," going to the foundation, is all about being more open and honest about those challenges, so that other women can be more open and honest, and all of us can work together towards real equality.
PM: I think that one of the most striking parts about the book, and in my opinion, one of the reasons it's hit such a nerve and is resonating around the world, is that you are personal in the book, and that you do make it clear that, while you've observed some things that are very important for other women to know, that you've had the same challenges that many others of us have, as you faced the hurdles and the barriers and possibly the people who don't believe the same.
So talk about that process: deciding you'd go public with the private part, and then you would also put yourself in the position of something of an expert on how to resolve those challenges.
SS: After I did the TED Talk, what happened was -- you know, I never really expected to write a book, I'm not an author, I'm not a writer, and it was viewed a lot, and it really started impacting people's lives.
I got this great --- one of the first letters I got was from a woman who said that she was offered a really big promotion at work, and she turned it down, and she told her best friend she turned it down, and her best friend said, you really need to watch this TED Talk.
And so she watched this TED Talk, and she went back the next day, she took the job, she went home, and she handed her husband the grocery list. (Laughter) And she said, I can do this.
And what really mattered to me -- it wasn't only women in the corporate world, even though I did hear from a lot of them, and it did impact a lot of them, it was also people of all different circumstances.
There was a doctor I met who was an attending physician at Johns Hopkins, and he said that until he saw my TED Talk, it never really occurred to him that even though half the students in his med school classes were women, they weren't speaking as much as the men as he did his rounds.
So he started paying attention, and as he waited for raised hands, he realized the men's hands were up.
So he started encouraging the women to raise their hands more, and it still didn't work.
So he told everyone, no more hand raising, I'm cold-calling.
So he could call evenly on men and women. And what he proved to himself was that the women knew the answers just as well or better, and he was able to go back to them and tell them that.
And then there was the woman, stay-at-home mom, lives in a really difficult neighborhood, with not a great school, she said that TED Talk -- she's never had a corporate job, but that TED Talk inspired her to go to her school and fight for a better teacher for her child.
And I guess it was part of was finding my own voice.
And I realized that other women and men could find their voice through it, which is why I went from the talk to the book.
PM: And in the book, you not only found your voice, which is clear and strong in the book, but you also share what you've learned -- the experiences of other people in the lessons.
And that's what I'm thinking about in terms of putting yourself in a -- you became a sort of expert in how you lean in.
So what did that feel like, and become like in your life?
To launch not just a book, not just a best-selling, best-viewed talk, but a movement, where people began to literally describe their actions at work as, I'm leaning in.
SS: I mean, I'm grateful, I'm honored, I'm happy, and it's the very beginning.
So I don't know if I'm an expert, or if anyone is an expert. I certainly have done a lot of research.
I have read every study, I have pored over the materials, and the lessons are very clear. Because here's what we know: What we know is that stereotypes are holding women back from leadership roles all over the world.
It's so striking. "Lean In" is very global, I've been all over the world, talking about it, and -- cultures are so different.
Even within our own country, to Japan, to Korea, to China, to Asia, Europe, they're so different. Except for one thing: gender.
All over the world, no matter what our cultures are, we think men should be strong, assertive, aggressive, have voice; we think women should speak when spoken to, help others.
Now we have, all over the world, women are called "bossy." There is a word for "bossy," for little girls, in every language there's one.
It's a word that's pretty much not used for little boys, because if a little boy leads, there's no negative word for it, it's expected. But if a little girl leads, she's bossy.
Now I know there aren't a lot of men here, but bear with me.
If you're a man, you'll have to represent your gender.
Please raise your hand if you've been told you're too aggressive at work.
(Laughter) There's always a few, it runs about five percent. Okay, get ready, gentlemen.
If you're a woman, please raise your hand if you've ever been told you're too aggressive at work.
(Laughter) That is what audiences have said in every country in the world, and it's deeply supported by the data.
Now, do we think women are more aggressive than men? Of course not.
It's just that we judge them through a different lens, and a lot of the character traits that you must exhibit to perform at work, to get results, to lead, are ones that we think, in a man, he's a boss, and in a woman, she's bossy.
And the good news about this is that we can change this by acknowledging it.
One of the happiest moments I had in this whole journey is, after the book came out, I stood on a stage with John Chambers, the CEO of Cisco.
He read the book. He stood on a stage with me, he invited me in front of his whole management team, men and women, and he said, I thought we were good at this. I thought I was good at this.
And then I read this book, and I realized that we -- my company -- we have called all of our senior women too aggressive, and I'm standing on this stage, and I'm sorry.
And I want you to know we're never going to do it again.
PM: Can we send that to a lot of other people that we know? (Applause) SS: And so John is doing that because he believes it's good for his company, and so this kind of acknowledgement of these biases can change it.
And so next time you all see someone call a little girl "bossy," you walk right up to that person, big smile, and you say, "That little girl's not bossy. That little girl has executive leadership skills." (Laughter) PM: I know that's what you're telling your daughter. SS: Absolutely.
PM: And you did focus in the book -- and the reason, as you said, in writing it, was to create a dialogue about this.
I mean, let's just put it out there, face the fact that women are -- in a time when we have more open doors, and more opportunities -- are still not getting to the leadership positions.
So in the months that have come since the book, in which "Lean In" focused on that and said, here are some of the challenges that remain, and many of them we have to own within ourselves and look at ourselves. What has changed?
Have you seen changes?
SS: Well, there's certainly more dialogue, which is great.
But what really matters to me, and I think all of us, is action.
So everywhere I go, CEOs, they're mostly men, say to me, you're costing me so much money because all the women want to be paid as much as the men.
And to them I say, I'm not sorry at all. (Laughter) At all. I mean, the women should be paid as much as the men.
Everywhere I go, women tell me they ask for raises.
Everywhere I go, women say they're getting better relationships with their spouses, asking for more help at home, asking for the promotions they should be getting at work, and importantly, believing it themselves. Even little things.
One of the governors of one of the states told me that he didn't realize that more women were, in fact, literally sitting on the side of the room, which they are, and now he made a rule that all the women on his staff need to sit at the table.
The foundation I started along with the book "Lean In" helps women, or men, start circles -- small groups, it can be 10, it can be however many you want, which meet once a month.
I would have hoped that by now, we'd have about 500 circles. That would've been great.
You know, 500 times roughly 10.
There are over 12,000 circles in 50 countries in the world.
PM: Wow, that's amazing.
SS: And these are people who are meeting every single month.
I met one of them, I was in Beijing.
A group of women, they're all about 29 or 30, they started the first Lean In circle in Beijing, several of them grew up in very poor, rural China.
These women are 29, they are told by their society that they are "left over," because they are not yet married, and the process of coming together once a month at a meeting is helping them define who they are for themselves.
What they want in their careers. The kind of partners they want, if at all.
I looked at them, we went around and introduced ourselves, and they all said their names and where they're from, and I said, I'm Sheryl Sandberg, and this was my dream.
And I kind of just started crying.
Right, which, I admit, I do. Right? I've talked about it before.
But the fact that a woman so far away out in the world, who grew up in a rural village, who's being told to marry someone she doesn't want to marry, can now go meet once a month with a group of people and refuse that, and find life on her own terms.
That's the kind of change we have to hope for.
PM: Have you been surprised by the global nature of the message?
Because I think when the book first came out, many people thought, well, this is a really important handbook for young women on their way up.
They need to look at this, anticipate the barriers, and recognize them, put them out in the open, have the dialogue about it, but that it's really for women who are that. Doing that. Pursuing the corporate world.
And yet the book is being read, as you say, in rural and developing countries.
What part of that has surprised you, and perhaps led to a new perspective on your part?
SS: The book is about self-confidence, and about equality.
And it turns out, everywhere in the world, women need more self-confidence, because the world tells us we're not equal to men.
Everywhere in the world, we live in a world where the men get "and," and women get "or."
I've never met a man who's been asked how he does it all. (Laughter) Again, I'm going to turn to the men in the audience: Please raise your hand if you've been asked, how do you do it all?
(Laughter) Men only.
Women, women. Please raise your hand if you've been asked how you do it all?
We assume men can do it all, slash -- have jobs and children.
We assume women can't, and that's ridiculous, because the great majority of women everywhere in the world, including the United States, work full time and have children.
And I think people don't fully understand how broad the message is.
There is a circle that's been started for rescued sex workers in Miami.
They're using "Lean In" to help people make the transition back to what would be a fair life, really rescuing them from their pimps, and using it.
There are dress-for-success groups in Texas which are using the book, for women who have never been to college.
And we know there are groups all the way to Ethiopia.
And so these messages of equality -- of how women are told they can't have what men can have -- how we assume that leadership is for men, how we assume that voice is for men, these affect all of us, and I think they are very universal.
And it's part of what TEDWomen does.
It unites all of us in a cause we have to believe in, which is more women, more voice, more equality.
PM: If you were invited now to make another TEDWomen talk, what would you say that is a result of this experience, for you personally, and what you've learned about women, and men, as you've made this journey?
SS: I think I would say -- I tried to say this strongly, but I think I can say it more strongly -- I want to say that the status quo is not enough.
That it's not good enough, that it's not changing quickly enough.
Since I gave my TED Talk and published my book, another year of data came out from the U.S. Census.
And you know what we found?
No movement in the wage gap for women in the United States.
Seventy-seven cents to the dollar.
If you are a black woman, 64 cents.
If you are a Latina, we're at 54 cents.
Do you know when the last time those numbers went up?
2002.
We are stagnating, we are stagnating in so many ways.
And I think we are not really being honest about that, for so many reasons. It's so hard to talk about gender.
We shy away from the word "feminist," a word I really think we need to embrace.
We have to get rid of the word bossy and bring back -- (Applause) I think I would say in a louder voice, we need to get rid of the word "bossy" and bring back the word "feminist," because we need it.
(Applause) PM: And we all need to do a lot more leaning in.
SS: A lot more leaning in.
PM: Thank you, Sheryl.
Thanks for leaning in and saying yes.
SS: Thank you.
(Applause)
Two years ago, I have to say there was no problem.
Two years ago, I knew exactly what an icon looked like.
It looks like this.
Everybody's icon, but also the default position of a curator of Italian Renaissance paintings, which I was then.
And in a way, this is also another default selection.
Leonardo da Vinci's exquisitely soulful image of the "Lady with an Ermine."
And I use that word, soulful, deliberately.
Or then there's this, or rather these: the two versions of Leonardo's "Virgin of the Rocks" that were about to come together in London for the very first time.
In the exhibition that I was then in the absolute throes of organizing.
I was literally up to my eyes in Leonardo, and I had been for three years.
So, he was occupying every part of my brain.
Leonardo had taught me, during that three years, about what a picture can do.
About taking you from your own material world into a spiritual world.
He said, actually, that he believed the job of the painter was to paint everything that was visible and invisible in the universe.
That's a huge task. And yet, somehow he achieves it.
He shows us, I think, the human soul.
He shows us the capacity of ourselves to move into a spiritual realm.
To see a vision of the universe that's more perfect than our own.
To see God's own plan, in some sense.
So this, in a sense, was really what I believed an icon was.
At about that time, I started talking to Tom Campbell, director here of the Metropolitan Museum, about what my next move might be.
The move, in fact, back to an earlier life, one I'd begun at the British Museum, back to the world of three dimensions -- of sculpture and of decorative arts -- to take over the department of European sculpture and decorative arts, here at the Met.
But it was an incredibly busy time.
All the conversations were done at very peculiar times of the day -- over the phone.
In the end, I accepted the job without actually having been here.
Again, I'd been there a couple of years before, but on that particular visit.
So, it was just before the time that the Leonardo show was due to open when I finally made it back to the Met, to New York, to see my new domain.
To see what European sculpture and decorative arts looked like, beyond those Renaissance collections with which I was so already familiar.
And I thought, on that very first day, I better tour the galleries.
Fifty-seven of these galleries -- like 57 varieties of baked beans, I believe.
I walked through and I started in my comfort zone in the Italian Renaissance.
And then I moved gradually around, feeling a little lost sometimes.
My head, also still full of the Leonardo exhibition that was about to open, and I came across this.
And I thought to myself: What the hell have I done?
There was absolutely no connection in my mind at all and, in fact, if there was any emotion going on, it was a kind of repulsion.
This object felt utterly and completely alien.
Silly at a level that I hadn't yet understood silliness to be.
And then it was made worse -- there were two of them.
(Laughter) So, I started thinking about why it was, in fact, that I disliked this object so much.
What was the anatomy of my distaste?
Well, so much gold, so vulgar.
You know, so nouveau riche, frankly.
Leonardo himself had preached against the use of gold, so it was absolutely anathema at that moment.
And then there's little pretty sprigs of flowers everywhere. (Laughter) And finally, that pink. That damned pink.
It's such an extraordinarily artificial color.
I mean, it's a color that I can't think of anything that you actually see in nature, that looks that shade.
The object even has its own tutu. (Laughter) This little flouncy, spangly, bottomy bit that sits at the bottom of the vase.
It reminded me, in an odd kind of way, of my niece's fifth birthday party.
Where all the little girls would come either as a princess or a fairy.
There was one who would come as a fairy princess.
You should have seen the looks.
(Laughter) And I realize that this object was in my mind, born from the same mind, from the same womb, practically, as Barbie Ballerina. (Laughter) And then there's the elephants. (Laughter) Those extraordinary elephants with their little, sort of strange, sinister expressions and Greta Garbo eyelashes, with these golden tusks and so on.
I realized this was an elephant that had absolutely nothing to do with a majestic march across the Serengeti.
It was a Dumbo nightmare. (Laughter) But something more profound was happening as well.
These objects, it seemed to me, were quintessentially the kind that I and my liberal left friends in London had always seen as summing up something deplorable about the French aristocracy in the 18th century.
The label had told me that these pieces were made by the Sèvres Manufactory, made of porcelain in the late 1750s, and designed by a designer called Jean-Claude Duplessis, actually somebody of extraordinary distinction as I later learned.
But for me, they summed up a kind of, that sort of sheer uselessness of the aristocracy in the 18th century.
I and my colleagues had always thought that these objects, in way, summed up the idea of, you know -- no wonder there was a revolution.
Or, indeed, thank God there was a revolution.
There was a sort of idea really, that, if you owned a vase like this, then there was really only one fate possible.
(Laughter) So, there I was -- in a sort of paroxysm of horror.
But I took the job and I went on looking at these vases.
I sort of had to because they're on a through route in the Met.
So, almost anywhere I went, there they were.
They had this kind of odd sort of fascination, like a car accident.
Where I couldn't stop looking.
And as I did so, I started thinking: Well, what are we actually looking at here?
And what I started with was understanding this as really a supreme piece of design.
It took me a little time.
But, that tutu for example -- actually, this is a piece that does dance in its own way.
It has an extraordinary lightness and yet, it is also amazing balanced.
It has these kinds of sculptural ingredients.
And then the play between -- actually really quite carefully disposed color and gilding, and the sculptural surface, is really rather remarkable.
And then I realized that this piece went into the kiln four times, at least four times in order to arrive at this.
How many moments for accident can you think of that could have happened to this piece?
And then remember, not just one, but two.
So he's having to arrive at two exactly matched vases of this kind.
And then this question of uselessness.
Well actually, the end of the trunks were originally candle holders.
So what you would have had were candles on either side.
Imagine that effect of candlelight on that surface.
On the slightly uneven pink, on the beautiful gold.
It would have glittered in an interior, a little like a little firework.
And at that point, actually, a firework went off in my brain.
Somebody reminded me that, that word 'fancy' -- which in a sense for me, encapsulated this object -- actually comes from the same root as the word 'fantasy.' And that what this object was just as much in a way, in its own way, as a Leonardo da Vinci painting, is a portal to somewhere else.
This is an object of the imagination.
If you think about the mad 18th-century operas of the time -- set in the Orient.
If you think about divans and perhaps even opium-induced visions of pink elephants, then at that point, this object starts to make sense.
This is an object which is all about escapism.
It's about an escapism that happens -- that the aristocracy in France sought very deliberately to distinguish themselves from ordinary people.
It's not an escapism that we feel particularly happy with today, however.
And again, going on thinking about this, I realize that in a way we're all victims of a certain kind of tyranny of the triumph of modernism whereby form and function in an object have to follow one another, or are deemed to do so.
And the extraneous ornament is seen as really, essentially, criminal.
It's a triumph, in a way, of bourgeois values rather than aristocratic ones.
And that seems fine.
Except for the fact that it becomes a kind of sequestration of imagination.
So just as in the 20th century, so many people had the idea that their faith took place on the Sabbath day, and the rest of their lives -- their lives of washing machines and orthodontics -- took place on another day.
Then, I think we've started doing the same.
We've allowed ourselves to lead our fantasy lives in front of screens.
In the dark of the cinema, with the television in the corner of the room.
We've eliminated, in a sense, that constant of the imagination that these vases represented in people's lives.
So maybe it's time we got this back a little.
I think it's beginning to happen.
In London, for example, with these extraordinary buildings that have been appearing over the last few years.
Redolent, in a sense, of science fiction, turning London into a kind of fantasy playground.
It's actually amazing to look out of a high building nowadays there.
But even then, there's a resistance.
London has called these buildings the Gherkin, the Shard, the Walkie Talkie -- bringing these soaring buildings down to Earth.
There's an idea that we don't want these anxious-making, imaginative journeys to happen in our daily lives.
I feel lucky in a way, I've encountered this object.
(Laughter) I found him on the Internet when I was looking up a reference.
And there he was.
And unlike the pink elephant vase, this was a kind of love at first sight.
In fact, reader, I married him. I bought him.
And he now adorns my office.
He's a Staffordshire figure made in the middle of the 19th century.
He represents the actor, Edmund Kean, playing Shakespeare's Richard III.
And it's based, actually, on a more elevated piece of porcelain.
So I loved, on an art historical level, I loved that layered quality that he has.
But more than that, I love him.
In a way that I think would have been impossible without the pink Sèvres vase in my Leonardo days.
I love his orange and pink breeches.
I love the fact that he seems to be going off to war, having just finished the washing up. (Laughter) He seems also to have forgotten his sword.
I love his pink little cheeks, his munchkin energy.
In a way, he's become my sort of alter ego.
He's, I hope, a little bit dignified, but mostly rather vulgar. (Laughter) And energetic, I hope, too.
I let him into my life because the Sèvres pink elephant vase allowed me to do so.
And before that Leonardo, I understood that this object could become part of a journey for me every day, sitting in my office.
I really hope that others, all of you, visiting objects in the museum, and taking them home and finding them for yourselves, will allow those objects to flourish in your imaginative lives.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
My job is to design, build and study robots that communicate with people.
But this story doesn't start with robotics at all, it starts with animation.
When I first saw Pixar's "Luxo Jr.," I was amazed by how much emotion they could put into something as trivial as a desk lamp.
I mean, look at them -- at the end of this movie, you actually feel something for two pieces of furniture.
(Laughter) And I said, I have to learn how to do this.
So I made a really bad career decision.
(Laughter) And that's what my mom was like when I did it.
(Laughter) I left a very cozy tech job in Israel at a nice software company and I moved to New York to study animation.
And there I lived in a collapsing apartment building in Harlem with roommates.
I'm not using this phrase metaphorically -- the ceiling actually collapsed one day in our living room.
Whenever they did news stories about building violations in New York, they would put the report in front of our building, as kind of, like, a backdrop to show how bad things are.
Anyway, during the day, I went to school and at night I would sit and draw frame by frame of pencil animation.
And I learned two surprising lessons.
One of them was that when you want to arouse emotions, it doesn't matter so much how something looks; it's all in the motion, in the timing of how the thing moves.
And the second was something one of our teachers told us.
He actually did the weasel in "Ice Age."
And he said, "As an animator, you're not a director -- you're an actor."
So, if you want to find the right motion for a character, don't think about it -- go use your body to find it.
Stand in front of a mirror, act it out in front of a camera -- whatever you need -- and then put it back in your character.
A year later I found myself at MIT in the Robotic Life Group.
It was one of the first groups researching the relationships between humans and robots.
And I still had this dream to make an actual, physical Luxo Jr. lamp.
But I found that robots didn't move at all in this engaging way that I was used to from my animation studies.
Instead, they were all -- how should I put it -- they were all kind of robotic.
(Laughter) And I thought, what if I took whatever I learned in animation school, and used that to design my robotic desk lamp.
So I went and designed frame by frame to try to make this robot as graceful and engaging as possible.
And here when you see the robot interacting with me on a desktop -- and I'm actually redesigning the robot, so, unbeknownst to itself, it's kind of digging its own grave by helping me.
(Laughter) I wanted it to be less of a mechanical structure giving me light, and more of a helpful, kind of quiet apprentice that's always there when you need it and doesn't really interfere.
And when, for example, I'm looking for a battery that I can't find, in a subtle way, it'll show me where the battery is.
So you can see my confusion here.
I'm not an actor.
And I want you to notice how the same mechanical structure can, at one point, just by the way it moves, seem gentle and caring and in the other case, seem violent and confrontational.
And it's the same structure, just the motion is different.
Actor: "You want to know something? Well, you want to know something?
He was already dead!
Just laying there, eyes glazed over!"
(Laughter) But, moving in a graceful way is just one building block of this whole structure called human-robot interaction.
I was, at the time, doing my PhD, I was working on human-robot teamwork, teams of humans and robots working together.
I was studying the engineering, the psychology, the philosophy of teamwork, and at the same time, I found myself in my own kind of teamwork situation, with a good friend of mine, who's actually here.
And in that situation, we can easily imagine robots in the near future being there with us.
It was after a Passover Seder.
We were folding up a lot of folding chairs, and I was amazed at how quickly we found our own rhythm.
Everybody did their own part, we didn't have to divide our tasks.
We didn't have to communicate verbally about this -- it all just happened.
And I thought, humans and robots don't look at all like this.
When humans and robots interact, it's much more like a chess game: the human does a thing, the robot analyzes whatever the human did, the robot decides what to do next, plans it and does it.
Then the human waits, until it's their turn again.
So it's much more like a chess game, and that makes sense, because chess is great for mathematicians and computer scientists.
It's all about information, analysis, decision-making and planning.
But I wanted my robot to be less of a chess player, and more like a doer that just clicks and works together.
So I made my second horrible career choice: I decided to study acting for a semester.
I took off from the PhD, I went to acting classes.
I actually participated in a play -- I hope there’s no video of that around still.
(Laughter) And I got every book I could find about acting, including one from the 19th century that I got from the library.
And I was really amazed, because my name was the second name on the list -- the previous name was in 1889.
(Laughter) And this book was kind of waiting for 100 years to be rediscovered for robotics.
And this book shows actors how to move every muscle in the body to match every kind of emotion that they want to express.
But the real revelation was when I learned about method acting.
It became very popular in the 20th century.
And method acting said you don't have to plan every muscle in your body; instead, you have to use your body to find the right movement.
You have to use your sense memory to reconstruct the emotions and kind of think with your body to find the right expression -- improvise, play off your scene partner.
And this came at the same time as I was reading about this trend in cognitive psychology, called embodied cognition, which also talks about the same ideas.
We use our bodies to think; we don't just think with our brains and use our bodies to move, but our bodies feed back into our brain to generate the way that we behave.
And it was like a lightning bolt.
I went back to my office, I wrote this paper, which I never really published, called "Acting Lessons for Artificial Intelligence."
And I even took another month to do what was then the first theater play with a human and a robot acting together.
That's what you saw before with the actors.
And I thought: How can we make an artificial intelligence model -- a computer, computational model -- that will model some of these ideas of improvisation, of taking risks, of taking chances, even of making mistakes?
Maybe it can make for better robotic teammates.
So I worked for quite a long time on these models and I implemented them on a number of robots.
Here you can see a very early example with the robots trying to use this embodied artificial intelligence to try to match my movements as closely as possible.
It's sort of like a game.
Let's look at it.
You can see when I psych it out, it gets fooled.
And it's a little bit like what you might see actors do when they try to mirror each other to find the right synchrony between them.
And then, I did another experiment, and I got people off the street to use the robotic desk lamp, and try out this idea of embodied artificial intelligence.
So, I actually used two kinds of brains for the same robot.
The robot is the same lamp that you saw, and I put two brains in it.
For one half of the people, I put in a brain that's kind of the traditional, calculated robotic brain.
It waits for its turn, it analyzes everything, it plans.
Let's call it the calculated brain.
The other got more the stage actor, risk-taker brain.
Let's call it the adventurous brain.
It sometimes acts without knowing everything it has to know.
It sometimes makes mistakes and corrects them.
And I had them do this very tedious task that took almost 20 minutes, and they had to work together, somehow simulating, like, a factory job of repetitively doing the same thing.
What I found is that people actually loved the adventurous robot.
They thought it was more intelligent, more committed, a better member of the team, contributed to the success of the team more.
They even called it "he" and "she," whereas people with the calculated brain called it "it," and nobody ever called it "he" or "she."
When they talked about it after the task, with the adventurous brain, they said, "By the end, we were good friends and high-fived mentally."
Whatever that means.
(Laughter) Sounds painful.
Whereas the people with the calculated brain said it was just like a lazy apprentice.
It only did what it was supposed to do and nothing more, which is almost what people expect robots to do, so I was surprised that people had higher expectations of robots than what anybody in robotics thought robots should be doing.
And in a way, I thought, maybe it's time -- just like method acting changed the way people thought about acting in the 19th century, from going from the very calculated, planned way of behaving, to a more intuitive, risk-taking, embodied way of behaving -- maybe it's time for robots to have the same kind of revolution.
A few years later, I was at my next research job at Georgia Tech in Atlanta, and I was working in a group dealing with robotic musicians.
And I thought, music: that's the perfect place to look at teamwork, coordination, timing, improvisation -- and we just got this robot playing marimba.
And the marimba, for everybody like me, it was this huge, wooden xylophone.
And when I was looking at this, I looked at other works in human-robot improvisation -- yes, there are other works in human-robot improvisation -- and they were also a little bit like a chess game.
The human would play, the robot analyzed what was played, and would improvise their own part.
So, this is what musicians called a call-and-response interaction, and it also fits very well robots and artificial intelligence.
But I thought, if I use the same ideas I used in the theater play and in the teamwork studies, maybe I can make the robots jam together like a band.
Everybody's riffing off each other, nobody is stopping for a moment.
And so I tried to do the same things, this time with music, where the robot doesn't really know what it's about to play, it just sort of moves its body and uses opportunities to play, and does what my jazz teacher when I was 17 taught me.
She said, when you improvise, sometimes you don't know what you're doing, and you still do it.
So I tried to make a robot that doesn't actually know what it's doing, but is still doing it.
So let's look at a few seconds from this performance, where the robot listens to the human musician and improvises.
And then, look how the human musician also responds to what the robot is doing and picking up from its behavior, and at some point can even be surprised by what the robot came up with.
(Music) (Music ends) (Applause) Being a musician is not just about making notes, otherwise nobody would ever go see a live show.
Musicians also communicate with their bodies, with other band members, with the audience, they use their bodies to express the music.
And I thought, we already have a robot musician on stage, why not make it be a full-fledged musician?
And I started designing a socially expressive head for the robot.
The head doesn’t actually touch the marimba, it just expresses what the music is like.
These are some napkin sketches from a bar in Atlanta that was dangerously located exactly halfway between my lab and my home.
So I spent, I would say, on average, three to four hours a day there.
I think.
(Laughter) And I went back to my animation tools and tried to figure out not just what a robotic musician would look like, but especially what a robotic musician would move like, to sort of show that it doesn't like what the other person is playing -- and maybe show whatever beat it's feeling at the moment.
So we ended up actually getting the money to build this robot, which was nice.
I'm going to show you now the same kind of performance, this time with a socially expressive head.
And notice one thing -- how the robot is really showing us the beat it's picking up from the human, while also giving the human a sense that the robot knows what it's doing.
And also how it changes the way it moves as soon as it starts its own solo.
(Music) Now it's looking at me, showing that it's listening.
(Music) Now look at the final chord of the piece again.
And this time the robot communicates with its body when it's busy doing its own thing, and when it's ready to coordinate the final chord with me.
(Music) (Music ending) (Final chord) (Applause) Thanks.
I hope you see how much this part of the body that doesn't touch the instrument actually helps with the musical performance.
And at some point -- we are in Atlanta, so obviously some rapper will come into our lab at some point -- and we had this rapper come in and do a little jam with the robot.
Here you can see the robot basically responding to the beat.
Notice two things: one, how irresistible it is to join the robot while it's moving its head.
You kind of want to move your own head when it does it.
And second, even though the rapper is really focused on his iPhone, as soon as the robot turns to him, he turns back.
So even though it's just in the periphery of his vision, in the corner of his eye, it's very powerful.
And the reason is that we can't ignore physical things moving in our environment.
We are wired for that.
So if you have a problem -- maybe your partner is looking at their iPhone or smartphone too much -- you might want to have a robot there to get their attention.
(Laughter) (Music) (Music ends) (Applause) Just to introduce the last robot that we've worked on, it came out of something surprising that we found: Some point people didn't care about the robot being intelligent, able to improvise and listen, and do all these embodied intelligence things that I spent years developing.
They really liked that the robot was enjoying the music.
(Laughter) And they didn't say the robot was moving to the music, they said "enjoying" the music.
And we thought, why don't we take this idea, and I designed a new piece of furniture.
This time it wasn't a desk lamp, it was a speaker dock, one of those things you plug your smartphone in.
And I thought, what would happen if your speaker dock didn't just play the music for you, but would actually enjoy it, too?
And so again, here are some animation tests from an early stage.
(Laughter) And this is what the final product looked like.
(Music) (Music ends) So, a lot of bobbing heads.
(Applause) A lot of bobbing heads in the audience, so we can still see robots influence people.
And it's not just fun and games.
I think one of the reasons I care so much about robots that use their body to communicate and use their body to move is -- I'm going to let you in on a little secret we roboticists are hiding -- is that every one of you is going to be living with a robot at some point in your life.
Somewhere in your future, there will be a robot in your life.
If not in yours, your children's lives.
And I want these robots to be more fluent, more engaging, more graceful than currently they seem to be.
And for that I think maybe robots need to be less like chess players and more like stage actors and more like musicians.
Maybe they should be able to take chances and improvise.
Maybe they should be able to anticipate what you're about to do.
Maybe they even need to be able to make mistakes and correct them, because in the end, we are human.
And maybe as humans, robots that are a little less than perfect are just perfect for us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So when I was in Morocco, in Casablanca, not so long ago, I met a young unmarried mother called Faiza.
Faiza showed me photos of her infant son and she told me the story of his conception, pregnancy, and delivery.
It was a remarkable tale, but Faiza saved the best for last.
"You know, I am a virgin," she told me.
"I have two medical certificates to prove it."
This is the modern Middle East, where two millennia after the coming of Christ, virgin births are still a fact of life.
Faiza's story is just one of hundreds I've heard over the years, traveling across the Arab region talking to people about sex.
Now, I know this might sound like a dream job, or possibly a highly dubious occupation, but for me, it's something else altogether.
I'm half Egyptian, and I'm Muslim.
But I grew up in Canada, far from my Arab roots.
Like so many who straddle East and West, I've been drawn, over the years, to try to better understand my origins.
That I chose to look at sex comes from my background in HIV/AIDS, as a writer and a researcher and an activist.
Sex lies at the heart of an emerging epidemic in the Middle East and North Africa, which is one of only two regions in the world where HIV/AIDS is still on the rise.
Now sexuality is an incredibly powerful lens with which to study any society, because what happens in our intimate lives is reflected by forces on a bigger stage: in politics and economics, in religion and tradition, in gender and generations.
As I found, if you really want to know a people, you start by looking inside their bedrooms.
Now to be sure, the Arab world is vast and varied.
But running across it are three red lines -- these are topics you are not supposed to challenge in word or deed.
The first of these is politics.
But the Arab Spring has changed all that, in uprisings which have blossomed across the region since 2011.
Now while those in power, old and new, continue to cling to business as usual, millions are still pushing back, and pushing forward to what they hope will be a better life.
That second red line is religion.
But now religion and politics are connected, with the rise of such groups as the Muslim Brotherhood.
And some people, at least, are starting to ask questions about the role of Islam in public and private life.
You know, as for that third red line, that off-limits subject, what do you think it might be?
Audience: Sex.
Shereen El Feki: Louder, I can't hear you.
Audience: Sex.
SEF: Again, please don't be shy.
Audience: Sex.
SEF: Absolutely, that's right, it's sex. (Laughter) Across the Arab region, the only accepted context for sex is marriage -- approved by your parents, sanctioned by religion and registered by the state.
Marriage is your ticket to adulthood.
If you don't tie the knot, you can't move out of your parents' place, and you're not supposed to be having sex, and you're definitely not supposed to be having children.
It's a social citadel; it's an impregnable fortress which resists any assault, any alternative.
And around the fortress is this vast field of taboo against premarital sex, against condoms, against abortion, against homosexuality, you name it.
Faiza was living proof of this.
Her virginity statement was not a piece of wishful thinking.
Although the major religions of the region extoll premarital chastity, in a patriarchy, boys will be boys.
Men have sex before marriage, and people more or less turn a blind eye.
Not so for women, who are expected to be virgins on their wedding night -- that is, to turn up with your hymen intact.
This is not a question of individual concern, this is a matter of family honor, and in particular, men's honor.
And so women and their relatives will go to great lengths to preserve this tiny piece of anatomy -- from female genital mutilation, to virginity testing, to hymen repair surgery.
Faiza chose a different route: non-vaginal sex.
Only she became pregnant all the same.
But Faiza didn't actually realize this, because there's so little sexuality education in schools, and so little communication in the family.
When her condition became hard to hide, Faiza's mother helped her flee her father and brothers.
This is because honor killings are a real threat for untold numbers of women in the Arab region.
And so when Faiza eventually fetched up at a hospital in Casablanca, the man who offered to help her, instead tried to rape her.
Sadly, Faiza is not alone.
In Egypt, where my research is focused, I have seen plenty of trouble in and out of the citadel.
There are legions of young men who can't afford to get married, because marriage has become a very expensive proposition.
They are expected to bear the burden of costs in married life, but they can't find jobs.
This is one of the major drivers of the recent uprisings, and it is one of the reasons for the rising age of marriage in much of the Arab region.
There are career women who want to get married, but can't find a husband, because they defy gender expectations, or as one young female doctor in Tunisia put it to me, "The women, they are becoming more and more open.
But the man, he is still at the prehistoric stage."
And then there are men and women who cross the heterosexual line, who have sex with their own sex, or who have a different gender identity.
They are on the receiving end of laws which punish their activities, even their appearance.
And they face a daily struggle with social stigma, with family despair, and with religious fire and brimstone.
Now, it's not as if it's all rosy in the marital bed either.
Couples who are looking for greater happiness, greater sexual happiness in their married lives, but are at a loss of how to achieve it, especially wives, who are afraid of being seen as bad women if they show some spark in the bedroom.
And then there are those whose marriages are actually a veil for prostitution.
They have been sold by their families, often to wealthy Arab tourists.
This is just one face of a booming sex trade across the Arab region.
Now raise your hand if any of this is sounding familiar to you, from your part of the world.
Yeah. It's not as if the Arab world has a monopoly on sexual hangups.
And although we don't yet have an Arab Kinsey Report to tell us exactly what's happening inside bedrooms across the Arab region, It's pretty clear that something is not right.
Double standards for men and women, sex as a source of shame, family control limiting individual choices, and a vast gulf between appearance and reality: what people are doing and what they're willing to admit to, and a general reluctance to move beyond private whispers to a serious and sustained public discussion.
As one doctor in Cairo summed it up for me, "Here, sex is the opposite of sport.
Football, everybody talks about it, but hardly anyone plays.
But sex, everybody is doing it, but nobody wants to talk about it." (Laughter) (Music) (In Arabic) SEF: I want to give you a piece of advice, which if you follow it, will make you happy in life.
When your husband reaches out to you, when he seizes a part of your body, sigh deeply and look at him lustily.
When he penetrates you with his penis, try to talk flirtatiously and move yourself in harmony with him.
Hot stuff!
And it might sound that these handy hints come from "The Joy of Sex" or YouPorn.
But in fact, they come from a 10th-century Arabic book called "The Encyclopedia of Pleasure," which covers sex from aphrodisiacs to zoophilia, and everything in between.
The Encyclopedia is just one in a long line of Arabic erotica, much of it written by religious scholars.
Going right back to the Prophet Muhammad, there is a rich tradition in Islam of talking frankly about sex: not just its problems, but also its pleasures, and not just for men, but also for women.
A thousand years ago, we used to have whole dictionaries of sex in Arabic.
Words to cover every conceivable sexual feature, position and preference, a body of language that was rich enough to make up the body of the woman you see on this page.
Today, this history is largely unknown in the Arab region.
Even by educated people, who often feel more comfortable talking about sex in a foreign language than they do in their own tongue.
Today's sexual landscape looks a lot like Europe and America on the brink of the sexual revolution.
But while the West has opened on sex, what we found is that Arab societies appear to have been moving in the opposite direction.
In Egypt and many of its neighbors, this closing down is part of a wider closing in political, social and cultural thought.
And it is the product of a complex historical process, one which has gained ground with the rise of Islamic conservatism since the late 1970s.
"Just say no" is what conservatives around the world say to any challenge to the sexual status quo.
In the Arab region, they brand these attempts as a Western conspiracy to undermine traditional Arab and Islamic values.
But what's really at stake here is one of their most powerful tools of control: sex wrapped up in religion.
But history shows us that even as recently as our fathers' and grandfathers' day, there have been times of greater pragmatism, and tolerance, and a willingness to consider other interpretations: be it abortion, or masturbation, or even the incendiary topic of homosexuality.
It is not black and white, as conservatives would have us believe.
In these, as in so many other matters, Islam offers us at least 50 shades of gray.
(Laughter) Over my travels, I've met men and women across the Arab region who've been exploring that spectrum -- sexologists who are trying to help couples find greater happiness in their marriages, innovators who are managing to get sexuality education into schools, small groups of men and women, lesbian, gay, transgendered, transsexual, who are reaching out to their peers with online initiatives and real-world support.
Women, and increasingly men, who are starting to speak out and push back against sexual violence on the streets and in the home.
Groups that are trying to help sex workers protect themselves against HIV and other occupational hazards, and NGOs that are helping unwed mothers like Faiza find a place in society, and critically, stay with their kids.
Now these efforts are small, they're often underfunded, and they face formidable opposition.
But I am optimistic that, in the long run, times are changing, and they and their ideas will gain ground.
Social change doesn't happen in the Arab region through dramatic confrontation, beating or indeed baring of breasts, but rather through negotiation.
What we're talking here is not about a sexual revolution, but a sexual evolution, learning from other parts of the world, adapting to local conditions, forging our own path, not following one blazed by another.
That path, I hope, will one day lead us to the right to control our own bodies, and to access the information and services we need to lead satisfying and safe sexual lives.
The right to express our ideas freely, to marry whom we choose, to choose our own partners, to be sexually active or not, to decide whether to have children and when, all this without violence or force or discrimination.
Now we are very far from this across the Arab region, and so much needs to change: law, education, media, the economy, the list goes on and on, and it is the work of a generation, at least.
But it begins with a journey that I myself have made, asking hard questions of received wisdoms in sexual life.
And it is a journey which has only served to strengthen my faith, and my appreciation of local histories and cultures by showing me possibilities where I once only saw absolutes.
Now given the turmoil in many countries in the Arab region, talking about sex, challenging the taboos, seeking alternatives might sound like something of a luxury.
But at this critical moment in history, if we do not anchor freedom and justice, dignity and equality, privacy and autonomy in our personal lives, in our sexual lives, we will find it very hard to achieve in public life.
The political and the sexual are intimate bedfellows, and that is true for us all.
no matter where we live and love.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I guess it is a result of globalization that you can find Coca-Cola tins on top of Everest and a Buddhist monk in Monterey.
(Laughter) And so I just came, two days ago, from the Himalayas to your kind invitation.
So I would like to invite you, also, for a while, to the Himalayas themselves.
And to show the place where meditators, like me, who began with being a molecular biologist in Pasteur Institute, and found their way to the mountains.
So these are a few images I was lucky to take and be there.
There's Mount Kailash in Eastern Tibet -- wonderful setting.
This is from Marlboro country.
(Laughter) This is a turquoise lake.
A meditator.
This is the hottest day of the year somewhere in Eastern Tibet, on August 1.
And the night before, we camped, and my Tibetan friends said, "We are going to sleep outside."
They said, "Yes, but it's summertime."
(Laughter) So now, we are going to speak of happiness.
As a Frenchman, I must say that there are a lot of French intellectuals that think happiness is not at all interesting.
(Laughter) I just wrote an essay on happiness, and there was a controversy.
And someone wrote an article saying, "Don't impose on us the dirty work of happiness."
(Laughter) "We don't care about being happy. We need to live with passion.
We like the ups and downs of life.
We like our suffering because it's so good when it ceases for a while."
(Laughter) This is what I see from the balcony of my hermitage in the Himalayas.
It's about two meters by three, and you are all welcome any time.
(Laughter) Now, let's come to happiness or well-being.
And first of all, you know, despite what the French intellectuals say, it seems that no one wakes up in the morning thinking, "May I suffer the whole day?"
(Laughter) Which means that somehow, consciously or not, directly or indirectly, in the short or the long term, whatever we do, whatever we hope, whatever we dream -- somehow, is related to a deep, profound desire for well-being or happiness.
As Pascal said, even the one who hangs himself, somehow, is looking for cessation of suffering.
But then, if you look in the literature, East and West, you can find incredible diversity of definition of happiness.
Some people say, I only believed in remembering the past, imagining the future, never the present.
Some people say happiness is right now; it's the quality of the freshness of the present moment.
And that led Henri Bergson, the French philosopher, to say, "All the great thinkers of humanity have left happiness in the vague so that each of them could define their own terms."
Well, that would be fine if it was just a secondary preoccupation in life.
But now, if it is something that is going to determine the quality of every instant of our life, then we better know what it is, have some clearer idea.
And probably, the fact that we don't know that is why, so often, although we seek happiness, it seems we turn our back to it.
Although we want to avoid suffering, it seems we are running somewhat towards it.
And that can also come from some kind of confusions.
One of the most common ones is happiness and pleasure.
But if you look at the characteristics of those two, pleasure is contingent upon time, upon its object, upon the place.
It is something that -- changes of nature.
Beautiful chocolate cake: first serving is delicious, second one not so much, then we feel disgust.
(Laughter) That's the nature of things.
I used to be a fan of Bach.
I can hear it two, three, five times.
If I had to hear it 24 hours, non-stop, it might be very tiring.
If you are feeling very cold, you come near a fire, it's so wonderful.
After some moments, you just go a little back, and then it starts burning.
It sort of uses itself as you experience it.
And also, again, it can -- also, it's something that you -- it is not something that is radiating outside.
Like, you can feel intense pleasure and some others around you can be suffering a lot.
Now, what, then, will be happiness?
And happiness, of course, is such a vague word, so let's say well-being.
And so, I think the best definition, according to the Buddhist view, is that well-being is not just a mere pleasurable sensation.
It is a deep sense of serenity and fulfillment.
A state that actually pervades and underlies all emotional states, and all the joys and sorrows that can come one's way.
For you, that might be surprising.
Can we have this kind of well-being while being sad?
Because we are speaking of a different level.
Look at the waves coming near the shore.
When you are at the bottom of the wave, you hit the bottom.
You hit the solid rock.
When you are surfing on the top, you are all elated.
So you go from elation to depression -- there's no depth.
Now, if you look at the high sea, there might be beautiful, calm ocean, like a mirror.
There might be storms, but the depth of the ocean is still there, unchanged.
So now, how is that?
It can only be a state of being, not just a fleeting emotion, sensation.
Even joy -- that can be the spring of happiness.
But there's also wicked joy, you can rejoice in someone's suffering.
So how do we proceed in our quest for happiness?
We think that if we could gather this and that, all the conditions, something that we say, "Everything to be happy -- to have everything to be happy."
That very sentence already reveals the doom, destruction of happiness.
To have everything.
And also, when things go wrong, we try to fix the outside so much, but our control of the outer world is limited, temporary, and often, illusory.
So now, look at inner conditions.
Isn't it the mind that translates the outer condition into happiness and suffering?
And isn't that stronger?
We know, by experience, that we can be what we call "a little paradise," and yet, be completely unhappy within.
The Dalai Lama was once in Portugal, and there was a lot of construction going on everywhere.
So one evening, he said, "Look, you are doing all these things, but isn't it nice, also, to build something within?"
And he said, "[Without] that -- even if you get a high-tech flat on the 100th floor of a super-modern and comfortable building, if you are deeply unhappy within, all you are going to look for is a window from which to jump."
So now, at the opposite, we know a lot of people who, in very difficult circumstances, manage to keep serenity, inner strength, inner freedom, confidence.
So now, if the inner conditions are stronger -- of course, the outer conditions do influence, and it's wonderful to live longer, healthier, to have access to information, education, to be able to travel, to have freedom.
However, this is not enough.
The experience that translates everything is within the mind.
So then, when we ask oneself how to nurture the condition for happiness, the inner conditions, and which are those which will undermine happiness.
So then, this just needs to have some experience.
We have to know from ourselves, there are certain states of mind that are conducive to this flourishing, to this well-being, what the Greeks called eudaimonia, flourishing.
There are some which are adverse to this well-being.
And so, if we look from our own experience, anger, hatred, jealousy, arrogance, obsessive desire, strong grasping, they don't leave us in such a good state after we have experienced it.
And also, they are detrimental to others' happiness.
So we may consider that the more those are invading our mind, and, like a chain reaction, the more we feel miserable, we feel tormented.
At the opposite, everyone knows deep within that an act of selfless generosity, if from the distance, without anyone knowing anything about it, we could save a child's life, make someone happy.
We don't need the recognition. We don't need any gratitude.
Just the mere fact of doing that fills such a sense of adequation with our deep nature.
And we would like to be like that all the time.
So is that possible, to change our way of being, to transform one's mind?
Aren't those negative emotions, or destructive emotions, inherent to the nature of mind?
Is change possible in our emotions, in our traits, in our moods?
For that we have to ask, what is the nature of mind?
And if we look from the experiential point of view, there is a primary quality of consciousness that's just the mere fact to be cognitive, to be aware.
Consciousness is like a mirror that allows all images to rise on it.
You can have ugly faces, beautiful faces in the mirror.
The mirror allows that, but the mirror is not tainted, is not modified, is not altered by those images.
Likewise, behind every single thought there is the bare consciousness, pure awareness.
This is the nature.
It cannot be tainted intrinsically with hatred or jealousy because then, if it was always there -- like a dye that would permeate the whole cloth -- then it would be found all the time, somewhere.
We know we're not always angry, always jealous, always generous.
So, because the basic fabric of consciousness is this pure cognitive quality that differentiates it from a stone, there is a possibility for change because all emotions are fleeting.
That is the ground for mind training.
Mind training is based on the idea that two opposite mental factors cannot happen at the same time.
You could go from love to hate.
But you cannot, at the same time, toward the same object, the same person, want to harm and want to do good.
You cannot, in the same gesture, shake hand and give a blow.
So, there are natural antidotes to emotions that are destructive to our inner well-being.
So that's the way to proceed.
A kind of sense of inner freedom as opposite to intense grasping and obsession.
Benevolence, loving kindness against hatred.
But, of course, each emotion then would need a particular antidote.
Another way is to try to find a general antidote to all emotions, and that's by looking at the very nature.
Usually, when we feel annoyed, hatred or upset with someone, or obsessed with something, the mind goes again and again to that object.
Each time it goes to the object, it reinforces that obsession or that annoyance.
So then, it's a self-perpetuating process.
So what we need to look for now is, instead of looking outward, we look inward.
Look at anger itself.
It looks very menacing, like a billowing monsoon cloud or thunderstorm.
We think we could sit on the cloud, but if you go there, it's just mist.
Likewise, if you look at the thought of anger, it will vanish like frost under the morning sun.
If you do this again and again, the propensity, the tendencies for anger to arise again will be less and less each time you dissolve it.
And, at the end, although it may rise, it will just cross the mind, like a bird crossing the sky without leaving any track.
So this is the principal of mind training.
Now, it takes time, because it took time for all those faults in our mind, the tendencies, to build up, so it will take time to unfold them as well.
But that's the only way to go.
Mind transformation -- that is the very meaning of meditation.
It means familiarization with a new way of being, new way of perceiving things, which is more in adequation with reality, with interdependence, with the stream and continuous transformation, which our being and our consciousness is.
So, the interface with cognitive science, since we need to come to that, it was, I suppose, the subject of -- we have to deal in such a short time -- with brain plasticity.
All the nominal connections, in numbers and quantities, were thought, until the last 20 years, to be more or less fixed when we reached adult age.
Now, recently, it has been found that it can change a lot.
A violinist, as we heard, who has done 10,000 hours of violin practice, some area that controls the movements of fingers in the brain changes a lot, increasing reinforcement of the synaptic connections.
So can we do that with human qualities?
With loving kindness, with patience, with openness?
So that's what those great meditators have been doing.
Some of them who came to the labs, like in Madison, Wisconsin, or in Berkeley, did 20 to 40,000 hours of meditation.
They do, like, three years' retreat, where they do meditate 12 hours a day.
And then, the rest of their life, they will do three or four hours a day.
They are real Olympic champions of mind training.
(Laughter) This is the place where the meditators -- you can see it's kind of inspiring.
Now, here with 256 electrodes.
(Laughter) So what did they find?
The scientific embargo -- a paper has been submitted to "Nature," hopefully, it will be accepted.
It deals with the state of compassion, unconditional compassion.
We asked meditators, who have been doing that for years and years, to put their mind in a state where there's nothing but loving kindness, total availability to sentient being.
Of course, during the training, we do that with objects.
We think of people suffering, of people we love, but at some point, it can be a state which is all pervading.
Here is the preliminary result, which I can show because it's already been shown.
The bell curve shows 150 controls, and what is being looked at is the difference between the right and the left frontal lobe.
In very short, people who have more activity in the right side of the prefrontal cortex are more depressed, withdrawn.
It's the opposite on the left side: more tendency to altruism, to happiness, to express, and curiosity and so forth.
So there's a basic line for people. And also, it can be changed.
If you see a comic movie, you go off to the left side.
If you are happy about something, you'll go more to the left side.
If you have a bout of depression, you'll go to the right side.
Here, the -0.5 is the full standard deviation of a meditator who meditated on compassion.
It's something that is totally out of the bell curve.
So, I've no time to go into all the different scientific results.
Hopefully, they will come.
But they found that -- this is after three and a half hours in an fMRI, it's like coming out of a space ship.
Also, it has been shown in other labs -- for instance, Paul Ekman's labs in Berkeley -- that some meditators are able, also, to control their emotional response more than it could be thought.
Like the startle experiments, for example.
If you sit a guy on a chair with all this apparatus measuring your physiology, and there's kind of a bomb that goes off, it's such an instinctive response that, in 20 years, they never saw anyone who would not jump.
Some meditators, without trying to stop it, but simply by being completely open, thinking that that bang is just going to be a small event like a shooting star, they are able not to move at all.
So the whole point of that is not, sort of, to make, like, a circus thing of showing exceptional beings who can jump, or whatever.
It's more to say that mind training matters.
This is not a supplementary vitamin for the soul.
This is something that's going to determine the quality of every instant of our lives.
We are ready to spend 15 years achieving education.
We love to do jogging, fitness.
We do all kinds of things to remain beautiful.
Yet, we spend surprisingly little time taking care of what matters most -- the way our mind functions -- which, again, is the ultimate thing that determines the quality of our experience.
Now, compassion is supposed to be put in action.
That's what we try to do in different places.
Just this one example is worth a lot of work.
This lady with bone TB, left alone in a tent, was going to die with her only daughter.
One year later, how she is.
Different schools and clinics we've been doing in Tibet.
And just, I leave you with the beauty of those looks that tells more about happiness than I could ever say.
(Laughter) And jumping monks of Tibet.
(Laughter) Flying monks.
Thank you very much.
Some of my most wonderful memories of childhood are of spending time with my grandmother, Mamar, in our four-family home in Brooklyn, New York.
Her apartment was an oasis.
It was a place where I could sneak a cup of coffee, which was really warm milk with just a touch of caffeine.
She loved life.
And although she worked in a factory, she saved her pennies and she traveled to Europe.
And I remember poring over those pictures with her and then dancing with her to her favorite music.
And then, when I was eight and she was 60, something changed.
She no longer worked or traveled.
She no longer danced.
There were no more coffee times.
My mother missed work and took her to doctors who couldn't make a diagnosis.
And my father, who worked at night, would spend every afternoon with her, just to make sure she ate.
Her care became all-consuming for our family.
And by the time a diagnosis was made, she was in a deep spiral.
Now many of you will recognize her symptoms.
My grandmother had depression.
A deep, life-altering depression, from which she never recovered.
And back then, so little was known about depression.
But even today, 50 years later, there's still so much more to learn.
Today, we know that women are 70 percent more likely to experience depression over their lifetimes compared with men.
And even with this high prevalence, women are misdiagnosed between 30 and 50 percent of the time.
Now we know that women are more likely to experience the symptoms of fatigue, sleep disturbance, pain and anxiety compared with men.
And these symptoms are often overlooked as symptoms of depression.
And it isn't only depression in which these sex differences occur, but they occur across so many diseases.
So it's my grandmother's struggles that have really led me on a lifelong quest.
And today, I lead a center in which the mission is to discover why these sex differences occur and to use that knowledge to improve the health of women.
Today, we know that every cell has a sex.
Now, that's a term coined by the Institute of Medicine.
And what it means is that men and women are different down to the cellular and molecular levels.
It means that we're different across all of our organs.
From our brains to our hearts, our lungs, our joints.
Now, it was only 20 years ago that we hardly had any data on women's health beyond our reproductive functions.
But then in 1993, the NIH Revitalization Act was signed into law.
And what this law did was it mandated that women and minorities be included in clinical trials that were funded by the National Institutes of Health.
And in many ways, the law has worked.
Women are now routinely included in clinical studies, and we've learned that there are major differences in the ways that women and men experience disease.
But remarkably, what we have learned about these differences is often overlooked.
So, we have to ask ourselves the question: Why leave women's health to chance?
And we're leaving it to chance in two ways.
The first is that there is so much more to learn and we're not making the investment in fully understanding the extent of these sex differences.
And the second is that we aren't taking what we have learned, and routinely applying it in clinical care.
We are just not doing enough.
So, I'm going to share with you three examples of where sex differences have impacted the health of women, and where we need to do more.
Let's start with heart disease.
It's the number one killer of women in the United States today.
This is the face of heart disease.
Linda is a middle-aged woman, who had a stent placed in one of the arteries going to her heart.
When she had recurring symptoms she went back to her doctor.
Her doctor did the gold standard test: a cardiac catheterization.
It showed no blockages.
Linda's symptoms continued.
She had to stop working.
And that's when she found us.
When Linda came to us, we did another cardiac catheterization and this time, we found clues.
But we needed another test to make the diagnosis.
So we did a test called an intracoronary ultrasound, where you use soundwaves to look at the artery from the inside out.
And what we found was that Linda's disease didn't look like the typical male disease.
The typical male disease looks like this.
There's a discrete blockage or stenosis.
Linda's disease, like the disease of so many women, looks like this.
The plaque is laid down more evenly, more diffusely along the artery, and it's harder to see.
So for Linda, and for so many women, the gold standard test wasn't gold.
Now, Linda received the right treatment.
She went back to her life and, fortunately, today she is doing well.
But Linda was lucky.
She found us, we found her disease.
But for too many women, that's not the case.
We have the tools.
We have the technology to make the diagnosis.
But it's all too often that these sex diffferences are overlooked.
So what about treatment?
A landmark study that was published two years ago asked the very important question: What are the most effective treatments for heart disease in women?
The authors looked at papers written over a 10-year period, and hundreds had to be thrown out.
And what they found out was that of those that were tossed out, 65 percent were excluded because even though women were included in the studies, the analysis didn't differentiate between women and men.
What a lost opportunity.
The money had been spent and we didn't learn how women fared.
And these studies could not contribute one iota to the very, very important question, what are the most effective treatments for heart disease in women?
I want to introduce you to Hortense, my godmother, Hung Wei, a relative of a colleague, and somebody you may recognize -- Dana, Christopher Reeve's wife.
All three women have something very important in common.
All three were diagnosed with lung cancer, the number one cancer killer of women in the United States today.
All three were nonsmokers.
Sadly, Dana and Hung Wei died of their disease.
Today, what we know is that women who are nonsmokers are three times more likely to be diagnosed with lung cancer than are men who are nonsmokers.
Now interestingly, when women are diagnosed with lung cancer, their survival tends to be better than that of men.
Now, here are some clues.
Our investigators have found that there are certain genes in the lung tumor cells of both women and men.
And these genes are activated mainly by estrogen.
And when these genes are over-expressed, it's associated with improved survival only in young women.
Now this is a very early finding and we don't yet know whether it has relevance to clinical care.
But it's findings like this that may provide hope and may provide an opportunity to save lives of both women and men.
Now, let me share with you an example of when we do consider sex differences, it can drive the science.
Several years ago a new lung cancer drug was being evaluated, and when the authors looked at whose tumors shrank, they found that 82 percent were women.
This led them to ask the question: Well, why?
And what they found was that the genetic mutations that the drug targeted were far more common in women.
And what this has led to is a more personalized approach to the treatment of lung cancer that also includes sex.
This is what we can accomplish when we don't leave women's health to chance.
We know that when you invest in research, you get results.
Take a look at the death rate from breast cancer over time.
And now take a look at the death rates from lung cancer in women over time.
Now let's look at the dollars invested in breast cancer -- these are the dollars invested per death -- and the dollars invested in lung cancer.
Now, it's clear that our investment in breast cancer has produced results.
They may not be fast enough, but it has produced results.
We can do the same for lung cancer and for every other disease.
So let's go back to depression.
Depression is the number one cause of disability in women in the world today.
Our investigators have found that there are differences in the brains of women and men in the areas that are connected with mood.
And when you put men and women in a functional MRI scanner -- that's the kind of scanner that shows how the brain is functioning when it's activated -- so you put them in the scanner and you expose them to stress.
You can actually see the difference.
And it's findings like this that we believe hold some of the clues for why we see these very significant sex differences in depression.
But even though we know that these differences occur, 66 percent of the brain research that begins in animals is done in either male animals or animals in whom the sex is not identified.
So, I think we have to ask again the question: Why leave women's health to chance?
And this is a question that haunts those of us in science and medicine who believe that we are on the verge of being able to dramatically improve the health of women.
We know that every cell has a sex.
We know that these differences are often overlooked.
And therefore we know that women are not getting the full benefit of modern science and medicine today.
We have the tools but we lack the collective will and momentum.
Women's health is an equal rights issue as important as equal pay.
And it's an issue of the quality and the integrity of science and medicine.
(Applause) So imagine the momentum we could achieve in advancing the health of women if we considered whether these sex differences were present at the very beginning of designing research.
Or if we analyzed our data by sex.
So, people often ask me: What can I do?
And here's what I suggest: First, I suggest that you think about women's health in the same way that you think and care about other causes that are important to you.
And second, and equally as important, that as a woman, you have to ask your doctor and the doctors who are caring for those who you love: Is this disease or treatment different in women?
Now, this is a profound question because the answer is likely yes, but your doctor may not know the answer, at least not yet.
But if you ask the question, your doctor will very likely go looking for the answer.
And this is so important, not only for ourselves, but for all of those whom we love.
Whether it be a mother, a daughter, a sister, a friend or a grandmother.
It was my grandmother's suffering that inspired my work to improve the health of women.
That's her legacy.
Our legacy can be to improve the health of women for this generation and for generations to come.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have spent the last years trying to resolve two enigmas: Why is productivity so disappointing in all the companies where I work?
I have worked with more than 500 companies.
Despite all the technological advances -- computers, I.T., communications, telecommunications, the Internet.
Enigma number two: Why is there so little engagement at work?
Why do people feel so miserable, even actively disengaged?
Disengaging their colleagues.
Acting against the interest of their company.
Despite all the affiliation events, the celebration, the people initiatives, the leadership development programs to train managers on how to better motivate their teams.
At the beginning, I thought there was a chicken and egg issue: Because people are less engaged, they are less productive.
Or vice versa, because they are less productive, we put more pressure and they are less engaged.
But as we were doing our analysis we realized that there was a common root cause to these two issues that relates, in fact, to the basic pillars of management.
The way we organize is based on two pillars.
The hard -- structure, processes, systems.
The soft -- feelings, sentiments, interpersonal relationships, traits, personality.
And whenever a company reorganizes, restructures, reengineers, goes through a cultural transformation program, it chooses these two pillars.
Now, we try to refine them, we try to combine them.
The real issue is -- and this is the answer to the two enigmas -- these pillars are obsolete.
Everything you read in business books is based either on one or the other or their combination.
They are obsolete.
How do they work when you try to use these approaches in front of the new complexity of business?
The hard approach, basically is that you start from strategy, requirements, structures, processes, systems, KPIs, scorecards, committees, headquarters, hubs, clusters, you name it.
I forgot all the metrics, incentives, committees, middle offices and interfaces.
What happens basically on the left, you have more complexity, the new complexity of business.
We need quality, cost, reliability, speed.
And every time there is a new requirement, we use the same approach.
We create dedicated structure processed systems, basically to deal with the new complexity of business.
The hard approach creates just complicatedness in the organization.
Let's take an example.
An automotive company, the engineering division is a five-dimensional matrix.
If you open any cell of the matrix, you find another 20-dimensional matrix.
You have Mr. Noise, Mr. Petrol Consumption, Mr. Anti-Collision Properties.
For any new requirement, you have a dedicated function in charge of aligning engineers against the new requirement.
What happens when the new requirement emerges?
Some years ago, a new requirement appeared on the marketplace: the length of the warranty period.
So therefore the new requirement is repairability, making cars easy to repair.
Otherwise when you bring the car to the garage to fix the light, if you have to remove the engine to access the lights, the car will have to stay one week in the garage instead of two hours, and the warranty budget will explode.
So, what was the solution using the hard approach?
If repairability is the new requirement, the solution is to create a new function, Mr. Repairability.
And Mr. Repairability creates the repairability process.
With a repairability scorecard, with a repairability metric and eventually repairability incentive.
That came on top of 25 other KPIs.
What percentage of these people is variable compensation?
Twenty percent at most, divided by 26 KPIs, repairability makes a difference of 0.8 percent.
What difference did it make in their actions, their choices to simplify? Zero.
But what occurs for zero impact? Mr. Repairability, process, scorecard, evaluation, coordination with the 25 other coordinators to have zero impact.
Now, in front of the new complexity of business, the only solution is not drawing boxes with reporting lines.
It is basically the interplay.
How the parts work together.
The connections, the interactions, the synapses.
It is not the skeleton of boxes, it is the nervous system of adaptiveness and intelligence.
You know, you could call it cooperation, basically.
Whenever people cooperate, they use less resources. In everything.
You know, the repairability issue is a cooperation problem.
When you design cars, please take into account the needs of those who will repair the cars in the after sales garages.
When we don't cooperate we need more time, more equipment, more systems, more teams.
We need -- When procurement, supply chain, manufacturing don't cooperate we need more stock, more inventories, more working capital.
Who will pay for that?
Shareholders? Customers?
No, they will refuse.
So who is left? The employees, who have to compensate through their super individual efforts for the lack of cooperation.
Stress, burnout, they are overwhelmed, accidents.
No wonder they disengage.
How do the hard and the soft try to foster cooperation?
The hard: In banks, when there is a problem between the back office and the front office, they don't cooperate. What is the solution?
They create a middle office.
What happens one year later?
Instead of one problem between the back and the front, now I have two problems.
Between the back and the middle and between the middle and the front.
Plus I have to pay for the middle office.
The hard approach is unable to foster cooperation.
It can only add new boxes, new bones in the skeleton.
The soft approach: To make people cooperate, we need to make them like each other.
Improve interpersonal feelings, the more people like each other, the more they will cooperate.
It is totally wrong.
It is even counterproductive.
Look, at home I have two TVs. Why?
Precisely not to have to cooperate with my wife.
(Laughter) Not to have to impose tradeoffs to my wife.
And why I try not to impose tradeoffs to my wife is precisely because I love my wife.
If I didn't love my wife, one TV would be enough: You will watch my favorite football game, if you are not happy, how is the book or the door?
(Laughter) The more we like each other, the more we avoid the real cooperation that would strain our relationships by imposing tough tradeoffs.
And we go for a second TV or we escalate the decision above for arbitration.
Definitely, these approaches are obsolete.
To deal with complexity, to enhance the nervous system, we have created what we call the smart simplicity approach based on simple rules.
Simple rule number one: Understand what others do.
What is their real work?
We need to go beyond the boxes, the job descriptions, beyond the surface of the container, to understand the real content.
Me, designer, if I put a wire here, I know that it will mean that we will have to remove the engine to access the lights.
Second, you need to reenforce integrators.
Integrators are not middle offices, they are managers, existing managers that you reinforce so that they have power and interest to make others cooperate.
How can you reinforce your managers as integrators?
By removing layers.
When there are too many layers people are too far from the action, therefore they need KPIs, metrics, they need poor proxies for reality.
They don't understand reality and they add the complicatedness of metrics, KPIs.
By removing rules -- the bigger we are, the more we need integrators, therefore the less rules we must have, to give discretionary power to managers.
And we do the opposite -- the bigger we are, the more rules we create.
And we end up with the Encyclopedia Britannica of rules.
You need to increase the quanitity of power so that you can empower everybody to use their judgment, their intelligence.
You must give more cards to people so that they have the critical mass of cards to take the risk to cooperate, to move out of insulation.
Otherwise, they will withdraw. They will disengage.
These rules, they come from game theory and organizational sociology.
You can increase the shadow of the future.
Create feedback loops that expose people to the consequences of their actions.
This is what the automotive company did when they saw that Mr. Repairability had no impact.
They said to the design engineers: Now, in three years, when the new car is launched on the market, you will move to the after sales network, and become in charge of the warranty budget, and if the warranty budget explodes, it will explode in your face. (Laughter) Much more powerful than 0.8 percent variable compensation.
You need also to increase reciprocity, by removing the buffers that make us self-sufficient.
When you remove these buffers, you hold me by the nose, I hold you by the ear.
We will cooperate.
Remove the second TV.
There are many second TVs at work that don't create value, they just provide dysfunctional self-sufficiency.
You need to reward those who cooperate and blame those who don't cooperate.
The CEO of The Lego Group, Jorgen Vig Knudstorp, has a great way to use it.
He says, blame is not for failure, it is for failing to help or ask for help.
It changes everything.
Suddenly it becomes in my interest to be transparent on my real weaknesses, my real forecast, because I know I will not be blamed if I fail, but if I fail to help or ask for help.
When you do this, it has a lot of implications on organizational design.
You stop drawing boxes, dotted lines, full lines; you look at their interplay.
It has a lot of implications on financial policies that we use.
On human resource management practices.
When you do that, you can manage complexity, the new complexity of business, without getting complicated.
You create more value with lower cost.
You simultaneously improve performance and satisfaction at work because you have removed the common root cause that hinders both.
Complicatedness: This is your battle, business leaders.
The real battle is not against competitors.
This is rubbish, very abstract.
When do we meet competitors to fight them?
The real battle is against ourselves, against our bureaucracy, our complicatedness.
Only you can fight, can do it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Joe Kowan: I have stage fright.
I've always had stage fright, and not just a little bit, it's a big bit.
And it didn't even matter until I was 27.
That's when I started writing songs, and even then I only played them for myself.
Just knowing my roommates were in the same house made me uncomfortable.
But after a couple of years, just writing songs wasn't enough.
I had all these stories and ideas, and I wanted to share them with people, but physiologically, I couldn't do it.
I had this irrational fear.
But the more I wrote, and the more I practiced, the more I wanted to perform.
So on the week of my 30th birthday, I decided I was going to go to this local open mic, and put this fear behind me.
Well, when I got there, it was packed.
There were like 20 people there.
(Laughter) And they all looked angry.
But I took a deep breath, and I signed up to play, and I felt pretty good.
Pretty good, until about 10 minutes before my turn, when my whole body rebelled, and this wave of anxiety just washed over me.
Now, when you experience fear, your sympathetic nervous system kicks in.
So you have a rush of adrenaline, your heart rate increases, your breathing gets faster.
Next your non-essential systems start to shut down, like digestion. (Laughter) So your mouth gets dry, and blood is routed away from your extremities, so your fingers don't work anymore.
Your pupils dilate, your muscles contract, your Spidey sense tingles, basically your whole body is trigger-happy. (Laughter) That condition is not conducive to performing folk music.
(Laughter) I mean, your nervous system is an idiot.
Really? Two hundred thousand years of human evolution, and it still can't tell the difference between a saber tooth tiger and 20 folksingers on a Tuesday night open mic?
(Laughter) I have never been more terrified -- until now.
(Laughter and cheers) So then it was my turn, and somehow, I get myself onto the stage, I start my song, I open my mouth to sing the first line, and this completely horrible vibrato -- you know, when your voice wavers -- comes streaming out.
And this is not the good kind of vibrato, like an opera singer has, this is my whole body just convulsing with fear.
I mean, it's a nightmare.
I'm embarrassed, the audience is clearly uncomfortable, they're focused on my discomfort.
It was so bad.
But that was my first real experience as a solo singer-songwriter.
And something good did happen -- I had the tiniest little glimpse of that audience connection that I was hoping for.
And I wanted more. But I knew I had to get past this nervousness.
That night I promised myself: I would go back every week until I wasn't nervous anymore.
And I did. I went back every single week, and sure enough, week after week, it didn't get any better. The same thing happened every week. (Laughter) I couldn't shake it.
And that's when I had an epiphany.
And I remember it really well, because I don't have a lot of epiphanies. (Laughter) All I had to do was write a song that exploits my nervousness.
That only seems authentic when I have stage fright, and the more nervous I was, the better the song would be. Easy.
So I started writing a song about having stage fright.
First, fessing up to the problem, the physical manifestations, how I would feel, how the listener might feel.
And then accounting for things like my shaky voice, and I knew I would be singing about a half-octave higher than normal, because I was nervous.
By having a song that explained what was happening to me, while it was happening, that gave the audience permission to think about it.
They didn't have to feel bad for me because I was nervous, they could experience that with me, and we were all one big happy, nervous, uncomfortable family. (Laughter) By thinking about my audience, by embracing and exploiting my problem, I was able to take something that was blocking my progress, and turn it into something that was essential for my success.
And having the stage fright song let me get past that biggest issue right in the beginning of a performance.
And then I could move on, and play the rest of my songs with just a little bit more ease.
And eventually, over time, I didn't have to play the stage fright song at all.
Except for when I was really nervous, like now. (Laughter) Would it be okay if I played the stage fright song for you?
(Applause) Can I have a sip of water?
(Music) Thank you.
♫ I'm not joking, you know, ♫ ♫ this stage fright is real. ♫ ♫ And if I'm up here trembling and singing, ♫ ♫ well, you'll know how I feel. ♫ ♫ And the mistake I'd be making, ♫ ♫ the tremolo caused by my whole body shaking. ♫ ♫ As you sit there feeling embarrassed for me, ♫ ♫ well, you don't have to be. ♫ ♫ Well, maybe just a little bit. ♫ (Laughter) ♫ And maybe I'll try to imagine you all without clothes. ♫ ♫ But singing in front of all naked strangers scares me more than anyone knows. ♫ ♫ Not to discuss this at length, ♫ ♫ but my body image was never my strength. ♫ ♫ So frankly, I wish that you all would get dressed, ♫ ♫ I mean, you're not even really naked. ♫ ♫ And I'm the one with the problem. ♫ ♫ And you tell me, don't worry so much, you'll be great. ♫ ♫ But I'm the one living with me ♫ ♫ and I know how I get. ♫ ♫ Your advice is gentle but late. ♫ ♫ If not just a bit patronizing. ♫ ♫ And that sarcastic tone doesn't help me when I sing. ♫ ♫ But we shouldn't talk about these things right now, ♫ ♫ really, I'm up on stage, and you're in the crowd. Hi. ♫ ♫ And I'm not making fun of unnurtured, irrational fear, ♫ ♫ and if I wasn't ready to face this, ♫ ♫ I sure as hell wouldn't be here. ♫ ♫ But if I belt one note out clearly, ♫ ♫ you'll know I'm recovering slowly but surely. ♫ ♫ And maybe next week, I'll set my guitar ringin' ♫ ♫ my voice clear as water, and everyone singin'. ♫ ♫ But probably I'll just get up and start groovin', ♫ ♫ my vocal cords movin', ♫ ♫ at speeds slightly faster than sound. ♫ (Applause)
I'd like to reimagine education.
The last year has seen the invention of a new four-letter word.
It starts with an M.
MOOC: massive open online courses.
Many organizations are offering these online courses to students all over the world, in the millions, for free.
Anybody who has an Internet connection and the will to learn can access these great courses from excellent universities and get a credential at the end of it.
Now, in this discussion today, I'm going to focus on a different aspect of MOOCs.
We are taking what we are learning and the technologies we are developing in the large and applying them in the small to create a blended model of education to really reinvent and reimagine what we do in the classroom.
Now, our classrooms could use change.
So, here's a classroom at this little three-letter institute in the Northeast of America, MIT.
And this was a classroom about 50 or 60 years ago, and this is a classroom today.
What's changed?
The seats are in color.
Whoop-de-do.
Education really hasn't changed in the past 500 years.
The last big innovation in education was the printing press and the textbooks.
Everything else has changed around us.
You know, from healthcare to transportation, everything is different, but education hasn't changed.
It's also been a real issue in terms of access.
So what you see here is not a rock concert.
And the person you see at the end of the stage is not Madonna.
This is a classroom at the Obafemi Awolowo University in Nigeria.
Now, we've all heard of distance education, but the students way in the back, 200 feet away from the instructor, I think they are undergoing long-distance education.
Now, I really believe that we can transform education, both in quality and scale and access, through technology.
For example, at edX, we are trying to transform education through online technologies.
Given education has been calcified for 500 years, we really cannot think about reengineering it, micromanaging it.
We really have to completely reimagine it.
It's like going from ox carts to the airplane.
Even the infrastructure has to change.
Everything has to change.
We need to go from lectures on the blackboard to online exercises, online videos.
We have to go to interactive virtual laboratories and gamification.
We have to go to completely online grading and peer interaction and discussion boards.
Everything really has to change.
So at edX and a number of other organizations, we are applying these technologies to education through MOOCs to really increase access to education.
And you heard of this example, where, when we launched our very first course -- and this was an MIT-hard circuits and electronics course -- about a year and a half ago, 155,000 students from 162 countries enrolled in this course.
And we had no marketing budget.
Now, 155,000 is a big number.
This number is bigger than the total number of alumni of MIT in its 150-year history.
7,200 students passed the course, and this was a hard course.
7,200 is also a big number.
If I were to teach at MIT two semesters every year, I would have to teach for 40 years before I could teach this many students.
Now these large numbers are just one part of the story.
So today, I want to discuss a different aspect, the other side of MOOCs, take a different perspective.
We are taking what we develop and learn in the large and applying it in the small to the classroom, to create a blended model of learning.
But before I go into that, let me tell you a story.
When my daughter turned 13, became a teenager, she stopped speaking English, and she began speaking this new language.
I call it teen-lish.
It's a digital language.
It's got two sounds: a grunt and a silence.
"Honey, come over for dinner."
"Hmm."
"Did you hear me?"
Silence. (Laughter) "Can you listen to me?"
&amp;quot;Hmm.&amp;quot; So we had a real issue with communicating, and we were just not communicating, until one day I had this epiphany.
I texted her. (Laughter) I got an instant response.
I said, no, that must have been by accident.
She must have thought, you know, some friend of hers was calling her.
So I texted her again. Boom, another response.
I said, this is great.
And so since then, our life has changed.
I text her, she responds.
It's just been absolutely great.
(Applause) So our millennial generation is built differently.
Now, I'm older, and my youthful looks might belie that, but I'm not in the millennial generation.
But our kids are really different.
The millennial generation is completely comfortable with online technology.
So why are we fighting it in the classroom?
Let's not fight it. Let's embrace it.
In fact, I believe -- and I have two fat thumbs, I can't text very well -- but I'm willing to bet that with evolution, our kids and their grandchildren will develop really, really little, itty-bitty thumbs to text much better, that evolution will fix all of that stuff.
But what if we embraced technology, embraced the millennial generation's natural predilections, and really think about creating these online technologies, blend them into their lives.
So here's what we can do.
So rather than driving our kids into a classroom, herding them out there at 8 o'clock in the morning -- I hated going to class at 8 o'clock in the morning, so why are we forcing our kids to do that?
So instead what you do is you have them watch videos and do interactive exercises in the comfort of their dorm rooms, in their bedroom, in the dining room, in the bathroom, wherever they're most creative.
Then they come into the classroom for some in-person interaction.
They can have discussions amongst themselves.
They can solve problems together.
They can work with the professor and have the professor answer their questions.
In fact, with edX, when we were teaching our first course on circuits and electronics around the world, this was happening unbeknownst to us.
Two high school teachers at the Sant High School in Mongolia had flipped their classroom, and they were using our video lectures and interactive exercises, where the learners in the high school, 15-year-olds, mind you, would go and do these things in their own homes and they would come into class, and as you see from this image here, they would interact with each other and do some physical laboratory work.
And the only way we discovered this was they wrote a blog and we happened to stumble upon that blog.
We were also doing other pilots.
So we did a pilot experimental blended courses, working with San Jose State University in California, again, with the circuits and electronics course.
You'll hear that a lot. That course has become sort of like our petri dish of learning.
So there, the students would, again, the instructors flipped the classroom, blended online and in person, and the results were staggering.
Now don't take these results to the bank just yet.
Just wait a little bit longer as we experiment with this some more, but the early results are incredible.
So traditionally, semester upon semester, for the past several years, this course, again, a hard course, had a failure rate of about 40 to 41 percent every semester.
With this blended class late last year, the failure rate fell to nine percent.
So the results can be extremely, extremely good.
Now before we go too far into this, I'd like to spend some time discussing some key ideas.
What are some key ideas that makes all of this work?
One idea is active learning.
The idea here is, rather than have students walk into class and watch lectures, we replace this with what we call lessons.
Lessons are interleaved sequences of videos and interactive exercises.
So a student might watch a five-, seven-minute video and follow that with an interactive exercise.
Think of this as the ultimate Socratization of education.
You teach by asking questions.
And this is a form of learning called active learning, and really promoted by a very early paper, in 1972, by Craik and Lockhart, where they said and discovered that learning and retention really relates strongly to the depth of mental processing.
Students learn much better when they are interacting with the material.
The second idea is self-pacing.
Now, when I went to a lecture hall, and if you were like me, by the fifth minute I would lose the professor.
I wasn't all that smart, and I would be scrambling, taking notes, and then I would lose the lecture for the rest of the hour.
Instead, wouldn't it be nice with online technologies, we offer videos and interactive engagements to students?
They can hit the pause button.
They can rewind the professor.
Heck, they can even mute the professor.
So this form of self-pacing can be very helpful to learning.
The third idea that we have is instant feedback.
With instant feedback, the computer grades exercises.
I mean, how else do you teach 150,000 students?
Your computer is grading all the exercises.
And we've all submitted homeworks, and your grades come back two weeks later, you've forgotten all about it.
I don't think I've still received some of my homeworks from my undergraduate days.
Some are never graded.
So with instant feedback, students can try to apply answers.
If they get it wrong, they can get instant feedback.
They can try it again and try it again, and this really becomes much more engaging.
They get the instant feedback, and this little green check mark that you see here is becoming somewhat of a cult symbol at edX.
Learners are telling us that they go to bed at night dreaming of the green check mark.
In fact, one of our learners who took the circuits course early last year, he then went on to take a software course from Berkeley at the end of the year, and this is what the learner had to say on our discussion board when he just started that course about the green check mark: &amp;quot;Oh god; have I missed you.&amp;quot; When's the last time you've seen students posting comments like this about homework?
My colleague Ed Bertschinger, who heads up the physics department at MIT, has this to say about instant feedback: He indicated that instant feedback turns teaching moments into learning outcomes.
The next big idea is gamification.
You know, all learners engage really well with interactive videos and so on.
You know, they would sit down and shoot alien spaceships all day long until they get it.
So we applied these gamification techniques to learning, and we can build these online laboratories.
How do you teach creativity? How do you teach design?
We can do this through online labs and use computing power to build these online labs.
So as this little video shows here, you can engage students much like they design with Legos.
So here, the learners are building a circuit with Lego-like ease.
And this can also be graded by the computer.
Fifth is peer learning.
So here, we use discussion forums and discussions and Facebook-like interaction not as a distraction, but to really help students learn.
Let me tell you a story.
When we did our circuits course for the 155,000 students, I didn't sleep for three nights leading up to the launch of the course.
I told my TAs, okay, 24/7, we're going to be up monitoring the forum, answering questions.
They had answered questions for 100 students.
How do you do that for 150,000?
So one night I'm sitting up there, at 2 a.m. at night, and I think there's this question from a student from Pakistan, and he asked a question, and I said, okay, let me go and type up an answer, I don't type all that fast, and I begin typing up the answer, and before I can finish, another student from Egypt popped in with an answer, not quite right, so I'm fixing the answer, and before I can finish, a student from the U.S.
had popped in with a different answer.
And then I sat back, fascinated.
Boom, boom, boom, boom, the students were discussing and interacting with each other, and by 4 a.m. that night, I'm totally fascinated, having this epiphany, and by 4 a.m. in the morning, they had discovered the right answer.
And all I had to do was go and bless it, "Good answer."
So this is absolutely amazing, where students are learning from each other, and they're telling us that they are learning by teaching.
Now this is all not just in the future.
This is happening today.
So we are applying these blended learning pilots in a number of universities and high schools around the world, from Tsinghua in China to the National University of Mongolia in Mongolia to Berkeley in California -- all over the world.
And these kinds of technologies really help, the blended model can really help revolutionize education.
It can also solve a practical problem of MOOCs, the business aspect.
We can also license these MOOC courses to other universities, and therein lies a revenue model for MOOCs, where the university that licenses it with the professor can use these online courses like the next-generation textbook.
They can use as much or as little as they like, and it becomes a tool in the teacher's arsenal.
Finally, I would like to have you dream with me for a little bit.
I would like us to really reimagine education.
We will have to move from lecture halls to e-spaces.
We have to move from books to tablets like the Aakash in India or the Raspberry Pi, 20 dollars.
The Aakash is 40 dollars.
We have to move from bricks-and-mortar school buildings to digital dormitories.
But I think at the end of the day, I think we will still need one lecture hall in our universities.
Otherwise, how else do we tell our grandchildren that your grandparents sat in that room in neat little rows like cornstalks and watched this professor at the end talk about content and, you know, you didn't even have a rewind button?
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you. (Applause)
In 2007, I became the attorney general of the state of New Jersey.
Before that, I'd been a criminal prosecutor, first in the Manhattan district attorney's office, and then at the United States Department of Justice.
But when I became the attorney general, two things happened that changed the way I see criminal justice.
The first is that I asked what I thought were really basic questions.
I wanted to understand who we were arresting, who we were charging, and who we were putting in our nation's jails and prisons.
I also wanted to understand if we were making decisions in a way that made us safer.
And I couldn't get this information out.
It turned out that most big criminal justice agencies like my own didn't track the things that matter.
So after about a month of being incredibly frustrated, I walked down into a conference room that was filled with detectives and stacks and stacks of case files, and the detectives were sitting there with yellow legal pads taking notes.
They were trying to get the information I was looking for by going through case by case for the past five years.
And as you can imagine, when we finally got the results, they weren't good.
It turned out that we were doing a lot of low-level drug cases on the streets just around the corner from our office in Trenton.
The second thing that happened is that I spent the day in the Camden, New Jersey police department.
Now, at that time, Camden, New Jersey, was the most dangerous city in America.
I ran the Camden Police Department because of that.
I spent the day in the police department, and I was taken into a room with senior police officials, all of whom were working hard and trying very hard to reduce crime in Camden.
And what I saw in that room, as we talked about how to reduce crime, were a series of officers with a lot of little yellow sticky notes.
And they would take a yellow sticky and they would write something on it and they would put it up on a board.
And one of them said, "We had a robbery two weeks ago.
We have no suspects."
And another said, "We had a shooting in this neighborhood last week. We have no suspects."
We weren't using data-driven policing.
We were essentially trying to fight crime with yellow Post-it notes.
Now, both of these things made me realize fundamentally that we were failing.
We didn't even know who was in our criminal justice system, we didn't have any data about the things that mattered, and we didn't share data or use analytics or tools to help us make better decisions and to reduce crime.
And for the first time, I started to think about how we made decisions.
When I was an assistant D.A., and when I was a federal prosecutor, I looked at the cases in front of me, and I generally made decisions based on my instinct and my experience.
When I became attorney general, I could look at the system as a whole, and what surprised me is that I found that that was exactly how we were doing it across the entire system -- in police departments, in prosecutors's offices, in courts and in jails.
And what I learned very quickly is that we weren't doing a good job.
So I wanted to do things differently.
I wanted to introduce data and analytics and rigorous statistical analysis into our work.
In short, I wanted to moneyball criminal justice.
Now, moneyball, as many of you know, is what the Oakland A's did, where they used smart data and statistics to figure out how to pick players that would help them win games, and they went from a system that was based on baseball scouts who used to go out and watch players and use their instinct and experience, the scouts' instincts and experience, to pick players, from one to use smart data and rigorous statistical analysis to figure out how to pick players that would help them win games.
It worked for the Oakland A's, and it worked in the state of New Jersey.
We took Camden off the top of the list as the most dangerous city in America.
We reduced murders there by 41 percent, which actually means 37 lives were saved.
And we reduced all crime in the city by 26 percent.
We also changed the way we did criminal prosecutions.
So we went from doing low-level drug crimes that were outside our building to doing cases of statewide importance, on things like reducing violence with the most violent offenders, prosecuting street gangs, gun and drug trafficking, and political corruption.
And all of this matters greatly, because public safety to me is the most important function of government.
If we're not safe, we can't be educated, we can't be healthy, we can't do any of the other things we want to do in our lives.
And we live in a country today where we face serious criminal justice problems.
We have 12 million arrests every single year.
The vast majority of those arrests are for low-level crimes, like misdemeanors, 70 to 80 percent.
Less than five percent of all arrests are for violent crime.
Yet we spend 75 billion, that's b for billion, dollars a year on state and local corrections costs.
Right now, today, we have 2.3 million people in our jails and prisons.
And we face unbelievable public safety challenges because we have a situation in which two thirds of the people in our jails are there waiting for trial.
They haven't yet been convicted of a crime.
They're just waiting for their day in court.
And 67 percent of people come back.
Our recidivism rate is amongst the highest in the world.
Almost seven in 10 people who are released from prison will be rearrested in a constant cycle of crime and incarceration.
So when I started my job at the Arnold Foundation, I came back to looking at a lot of these questions, and I came back to thinking about how we had used data and analytics to transform the way we did criminal justice in New Jersey.
And when I look at the criminal justice system in the United States today, I feel the exact same way that I did about the state of New Jersey when I started there, which is that we absolutely have to do better, and I know that we can do better.
So I decided to focus on using data and analytics to help make the most critical decision in public safety, and that decision is the determination of whether, when someone has been arrested, whether they pose a risk to public safety and should be detained, or whether they don't pose a risk to public safety and should be released.
Everything that happens in criminal cases comes out of this one decision.
It impacts everything.
It impacts sentencing.
It impacts whether someone gets drug treatment.
It impacts crime and violence.
And when I talk to judges around the United States, which I do all the time now, they all say the same thing, which is that we put dangerous people in jail, and we let non-dangerous, nonviolent people out.
They mean it and they believe it.
But when you start to look at the data, which, by the way, the judges don't have, when we start to look at the data, what we find time and time again, is that this isn't the case.
We find low-risk offenders, which makes up 50 percent of our entire criminal justice population, we find that they're in jail.
Take Leslie Chew, who was a Texas man who stole four blankets on a cold winter night.
He was arrested, and he was kept in jail on 3,500 dollars bail, an amount that he could not afford to pay.
And he stayed in jail for eight months until his case came up for trial, at a cost to taxpayers of more than 9,000 dollars.
And at the other end of the spectrum, we're doing an equally terrible job.
The people who we find are the highest-risk offenders, the people who we think have the highest likelihood of committing a new crime if they're released, we see nationally that 50 percent of those people are being released.
The reason for this is the way we make decisions.
Judges have the best intentions when they make these decisions about risk, but they're making them subjectively.
They're like the baseball scouts 20 years ago who were using their instinct and their experience to try to decide what risk someone poses.
They're being subjective, and we know what happens with subjective decision making, which is that we are often wrong.
What we need in this space are strong data and analytics.
What I decided to look for was a strong data and analytic risk assessment tool, something that would let judges actually understand with a scientific and objective way what the risk was that was posed by someone in front of them.
I looked all over the country, and I found that between five and 10 percent of all U.S. jurisdictions actually use any type of risk assessment tool, and when I looked at these tools, I quickly realized why.
They were unbelievably expensive to administer, they were time-consuming, they were limited to the local jurisdiction in which they'd been created.
So basically, they couldn't be scaled or transferred to other places.
So I went out and built a phenomenal team of data scientists and researchers and statisticians to build a universal risk assessment tool, so that every single judge in the United States of America can have an objective, scientific measure of risk.
In the tool that we've built, what we did was we collected 1.5 million cases from all around the United States, from cities, from counties, from every single state in the country, the federal districts.
And with those 1.5 million cases, which is the largest data set on pretrial in the United States today, we were able to basically find that there were 900-plus risk factors that we could look at to try to figure out what mattered most.
And we found that there were nine specific things that mattered all across the country and that were the most highly predictive of risk.
And so we built a universal risk assessment tool.
And it looks like this.
As you'll see, we put some information in, but most of it is incredibly simple, it's easy to use, it focuses on things like the defendant's prior convictions, whether they've been sentenced to incarceration, whether they've engaged in violence before, whether they've even failed to come back to court.
And with this tool, we can predict three things.
First, whether or not someone will commit a new crime if they're released.
Second, for the first time, and I think this is incredibly important, we can predict whether someone will commit an act of violence if they're released.
And that's the single most important thing that judges say when you talk to them.
And third, we can predict whether someone will come back to court.
And every single judge in the United States of America can use it, because it's been created on a universal data set.
What judges see if they run the risk assessment tool is this -- it's a dashboard.
At the top, you see the New Criminal Activity Score, six of course being the highest, and then in the middle you see, "Elevated risk of violence."
What that says is that this person is someone who has an elevated risk of violence that the judge should look twice at.
And then, towards the bottom, you see the Failure to Appear Score, which again is the likelihood that someone will come back to court.
Now I want to say something really important.
It's not that I think we should be eliminating the judge's instinct and experience from this process.
I don't.
I actually believe the problem that we see and the reason that we have these incredible system errors, where we're incarcerating low-level, nonviolent people and we're releasing high-risk, dangerous people, is that we don't have an objective measure of risk.
But what I believe should happen is that we should take that data-driven risk assessment and combine that with the judge's instinct and experience to lead us to better decision making.
The tool went statewide in Kentucky on July 1, and we're about to go up in a number of other U.S. jurisdictions.
Our goal, quite simply, is that every single judge in the United States will use a data-driven risk tool within the next five years.
We're now working on risk tools for prosecutors and for police officers as well, to try to take a system that runs today in America the same way it did 50 years ago, based on instinct and experience, and make it into one that runs on data and analytics.
Now, the great news about all this, and we have a ton of work left to do, and we have a lot of culture to change, but the great news about all of it is that we know it works.
It's why Google is Google, and it's why all these baseball teams use moneyball to win games.
The great news for us as well is that it's the way that we can transform the American criminal justice system.
It's how we can make our streets safer, we can reduce our prison costs, and we can make our system much fairer and more just.
Some people call it data science.
I call it moneyballing criminal justice.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Did you know that one of the first fertility drugs was made from the pee of Catholic nuns, and that even the Pope got involved?
So, this is totally true.
Back in the 1950s, scientists knew that when women enter menopause, they start releasing high levels of fertility hormones in their urine.
But there was this doctor named Bruno Lunenfeld, who wondered if he could actually isolate those hormones from the urine and use it to help women who are having trouble getting pregnant.
Obviously, the problem with this was that in order to test this idea, he needed a lot of pee from older women.
And that is not an easy thing to find.
So he and his colleagues got special permission from the Pope to collect gallons and gallons of urine from hundreds of older Catholic nuns.
And in doing so, he actually isolated hormones that are still used to help women get pregnant today, though now, they can be synthesized in a lab, and gallons of pee aren't necessary.
So why am I standing up here, telling this wonderfully intellectual audience about nun pee?
Well, I'm a science journalist and multimedia producer, who has always been fascinated by gross stuff.
So fascinated, in fact, that I started a weekly YouTube series called "Gross Science," all about the slimy, smelly, creepy underbelly of nature, medicine and technology.
Now, I think most of us would agree that there's something a little gross about pee.
You know, it's something that we don't really like to talk about, and we keep the act of doing it very private.
But when Lunenfeld peered into the world of pee, he discovered something deeply helpful to humanity.
And after a year and a half of making my show, I can tell you that very often when we explore the gross side of life, we find insights that we never would have thought we'd find, and we even often reveal beauty that we didn't think was there.
I think it's important for us to talk about gross things for a few reasons.
So, first of all, talking about gross stuff is a great tool for education, and it's an excellent way to preserve curiosity.
To explain what I mean, why don't I tell you a little bit about what I was like as a child?
So, I was what you might call a gross kid.
In fact, my love of science itself began when my parents bought me a slime chemistry set and was then only enhanced by doing gross experiments in my sixth-grade biology class.
We did things like, we swabbed surfaces around our classroom and cultured the bacteria we'd collected, and we dissected owl pellets, which are these balls of material that are undigested that owls barf up, and it's really kind of gross and awesome and cool.
Now, the fact that I was obsessed with gross stuff as a kid is not so revolutionary.
You know, lots of kids are really into gross things, like playing in dirt or collecting beetles or eating their boogers.
And why is that?
I think really little kids are like little explorers.
They just want to experience as much as they can and don't have any idea about the relative acceptability of touching a ladybug versus a stinkbug.
They just want to understand how everything works and experience as much of life as they can.
And that is pure curiosity.
But then adults step in, and we tell kids not to pick their noses and not to touch the slugs or toads or whatever else they find in the backyard, because those things are gross.
And we do that in part to keep kids safe, right?
Like, maybe picking your nose spreads germs and maybe touching that toad will give you warts, even though I don't actually think that's true.
You should feel free to touch as many toads as you want.
So at a certain point, when kids get a little bit older, there's this way that engaging with gross stuff isn't just about curiosity, it's also about, sort of, finding out where the limits are, pushing the boundaries of what's OK.
So, lots of kids of a certain age will have burping competitions or competitions to see who can make the grossest face.
And they do that in part because it's a little bit transgressive, right?
But there's another layer to why we define stuff as gross.
As humans, we've sort of extended the concept of disgust to morality.
So, the psychologist Paul Rozin would say that many of the things we categorize as gross are things that reminds us that we're just animals.
These are things like bodily fluids and sex and physical abnormalities and death.
And the idea that we're just animals can be really unsettling, because it can be this reminder of our own mortality.
And that can leave many of us with this deep existential angst.
Rozin would say that there's this way in which disgust and the avoidance of gross things becomes not just a way to protect our bodies, it becomes a way to protect our souls.
I think at a certain point, kids really begin to internalize this link between disgusting things and immorality.
And while I don't have any concrete data to back up this next idea, I think that for a lot of us, it happens around the time we hit puberty.
And you know -- yeah, I know.
So during puberty, our bodies are changing, and we're sweating more, and girls get their periods, and we're thinking about sex in this way that we never did before.
And through the human capacity for abstraction, this shame can settle in.
So we don't necessarily just think, "Oh, my goodness, something really gross is happening to my body!"
We think, "Oh my God, maybe I'm gross.
And maybe that means that there's something bad or wrong about me."
The thing is, that if you de facto associate gross stuff with immorality, you lose a huge part of your curiosity, because there is so much out there in the world that is a little bit gross.
Like, think about going for a walk in the woods.
You could just pay attention to the birds and the trees and the flowers and that would be fine, but in my view, you'd be missing a bigger and more awesome picture of life on this planet.
There are cycles of decay that are driving forest growth, and there are networks of fungus beneath your feet that are connecting literally all of the plants around you.
That's really amazing.
So I feel like we should be talking about gross stuff early and often with young people, so they feel like they're actually allowed to claim this bigger picture of life on our planet.
The good news is that for many of us, the fascination with gross stuff doesn't exactly go away, we just kind of pretend like it's not there.
But truthfully, we all spend sort of a big part of our lives just trying not to be gross.
When you really think about it, we're sort of just like bags of fluids and some weird tissues surrounded by a thin layer of skin.
And to a certain extent, multiple times a day, whether consciously or subconsciously, I need to remind myself not to fart publicly.
(Laughter) You know, we're desperately trying to avoid being gross all the time, so I think many of us take this kind of voyeuristic delight in learning about gross things.
This is certainly true of kids; the number of middle school teachers who show my videos in their science classes is a testament to that.
But I think it's totally true of adults, too.
You know, I think we all love hearing about gross stories, because it's a socially acceptable way to explore the gross side of ourselves.
But there's this other reason that I think talking about gross stuff is so important.
A while back, I made a video on tonsil stones -- sorry, everyone -- which are these balls of mucus and bacteria and food that get lodged in your tonsils and they smell really terrible, sometimes you cough them up and it's like -- it's awful.
And many, many people have experienced this.
But many of the people who have experienced this haven't really had a forum to talk about it.
And today, this video that I made is my most popular video.
It has millions of views.
(Laughter) And the comment section for that video became sort of like a self-help section, where people could talk about their tonsil stone experiences and, like, tips and tricks for getting rid of them.
And I think it became this great way for people to talk about something that they'd never felt comfortable taking about publicly.
And that is wonderful when it's about something as goofy as tonsil stones, but it's a little sad when a video can have an effect like that when it's about something as common as periods.
Last February, I released a video on menstruation, and to this day, I am still getting messages from people around the globe who are asking me about their periods.
There are a lot of young people -- and some not-so-young people -- out there, who are worried that what's happening to their bodies is somehow not normal.
And, of course, I always tell them that I am not a medical professional, and that, if possible, they should talk to a doctor.
But the truth of the matter is that everyone should feel comfortable talking to a doctor about their own bodies.
And that's why I think it's really important for us to start this dialogue about gross stuff from a pretty early age, so we can let our kids know that it's alright to have agency over your own body and over your own health.
There's another reason that talking to your doctor about your health and gross stuff is really, really important.
Doctors and the scientific community can only address issues when they know there's something to address.
So one of the really interesting things I learned while making the video on periods, is that I was talking to this one scientist who told me there's actually still a lot we don't know about periods.
There's a lot of basic research that still hasn't been done.
In part, that's just because there weren't a lot of scientists in the field who were women, to ask questions about it.
And it's also not a topic that women talk about publicly.
So there's this gap in what we know, just because no one was there to ask a question.
There's one final reason that I think talking about gross stuff is so important, and that's because you just never know what you're going to find when you peel back all those layers of disgustingness.
So, take the California brown sea hare.
This is a sea slug that squirts this lovely, bright purple ink at any creature that tries to eat it.
But it also happens to be one of the kinkiest creatures in the animal kingdom.
So these guys are hermaphrodites, which means they have both male and female genitalia.
And when it's time to mate, up to 20 individuals will all get together in this kind of, like, conga line and they'll all mate together.
(Laughter) A single sea hare will inseminate the partner in front of it and receive sperm from the one behind, which is sort of like an awesome time-saver, when you think about it.
(Laughter) But if scientists had only seen this and they were like, "OK, we're just not going to touch that with a stick," they would have missed the bigger thing about sea hares that makes them really remarkable.
It turns out that these sea hares have a small number of very large neurons, which makes them excellent to use in neuroscience research.
And, in fact, the scientist Eric Kandel used them in his research to understand how memories are stored.
And you know what?
He won a Nobel Prize for his work.
So go out there and pick up beetles and play in dirt and ask questions.
And own your fascination with gross stuff and don't be ashamed of it, because you never know what you're going to find.
And as I say at the end of all my videos, "Ew."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm McKenna Pope. I'm 14 years old, and when I was 13, I convinced one of the largest toy companies, toymakers, in the world, Hasbro, to change the way that they marketed one of their most best-selling products.
So allow me to tell you about it.
So I have a brother, Gavin.
When this whole shebang happened, he was four.
He loved to cook.
He was always getting ingredients out of the fridge and mixing them into these, needless to say, uneatable concoctions, or making invisible macaroni and cheese.
He wanted to be a chef really badly.
And so what better gift for a kid who wanted to be a chef than an Easy-Bake Oven. Right?
I mean, we all had those when we were little.
And he wanted one so badly.
But then he started to realize something.
In the commercials, and on the boxes for the Easy-Bake Ovens, Hasbro marketed them specifically to girls.
And the way that they did this was they would only feature girls on the boxes or in the commercials, and there would be flowery prints all over the ovens and it would be in bright pink and purple, very gender-specific colors to females, right?
So it kind of was sending a message that only girls are supposed to cook; boys aren't.
And this discouraged my brother a lot.
He thought that he wasn't supposed to want to be a chef, because that was something that girls did.
Girls cooked; boys didn't, or so was the message that Hasbro was sending.
And this got me thinking, God, I wish there was a way that I could change this, that could I have my voice heard by Hasbro so I could ask them and tell them what they were doing wrong and ask them to change it.
And that got me thinking about a website that I had learned about a few months prior called Change.org.
Change.org is an online petition-sharing platform where you can create a petition and share it across all of these social media networks, through Facebook, through Twitter, through YouTube, through Reddit, through Tumblr, through whatever you can think of.
And so I created a petition along with the YouTube video that I added to the petition basically asking Hasbro to change the way that they marketed it, in featuring boys in the commercials, on the boxes, and most of all creating them in less gender-specific colors.
So this petition started to take off -- humongously fast, you have no idea.
I was getting interviewed by all these national news outlets and press outlets, and it was amazing.
In three weeks, maybe three and a half, I had 46,000 signatures on this petition.
(Applause) Thank you.
So, needless to say, it was crazy.
Eventually, Hasbro themselves invited me to their headquarters so they could go and unveil their new Easy-Bake Oven product to me in black, silver and blue.
It was literally one of the best moments of my life.
It was like &amp;quot;Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory.&amp;quot; That thing was amazing.
What I didn't realize at the time, however, was that I had become an activist, I could change something, that even as a kid, or maybe even especially as a kid, my voice mattered, and your voice matters too.
I want to let you know it's not going to be easy, and it wasn't easy for me, because I faced a lot of obstacles.
People online, and sometimes even in real life, were disrespectful to me and my family, and talked about how the whole thing was a waste of time, and it really discouraged me.
And actually, I have some examples, because what's better revenge than displaying their idiocy?
So, let's see.
From user name Liquidsore29 -- interesting user names we have here— &amp;quot;Disgusting liberal moms making their sons gay.&amp;quot; Liquidsore29, really? Really? Okay.
How about from Whiteboy77AGS: "People always need something to (female dog) about."
From Jeffrey Gutierrez: &amp;quot;OMG, shut up. You just want money and attention.&amp;quot; So it was comments like these that really discouraged me from wanting to make change in the future because I thought, people don't care, people think it's a waste of time, and people are going to be disrespectful to me and my family.
It hurt me, and it made me think, what's the point of making change in the future?
But then I started to realize something.
Haters gonna hate.
Come on, say it with me. One, two, three: Haters gonna hate.
So let your haters hate, you know what, and make your change, because I know you can.
I look out into this crowd, and I see 400 people who came out because they wanted to know how they could make a change, and I know that you can, and all of you watching at home can too because you have so much that you can do and that you believe in, and you can trade it across all these social media, through Facebook, through Twitter, through YouTube, through Reddit, through Tumblr, through whatever else you can think of.
And you can make that change.
You can take what you believe in and turn it into a cause and change it.
And that spark that you've been hearing about all day today, you can use that spark that you have within you and turn it into a fire.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Science, science has allowed us to know so much about the far reaches of the universe, which is at the same time tremendously important and extremely remote, and yet much, much closer, much more directly related to us, there are many things we don't really understand.
And one of them is the extraordinary social complexity of the animals around us, and today I want to tell you a few stories of animal complexity.
But first, what do we call complexity?
What is complex?
Well, complex is not complicated.
Something complicated comprises many small parts, all different, and each of them has its own precise role in the machinery.
On the opposite, a complex system is made of many, many similar parts, and it is their interaction that produces a globally coherent behavior.
Complex systems have many interacting parts which behave according to simple, individual rules, and this results in emergent properties.
The behavior of the system as a whole cannot be predicted from the individual rules only.
As Aristotle wrote, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
But from Aristotle, let's move onto a more concrete example of complex systems.
These are Scottish terriers.
In the beginning, the system is disorganized.
Then comes a perturbation: milk.
Every individual starts pushing in one direction and this is what happens.
The pinwheel is an emergent property of the interactions between puppies whose only rule is to try to keep access to the milk and therefore to push in a random direction.
So it's all about finding the simple rules from which complexity emerges.
I call this simplifying complexity, and it's what we do at the chair of systems design at ETH Zurich.
We collect data on animal populations, analyze complex patterns, try to explain them.
It requires physicists who work with biologists, with mathematicians and computer scientists, and it is their interaction that produces cross-boundary competence to solve these problems.
So again, the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.
In a way, collaboration is another example of a complex system.
And you may be asking yourself which side I'm on, biology or physics?
In fact, it's a little different, and to explain, I need to tell you a short story about myself.
When I was a child, I loved to build stuff, to create complicated machines.
So I set out to study electrical engineering and robotics, and my end-of-studies project was about building a robot called ER-1 -- it looked like this— that would collect information from its environment and proceed to follow a white line on the ground.
It was very, very complicated, but it worked beautifully in our test room, and on demo day, professors had assembled to grade the project.
So we took ER-1 to the evaluation room.
It turned out, the light in that room was slightly different.
The robot's vision system got confused.
At the first bend in the line, it left its course, and crashed into a wall.
We had spent weeks building it, and all it took to destroy it was a subtle change in the color of the light in the room.
That's when I realized that the more complicated you make a machine, the more likely that it will fail due to something absolutely unexpected.
And I decided that, in fact, I didn't really want to create complicated stuff.
I wanted to understand complexity, the complexity of the world around us and especially in the animal kingdom.
Which brings us to bats.
Bechstein's bats are a common species of European bats.
They are very social animals.
Mostly they roost, or sleep, together.
And they live in maternity colonies, which means that every spring, the females meet after the winter hibernation, and they stay together for about six months to rear their young, and they all carry a very small chip, which means that every time one of them enters one of these specially equipped bat boxes, we know where she is, and more importantly, we know with whom she is.
So I study roosting associations in bats, and this is what it looks like.
During the day, the bats roost in a number of sub-groups in different boxes.
It could be that on one day, the colony is split between two boxes, but on another day, it could be together in a single box, or split between three or more boxes, and that all seems rather erratic, really.
It's called fission-fusion dynamics, the property for an animal group of regularly splitting and merging into different subgroups.
So what we do is take all these data from all these different days and pool them together to extract a long-term association pattern by applying techniques with network analysis to get a complete picture of the social structure of the colony.
Okay? So that's what this picture looks like.
In this network, all the circles are nodes, individual bats, and the lines between them are social bonds, associations between individuals.
It turns out this is a very interesting picture.
This bat colony is organized in two different communities which cannot be predicted from the daily fission-fusion dynamics.
We call them cryptic social units.
Even more interesting, in fact: Every year, around October, the colony splits up, and all bats hibernate separately, but year after year, when the bats come together again in the spring, the communities stay the same.
So these bats remember their friends for a really long time.
With a brain the size of a peanut, they maintain individualized, long-term social bonds, We didn't know that was possible.
We knew that primates and elephants and dolphins could do that, but compared to bats, they have huge brains.
So how could it be that the bats maintain this complex, stable social structure with such limited cognitive abilities?
And this is where complexity brings an answer.
To understand this system, we built a computer model of roosting, based on simple, individual rules, and simulated thousands and thousands of days in the virtual bat colony.
It's a mathematical model, but it's not complicated.
What the model told us is that, in a nutshell, each bat knows a few other colony members as her friends, and is just slightly more likely to roost in a box with them.
Simple, individual rules.
This is all it takes to explain the social complexity of these bats.
But it gets better.
Between 2010 and 2011, the colony lost more than two thirds of its members, probably due to the very cold winter.
The next spring, it didn't form two communities like every year, which may have led the whole colony to die because it had become too small.
Instead, it formed a single, cohesive social unit, which allowed the colony to survive that season and thrive again in the next two years.
What we know is that the bats are not aware that their colony is doing this.
All they do is follow simple association rules, and from this simplicity emerges social complexity which allows the colony to be resilient against dramatic changes in the population structure.
And I find this incredible.
Now I want to tell you another story, but for this we have to travel from Europe to the Kalahari Desert in South Africa.
This is where meerkats live.
I'm sure you know meerkats.
They're fascinating creatures.
They live in groups with a very strict social hierarchy.
There is one dominant pair, and many subordinates, some acting as sentinels, some acting as babysitters, some teaching pups, and so on.
What we do is put very small GPS collars on these animals to study how they move together, and what this has to do with their social structure.
And there's a very interesting example of collective movement in meerkats.
In the middle of the reserve which they live in lies a road.
On this road there are cars, so it's dangerous.
But the meerkats have to cross it to get from one feeding place to another.
So we asked, how exactly do they do this?
We found that the dominant female is mostly the one who leads the group to the road, but when it comes to crossing it, crossing the road, she gives way to the subordinates, a manner of saying, "Go ahead, tell me if it's safe."
What I didn't know, in fact, was what rules in their behavior the meerkats follow for this change at the edge of the group to happen and if simple rules were sufficient to explain it.
So I built a model, a model of simulated meerkats crossing a simulated road.
It's a simplistic model.
Moving meerkats are like random particles whose unique rule is one of alignment.
They simply move together.
When these particles get to the road, they sense some kind of obstacle, and they bounce against it.
The only difference between the dominant female, here in red, and the other individuals, is that for her, the height of the obstacle, which is in fact the risk perceived from the road, is just slightly higher, and this tiny difference in the individual's rule of movement is sufficient to explain what we observe, that the dominant female leads her group to the road and then gives way to the others for them to cross first.
George Box, who was an English statistician, once wrote, "All models are false, but some models are useful."
And in fact, this model is obviously false, because in reality, meerkats are anything but random particles.
But it's also useful, because it tells us that extreme simplicity in movement rules at the individual level can result in a great deal of complexity at the level of the group.
So again, that's simplifying complexity.
I would like to conclude on what this means for the whole species.
When the dominant female gives way to a subordinate, it's not out of courtesy.
In fact, the dominant female is extremely important for the cohesion of the group.
If she dies on the road, the whole group is at risk.
So this behavior of risk avoidance is a very old evolutionary response.
These meerkats are replicating an evolved tactic that is thousands of generations old, and they're adapting it to a modern risk, in this case a road built by humans.
They adapt very simple rules, and the resulting complex behavior allows them to resist human encroachment into their natural habitat.
In the end, it may be bats which change their social structure in response to a population crash, or it may be meerkats who show a novel adaptation to a human road, or it may be another species.
My message here -- and it's not a complicated one, but a simple one of wonder and hope -- my message here is that animals show extraordinary social complexity, and this allows them to adapt and respond to changes in their environment.
In three words, in the animal kingdom, simplicity leads to complexity which leads to resilience.
Thank you.
(Applause) Dania Gerhardt: Thank you very much, Nicolas, for this great start. Little bit nervous?
Nicolas Perony: I'm okay, thanks.
DG: Okay, great. I'm sure a lot of people in the audience somehow tried to make associations between the animals you were talking about -- the bats, meerkats -- and humans.
You brought some examples: The females are the social ones, the females are the dominant ones, I'm not sure who thinks how.
But is it okay to do these associations?
Are there stereotypes you can confirm in this regard that can be valid across all species?
NP: Well, I would say there are also counter-examples to these stereotypes.
For examples, in sea horses or in koalas, in fact, it is the males who take care of the young always.
And the lesson is that it's often difficult, and sometimes even a bit dangerous, to draw parallels between humans and animals.
So that's it.
DG: Okay. Thank you very much for this great start.
Thank you, Nicolas Perony.
Server: May I help you, sir?
Customer: Uh, let's see.
Server: We have pan seared registry error sprinkled with the finest corrupted data, binary brioche, RAM sandwiches, Conficker fitters, and a scripting salad with or without polymorphic dressing, and a grilled coding kabob.
Customer: I'd like a RAM sandwich and a glass of your finest Code 39.
Server: Would you like any desserts, sir?
Our special is tracking cookie.
Customer: I'd like a batch of some zombie tracking cookies, thank you.
Server: Coming right up, sir.
Your food will be served shortly.
(Applause) Maya Penn: I've been drawing ever since I could hold a crayon, and I've been making animated flip books since I was three years old.
At that age, I also learned about what an animator was.
There was a program on TV about jobs most kids don't know about.
When I understood that an animator makes the cartoons I saw on TV, I immediately said, "That's what I want to be."
I don't know if I said it mentally or out loud, but that was a greatly defining moment in my life.
Animation and art has always been my first love.
It was my love for technology that sparked the idea for "Malicious Dishes."
There was a virus on my computer, and I was trying to get rid of it, and all of a sudden, I just thought, what if viruses have their own little world inside the computer?
Maybe a restaurant where they meet up and do virusy things?
And thus, "Malicious Dishes" was born.
At four years old, my dad showed me how to take apart a computer and put it back together again.
That started my love for technology.
I built my first website myself in HTML, and I'm learning JavaScript and Python.
I'm also working on an animated series called "The Pollinators."
It's about bees and other pollinators in our environment and why they're so important.
If plants aren't pollinated by the pollinators, then all creatures, including ourselves, that depend on these plants, would starve.
So I decided to take these cool creatures and make a superhero team.
(Applause) (Foot stomp) (Music) (Roar) Pollinator: Deforestsaurus! I should have known!
I need to call on the rest of the Pollinators!
(Music) Thank you. (Applause) All of my animations start with ideas, but what are ideas?
Ideas can spark a movement.
Ideas are opportunities and innovation.
Ideas truly are what make the world go round.
If it wasn't for ideas, we wouldn't be where we are now with technology, medicine, art, culture, and how we even live our lives.
At eight years old, I took my ideas and started my own business called Maya's Ideas, and my nonprofit, Maya's Ideas for the Planet.
(Laughter) And I make eco-friendly clothing and accessories.
I'm 13 now, and although I started my business in 2008, my artistic journey started way before then.
I was greatly influenced by art, and I wanted to incorporate it in everything I did, even my business.
I would find different fabrics around the house, and say, &amp;quot;This could be a scarf or a hat,&amp;quot; and I had all these ideas for designs.
I noticed when I wore my creations, people would stop me and say, "Wow, that's really cute. Where can I get one?"
And I thought, I can start my own business.
Now I didn't have any business plans at only eight years old.
I only knew I wanted to make pretty creations that were safe for the environment and I wanted to give back.
My mom taught me how to sew, and on my back porch, I would sit and make little headbands out of ribbon, and I would write down the names and the price of each item.
I started making more items like hats, scarves and bags.
Soon, my items began selling all over the world, and I had customers in Denmark, Italy, Australia, Canada and more.
Now, I had a lot to learn about my business, like branding and marketing, staying engaged with my customers, and seeing what sold the most and the least.
Soon, my business really started to take off.
Then one day, Forbes magazine contacted me when I was 10 years old.
(Laughter) They wanted to feature me and my company in their article.
Now a lot of people ask me, why is your business eco-friendly?
I've had a passion for protecting the environment and its creatures since I was little.
My parents taught me at an early age about giving back and being a good steward to the environment.
I heard about how the dyes in some clothing or the process of even making the items was harmful to the people and the planet, so I started doing my own research, and I discovered that even after dyeing has being completed, there is a waste issue that gives a negative impact on the environment.
For example, the grinding of materials, or the dumping of dried powder materials.
These actions can pollute the air, making it toxic to anyone or anything that inhales it.
So when I started my business, I knew two things: All of my items had to be eco-friendly, and 10 to 20 percent of the profits I made went to local and global charities and environmental organizations.
(Applause) I feel I'm part of the new wave of entrepreneurs that not only seeks to have a successful business, but also a sustainable future.
I feel that I can meet the needs of my customers without compromising the ability of future generations to live in a greener tomorrow.
We live in a big, diverse and beautiful world, and that makes me even more passionate to save it.
But it's never enough to just to get it through your heads about the things that are happening in our world.
It takes to get it through your hearts, because when you get it through your heart, that is when movements are sparked.
That is when opportunities and innovation are created, and that is why ideas come to life.
Thank you, and peace and blessings.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause) Pat Mitchell: So, you heard Maya talk about the amazing parents who are behind this incredible woman. Where are they?
Please, Mr. and Mrs. Penn. Would you just -- Ah!
(Applause)
Many of us will experience some kind of trauma during our lifetime.
Sometimes, we escape with no long-term effects.
But for millions of us, those experiences linger, causing symptoms like flashbacks, nightmares, and negative thoughts that interfere with everyday life.
This phenomenon, called post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD, isn’t a personal failing; rather, it’s a treatable malfunction of certain biological mechanisms that allow us to cope with dangerous experiences.
To understand PTSD, we first need to understand how the brain processes a wide range of ordeals, including the death of a loved one, domestic violence, injury or illness, abuse, rape, war, car accidents, and natural disasters.
These events can bring on feelings of danger and helplessness, which activate the brain’s alarm system, known as the “fight-flight-freeze” response.
When this alarm sounds, the hypothalamic, pituitary, and adrenal systems, known as the HPA axis, work together to send signals to the parasympathetic nervous system.
That’s the network that communicates with adrenal glands and internal organs to help regulate functions like heart rate, digestion, and respiration.
These signals start a chemical cascade that floods the body with several different stress hormones, causing physiological changes that prepare the body to defend itself.
Our heart rate speeds up, breathing quickens, and muscles tense.
Even after a crisis is over, escalated levels of stress hormones may last for days, contributing to jittery feelings, nightmares, and other symptoms.
For most people, these experiences disappear within a few days to two weeks as their hormone levels stabilize.
But a small percentage of those who experience trauma have persistent problems —sometimes vanishing temporarily only to resurface months later.
We don’t completely understand what’s happening in the brain, but one theory is that the stress hormone cortisol may be continuously activating the “fight-flight-freeze” response while reducing overall brain functioning, leading to a number of negative symptoms.
These symptoms often fall into four categories: intrusive thoughts, like dreams and flashbacks, avoiding reminders of the trauma, negative thoughts and feelings, like fear, anger, and guilt, and “reactive” symptoms like irritability and difficulty sleeping.
Not everyone has all these symptoms, or experiences them to the same extent and intensity.
When problems last more than a month, PTSD is often diagnosed.
Genetics, on-going overwhelming stress, and many risk factors like preexisting mental illnesses or lack of emotional support, likely play a role in determining who will experience PTSD.
But the underlying cause is still a medical mystery.
A major challenge of coping with PTSD is sensitivity to triggers, physical and emotional stimuli that the brain associates with the original trauma.
These can be everyday sensations that aren’t inherently dangerous but prompt powerful physical and emotional reactions.
For example, the smell of a campfire could evoke the memory of being trapped in a burning house.
For someone with PTSD, that memory activates the same neurochemical cascade as the original event.
That then stirs up the same feelings of panic and helplessness as if they’re experiencing the trauma all over again.
Trying to avoid these triggers, which are sometimes unpredictable, can lead to isolation.
That can leave people feeling invalidated, ignored, or misunderstood, like a pause button has been pushed on their lives while the rest of the world continues around them.
But, there are options.
If you think you might be suffering from PTSD, the first step is an evaluation with a mental health professional who can direct you towards the many resources available.
Psychotherapy can be very effective for PTSD, helping patients better understand their triggers.
And certain medications can make symptoms more manageable, as can self- care practices, like mindfulness and regular exercise.
What if you notice signs of PTSD in a friend or family member?
Social support, acceptance, and empathy are key to helping and recovery.
Let them know you believe their account of what they’re experiencing, and that you don’t blame them for their reactions.
If they’re open to it, encourage them to seek evaluation and treatment.
PTSD has been called “the hidden wound” because it comes without outward physical signs.
But even if it’s an invisible disorder, it doesn’t have to be a silent one.
Dutch artist Piet Mondrian’s abstract, rectangular paintings inspired mathematicians to create a two-fold challenge.
First, we must completely cover a square canvas with non-overlapping rectangles.
All must be unique, so if we use a 1x4, we can’t use a 4x1 in another spot, but a 2x2 rectangle would be fine.
Let’s try that.
Say we have a canvas measuring 4x4.
We can’t chop it directly in half, since that would give us identical rectangles of 2x4.
But the next closest option - 3x4 and 1x4 - works.
That was easy, but we’re not done yet.
Now take the area of the largest rectangle, and subtract the area of the smallest.
The result is our score, and the goal is to get as low a score as possible.
Here, the largest area is 12 and the smallest is 4, giving us a score of 8.
Since we didn’t try to go for a low score that time, we can probably do better.
Let’s keep our 1x4 while breaking the 3x4 into a 3x3 and a 3x1.
Now our score is 9 minus 3, or 6.
Still not optimal, but better.
With such a small canvas, there are only a few options.
But let’s see what happens when the canvas gets bigger.
Try out an 8x8; what’s the lowest score you can get?
Pause here if you want to figure it out yourself.
Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 To get our bearings, we can start as before: dividing the canvas roughly in two.
That gives us a 5x8 rectangle with area 40 and a 3x8 with area 24, for a score of 16.
That’s pretty bad.
Dividing that 5x8 into a 5x5 and a 5x3 leaves us with a score of 10.
Better, but still not great.
We could just keep dividing the biggest rectangle.
But that would leave us with increasingly tiny rectangles, which would increase the range between the largest and smallest.
What we really want is for all our rectangles to fall within a small range of area values.
And since the total area of the canvas is 64, the areas need to add up to that.
Let’s make a list of possible rectangles and areas.
To improve on our previous score, we can try to pick a range of values spanning 9 or less and adding up to 64.
You’ll notice that some values are left out because rectangles like 1x13 or 2x9 won’t fit on the canvas.
You might also realize that if you use one of the rectangles with an odd area like 5, 9, or 15, you need to use another odd-value rectangle to get an even sum.
With all that in mind, let’s see what works.
Starting with area 20 or more puts us over the limit too quickly.
But we can get to 64 using rectangles in the 14-18 range, leaving out 15.
Unfortunately, there’s no way to make them fit.
Using the 2x7 leaves a gap that can only be filled by a rectangle with a width of 1.
Going lower, the next range that works is 8 to 14, leaving out the 3x3 square.
This time, the pieces fit.
That’s a score of 6.
Can we do even better?
No.
We can get the same score by throwing out the 2x7 and 1x8 and replacing them with a 3x3, 1x7, and 1x6.
But if we go any lower down the list, the numbers become so small that we’d need a wider range of sizes to cover the canvas, which would increase the score.
There’s no trick or formula here – just a bit of intuition.
It's more art than science.
And for larger grids, expert mathematicians aren’t sure whether they’ve found the lowest possible scores.
So how would you divide a 4x4, 10x10, or 32x32 canvas?
Give it a try and post your results in the comments.
The 40 or so muscles in the human face can be activated in different combinations to create thousands of expressions.
But do these expressions look the same and communicate the same meaning around the world, regardless of culture?
Is one person’s smile another’s grimace?
Charles Darwin theorized that emotional expression was a common human feature.
But he was in the minority.
Until the mid-20th century, many researchers believed that the specific ways we show emotion were learned behaviors that varied across cultures.
Personality theorist Silvan Tomkins was one of the few to insist otherwise.
Tomkins claimed that certain affects— emotional states and their associated facial expressions— were universal.
In the 1960s, psychologist Paul Ekman set about testing this theory by examining hundreds of hours of film footage of remote tribes isolated from the modern world.
Ekman found the native peoples’ expressions to be not only familiar, but occurring in precisely the situations he would expect.
Conversely, he ran tests with tribes who had no prior exposure to Western culture.
They were able to correctly match photos of different facial expressions with stories designed to trigger particular feelings.
Over the next few decades, further research has corroborated Darwin’s idea that some of our most important emotional expressions are in fact universal.
The degrees of expression appropriate to a given situation can, however, vary greatly across cultures.
For instance, researchers have studied facial expression in people who are born blind, hypothesizing that if expressions are universal, they would be displayed in the same way as sighted people.
In one study, both blind and sighted athletes displayed the same expressions of emotion when winning or losing their matches.
Further evidence can be found in our evolutionary relatives.
Comparisons of facial expression between humans and non-human mammals have found similarities in the structure and movement of facial muscles.
Chimpanzee laughter looks different from ours, but uses some of the same muscle movements.
Back in the 60s, Ekman identified six core expressions.
Anger is accompanied by lowered eyebrows drawn together, tense and narrowed eyes, and tight lips; disgust, by the lips pulled up and the nose crinkling.
In fear, the upper white of the eyes are revealed as the eyebrows raise and the mouth stretches open, while surprise looks similar, but with rounded eyebrows and relaxed lips.
Sadness is indicated by the inner corners of the eyebrows being drawn inwards and upwards, drooping eyes, and a downturned mouth.
And of course there’s happiness: lips drawn up and back, and raised cheeks causing wrinkling around the eyes.
More recently, researchers have proposed additional entries such as contempt, shame, and disapproval, but opinions vary on how distinct boundaries between these categories can be drawn.
So if Ekman and other researchers are correct, what makes certain expressions universal?
And why are they expressed in these particular ways?
Scientists have a lot of theories rooted in our evolutionary history.
One is that certain expressions are important for survival.
Fear and surprise could signal to others an immediate danger.
Studies of humans and some other primates have found that we pay more attention to faces that signal threats over neutral faces, particularly when we’re already on high alert.
Expressions also could help improve group fitness by communicating our internal states to those around us.
Sadness, for example, signals to the group that something’s wrong.
There’s some evidence that expressions might be even more directly linked to our physiology.
The fear expression, for instance, could directly improve survival in potentially dangerous situations by letting our eyes absorb more light and our lungs take in more air, preparing us to fight or flee.
There’s still much research to be done in understanding emotional expression, particularly as we learn more about the inner workings of the brain.
But if you ever find yourself among strangers in a strange land, a friendly smile could go a long way.
"How much pain medication are you taking?"
That was the very routine question that changed my life.
It was July 2015, about two months after I nearly lost my foot in a serious motorcycle accident.
So I was back in my orthopedic surgeon's office for yet another follow-up appointment.
I looked at my wife, Sadiye; we did some calculating.
"About 115 milligrams oxycodone," I responded.
"Maybe more."
I was nonchalant, having given this information to many doctors many times before, but this time was different.
My doctor turned serious and he looked at me and said, "Travis, that's a lot of opioids.
You need to think about getting off the meds now."
In two months of escalating prescriptions, this was the first time that anyone had expressed concern.
Indeed, this was the first real conversation I'd had about my opioid therapy, period.
I had been given no warnings, no counseling, no plan ...
just lots and lots of prescriptions.
What happened next really came to define my entire experience of medical trauma.
I was given what I now know is a much too aggressive tapering regimen, according to which I divided my medication into four doses, dropping one each week over the course of the month.
The result is that I was launched into acute opioid withdrawal.
The result, put another way, was hell.
The early stages of withdrawal feel a lot like a bad case of the flu.
I became nauseated, lost my appetite, I ached everywhere, had increased pain in my rather mangled foot; I developed trouble sleeping due to a general feeling of restlessness.
At the time, I thought this was all pretty miserable.
That's because I didn't know what was coming.
At the beginning of week two, my life got much worse.
As the symptoms dialed up in intensity, my internal thermostat seemed to go haywire.
I would sweat profusely almost constantly, and yet if I managed to get myself out into the hot August sun, I might look down and find myself covered in goosebumps.
The restlessness that had made sleep difficult during that first week now turned into what I came to think of as the withdrawal feeling.
It was a deep sense of jitters that would keep me twitching.
It made sleep nearly impossible.
But perhaps the most disturbing was the crying.
I would find myself with tears coming on for seemingly no reason and with no warning.
At the time they felt like a neural misfire, similar to the goosebumps.
Sadiye became concerned, and she called the prescribing doctor who very helpfully advised lots of fluids for the nausea.
When she pushed him and said, "You know, he's really quite badly off," the doctor responded, "Well, if it's that bad, he can just go back to his previous dose for a little while."
"And then what?" I wondered.
"Try again later," he responded.
Now, there's no way that I was going to go back on my previous dose unless I had a better plan for making it through the withdrawal next time.
And so we stuck to riding it out and dropped another dose.
At the beginning of week three, my world got very dark.
I basically stopped eating, and I barely slept at all thanks to the jitters that would keep me writhing all night.
But the worst -- the worst was the depression.
The tears that had felt like a misfire before now felt meaningful.
Several times a day I would get that welling in my chest where you know the tears are coming, but I couldn't stop them and with them came desperation and hopelessness.
I began to believe that I would never recover either from the accident or from the withdrawal.
Sadiye got back on the phone with the prescriber and this time he recommended that we contact our pain management team from the last hospitalization.
That sounded like a great idea, so we did that immediately, and we were shocked when nobody would speak with us.
The receptionist who answered the phone advised us that the pain management team provides an inpatient service; although they prescribe opioids to get pain under control, they do not oversee tapering and withdrawal.
Furious, we called the prescriber back and begged him for anything -- anything that could help me -- but instead he apologized, saying that he was out of his depth.
"Look," he told us, "my initial advice to you is clearly bad, so my official recommendation is that Travis go back on the medication until he can find someone more competent to wean him off."
Of course I wanted to go back on the medication.
I was in agony.
But I believed that if I saved myself from the withdrawal with the drugs that I would never be free of them, and so we buckled ourselves in, and I dropped the last dose.
As my brain experienced life without prescription opioids for the first time in months, I thought I would die.
I assumed I would die -- (Crying) I'm sorry.
(Crying) Because if the symptoms didn't kill me outright, I'd kill myself.
And I know that sounds dramatic, because to me, standing up here years later, whole and healthy -- to me, it sounds dramatic.
But I believed it to my core because I no longer had any hope that I would be normal again.
The insomnia became unbearable and after two days with virtually no sleep, I spent a whole night on the floor of our basement bathroom.
I alternated between cooling my feverish head against the ceramic tiles and trying violently to throw up despite not having eaten anything in days.
When Sadiye found me at the end of the night she was horrified, and we got back on the phone.
We called everyone.
We called surgeons and pain docs and general practitioners -- anyone we could find on the internet, and not a single one of them would help me.
The few that we could speak with on the phone advised us to go back on the medication.
An independent pain management clinic said that they prescribe opioids but they don't oversee tapering or withdrawal.
When my desperation was clearly coming through my voice, much as it is now, the receptionist took a deep breath and said, "Mr. Rieder, it sounds like perhaps what you need is a rehab facility or a methadone clinic."
I didn't know any better at the time, so I took her advice.
I hung up and I started calling those places, but it took me virtually no time at all to discover that many of these facilities are geared towards those battling long-term substance use disorder.
In the case of opioids, this often involves precisely not weaning the patient off the medication, but transitioning them onto the safer, longer-acting opioids: methadone or buprenorphine for maintenance treatment.
In addition, everywhere I called had an extensive waiting list.
I was simply not the kind of patient they were designed to see.
After being turned away from a rehab facility, I finally admitted defeat.
I was broken and beaten, and I couldn't do it anymore.
So I told Sadiye that I was going back on the medication.
I would start with the lowest dose possible, and I would take only as much as I absolutely needed to escape the most crippling effects of the withdrawal.
So that night she helped me up the stairs and for the first time in weeks I actually went to bed.
I took the little orange prescription bottle, I set it on my nightstand ...
and then I didn't touch it.
I fell asleep, I slept through the night and when I woke up, the most severe symptoms had abated dramatically.
I'd made it out.
(Applause) Thanks for that, that was my response, too.
(Laughter) So -- I'm sorry, I have to gather myself just a little bit.
I think this story is important.
It's not because I think I'm special.
This story is important precisely because I'm not special; because nothing that happened to me was all that unique.
My dependence on opioids was entirely predictable given the amount that I was prescribed and the duration for which I was prescribed it.
Dependence is simply the brain's natural response to an opioid-rich environment and so there was every reason to think that from the beginning, I would need a supervised, well-formed tapering plan, but our health care system seemingly hasn't decided who's responsible for patients like me.
The prescribers saw me as a complex patient needing specialized care, probably from pain medicine.
The pain docs saw their job as getting pain under control and when I couldn't get off the medication, they saw me as the purview of addiction medicine.
But addiction medicine is overstressed and focused on those suffering from long-term substance use disorder.
In short, I was prescribed a drug that needed long-term management and then I wasn't given that management, and it wasn't even clear whose job such management was.
This is a recipe for disaster and any such disaster would be interesting and worth talking about -- probably worth a TED Talk -- but the failure of opioid tapering is a particular concern at this moment in America because we are in the midst of an epidemic in which 33,000 people died from overdose in 2015.
Nearly half of those deaths involved prescription opioids.
The medical community has in fact started to react to this crisis, but much of their response has involved trying to prescribe fewer pills -- and absolutely, that's going to be important.
So for instance, we're now gaining evidence that American physicians often prescribe medication even when it's not necessary in the case of opioids.
And even when opioids are called for, they often prescribe much more than is needed.
These sorts of considerations help to explain why America, despite accounting for only five percent of the global population, consumes nearly 70 percent of the total global opioid supply.
But focusing only on the rate of prescribing risks overlooking two crucially important points.
The first is that opioids just are and will continue to be important pain therapies.
As somebody who has had severe, real, long-lasting pain, I can assure you these medications can make life worth living.
And second: we can still fight the epidemic while judiciously prescribing opioids to people who really need them by requiring that doctors properly manage the pills that they do prescribe.
So for instance, go back to the tapering regimen that I was given.
Is it reasonable to expect that any physician who prescribes opioids knows that that is too aggressive?
Well, after I initially published my story in an academic journal, someone from the CDC sent me their pocket guide for tapering opioids.
This is a four-page document, and most of it's pictures.
In it, they teach physicians how to taper opioids in the easier cases, and one of the their recommendations is that you never start at more than a 10 percent dose reduction per week.
If my physician had given me that plan, my taper would have taken several months instead of a few weeks.
I'm sure it wouldn't have been easy.
It probably would have been pretty uncomfortable, but maybe it wouldn't have been hell.
And that seems like the kind of information that someone who prescribes this medication ought to have.
In closing, I need to say that properly managing prescribed opioids will not by itself solve the crisis.
America's epidemic is far bigger than that, but when a medication is responsible for tens of thousands of deaths a year, reckless management of that medication is indefensible.
Helping opioid therapy patients to get off the medication that they were prescribed may not be a complete solution to our epidemic, but it would clearly constitute progress.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to imagine what a breakthrough this was for women who were victims of violence in the 1980s.
They would come into the emergency room with what the police would call "a lovers' quarrel," and I would see a woman who was beaten, I would see a broken nose and a fractured wrist and swollen eyes.
And as activists, we would take our Polaroid camera, we would take her picture, we would wait 90 seconds, and we would give her the photograph.
And she would then have the evidence she needed to go to court.
We were making what was invisible visible.
I've been doing this for 30 years.
I've been part of a social movement that has been working on ending violence against women and children.
And for all those years, I've had an absolutely passionate and sometimes not popular belief that this violence is not inevitable, that it is learned, and if it's learned, it can be un-learned, and it can be prevented.
(Applause) Why do I believe this?
Because it's true.
It is absolutely true.
Between 1993 and 2010, domestic violence among adult women in the United States has gone down by 64 percent, and that is great news.
(Applause) Sixty-four percent. Now, how did we get there?
Our eyes were wide open.
Thirty years ago, women were beaten, they were stalked, they were raped, and no one talked about it.
There was no justice.
And as an activist, that was not good enough.
And so step one on this journey is we organized, and we created this extraordinary underground network of amazing women who opened shelters, and if they didn't open a shelter, they opened their home so that women and children could be safe.
And you know what else we did?
We had bake sales, we had car washes, and we did everything we could do to fundraise, and then at one point we said, you know, it's time that we went to the federal government and asked them to pay for these extraordinary services that are saving people's lives.
Right? (Applause) And so, step number two, we knew we needed to change the laws.
And so we went to Washington, and we lobbied for the first piece of legislation.
And I remember walking through the halls of the U.S. Capitol, and I was in my 30s, and my life had purpose, and I couldn't imagine that anybody would ever challenge this important piece of legislation.
I was probably 30 and naive.
But I heard about a congressman who had a very, very different point of view.
Do you know what he called this important piece of legislation?
He called it the Take the Fun Out of Marriage Act.
The Take the Fun Out of Marriage Act.
Ladies and gentlemen, that was in 1984 in the United States, and I wish I had Twitter.
(Laughter) Ten years later, after lots of hard work, we finally passed the Violence Against Women Act, which is a life-changing act that has saved so many lives. (Applause) Thank you.
I was proud to be part of that work, and it changed the laws and it put millions of dollars into local communities.
And you know what else it did? It collected data.
And I have to tell you, I'm passionate about data.
In fact, I am a data nerd.
I'm sure there are a lot of data nerds here.
I am a data nerd, and the reason for that is I want to make sure that if we spend a dollar, that the program works, and if it doesn't work, we should change the plan.
And I also want to say one other thing: We are not going to solve this problem by building more jails or by even building more shelters.
It is about economic empowerment for women, it is about healing kids who are hurt, and it is about prevention with a capital P.
And so, step number three on this journey: We know, if we're going to keep making this progress, we're going to have to turn up the volume, we're going to have to increase the visibility, and we're going to have to engage the public.
And so knowing that, we went to the Advertising Council, and we asked them to help us build a public education campaign.
And we looked around the world to Canada and Australia and Brazil and parts of Africa, and we took this knowledge and we built the first national public education campaign called There's No Excuse for Domestic Violence.
Take a look at one of our spots.
(Video) Man: Where's dinner?
Woman: Well, I thought you'd be home a couple hours ago, and I put everything away, so— Man: What is this? Pizza. Woman: If you had just called me, I would have known— Man: Dinner? Dinner ready is a pizza? Woman: Honey, please don't be so loud.
Please don't—Let go of me!
Man: Get in the kitchen! Woman: No! Help!
Man: You want to see what hurts? (Slaps woman) That's what hurts! That's what hurts! (Breaking glass) Woman: Help me!
["Children have to sit by and watch. What's your excuse?"] Esta Soler: As we were in the process of releasing this campaign, O.J. Simpson was arrested for the murder of his wife and her friend.
We learned that he had a long history of domestic violence.
The media became fixated.
The story of domestic violence went from the back page, but actually from the no-page, to the front page.
Our ads blanketed the airwaves, and women, for the first time, started to tell their stories.
Movements are about moments, and we seized this moment.
And let me just put this in context.
Before 1980, do you have any idea how many articles were in The New York Times on domestic violence?
I'll tell you: 158.
And in the 2000s, over 7,000.
We were obviously making a difference.
But we were still missing a critical element.
So, step four: We needed to engage men.
We couldn't solve this problem with 50 percent of the population on the sidelines.
And I already told you I'm a data nerd.
National polling told us that men felt indicted and not invited into this conversation.
So we wondered, how can we include men?
How can we get men to talk about violence against women and girls?
And a male friend of mine pulled me aside and he said, "You want men to talk about violence against women and girls. Men don't talk."
(Laughter) I apologize to the men in the audience.
I know you do.
But he said, "Do you know what they do do?
They do talk to their kids.
They talk to their kids as parents, as coaches."
And that's what we did.
We met men where they were at and we built a program.
And then we had this one event that stays in my heart forever where a basketball coach was talking to a room filled with male athletes and men from all walks of life.
And he was talking about the importance of coaching boys into men and changing the culture of the locker room and giving men the tools to have healthy relationships.
And all of a sudden, he looked at the back of the room, and he saw his daughter, and he called out his daughter's name, Michaela, and he said, "Michaela, come up here."
And she's nine years old, and she was kind of shy, and she got up there, and he said, "Sit down next to me."
She sat right down next to him.
He gave her this big hug, and he said, "People ask me why I do this work.
I do this work because I'm her dad, and I don't want anyone ever to hurt her."
And as a parent, I get it.
I get it, knowing that there are so many sexual assaults on college campuses that are so widespread and so under-reported.
We've done a lot for adult women.
We've got to do a better job for our kids.
We just do. We have to. (Applause) We've come a long way since the days of the Polaroid.
Technology has been our friend.
The mobile phone is a global game changer for the empowerment of women, and Facebook and Twitter and Google and YouTube and all the social media helps us organize and tell our story in a powerful way.
And so those of you in this audience who have helped build those applications and those platforms, as an organizer, I say, thank you very much.
Really. I clap for you.
(Applause) I'm the daughter of a man who joined one club in his life, the Optimist Club.
You can't make that one up.
And it is his spirit and his optimism that is in my DNA.
I have been doing this work for over 30 years, and I am convinced, now more than ever, in the capacity of human beings to change.
I believe we can bend the arc of human history toward compassion and equality, and I also fundamentally believe and passionately believe that this violence does not have to be part of the human condition.
And I ask you, stand with us as we create futures without violence for women and girls and men and boys everywhere.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Five years ago, I was a Ph.D. student living two lives.
In one, I used NASA supercomputers to design next-generation spacecraft, and in the other I was a data scientist looking for potential smugglers of sensitive nuclear technologies.
As a data scientist, I did a lot of analyses, mostly of facilities, industrial facilities around the world.
And I was always looking for a better canvas to tie these all together.
And one day, I was thinking about how all data has a location, and I realized that the answer had been staring me in the face.
Although I was a satellite engineer, I hadn't thought about using satellite imagery in my work.
Now, like most of us, I'd been online, I'd see my house, so I thought, I'll hop in there and I'll start looking up some of these facilities.
And what I found really surprised me.
The pictures that I was finding were years out of date, and because of that, it had relatively little relevance to the work that I was doing today.
But I was intrigued.
I mean, satellite imagery is pretty amazing stuff.
There are millions and millions of sensors surrounding us today, but there's still so much we don't know on a daily basis.
How much oil is stored in all of China?
How much corn is being produced?
How many ships are in all of our world's ports?
Now, in theory, all of these questions could be answered by imagery, but not if it's old.
And if this data was so valuable, then how come I couldn't get my hands on more recent pictures?
So the story begins over 50 years ago with the launch of the first generation of U.S. government photo reconnaissance satellites.
And today, there's a handful of the great, great grandchildren of these early Cold War machines which are now operated by private companies and from which the vast majority of satellite imagery that you and I see on a daily basis comes.
During this period, launching things into space, just the rocket to get the satellite up there, has cost hundreds of millions of dollars each, and that's created tremendous pressure to launch things infrequently and to make sure that when you do, you cram as much functionality in there as possible.
All of this has only made satellites bigger and bigger and bigger and more expensive, now nearly a billion, with a b, dollars per copy.
Because they are so expensive, there aren't very many of them.
Because there aren't very many of them, the pictures that we see on a daily basis tend to be old.
I think a lot of people actually understand this anecdotally, but in order to visualize just how sparsely our planet is collected, some friends and I put together a dataset of the 30 million pictures that have been gathered by these satellites between 2000 and 2010.
As you can see in blue, huge areas of our world are barely seen, less than once a year, and even the areas that are seen most frequently, those in red, are seen at best once a quarter.
Now as aerospace engineering grad students, this chart cried out to us as a challenge.
Why do these things have to be so expensive?
Does a single satellite really have to cost the equivalent of three 747 jumbo jets?
Wasn't there a way to build a smaller, simpler, new satellite design that could enable more timely imaging?
I realize that it does sound a little bit crazy that we were going to go out and just begin designing satellites, but fortunately we had help.
In the late 1990s, a couple of professors proposed a concept for radically reducing the price of putting things in space.
This was hitchhiking small satellites alongside much larger satellites.
This dropped the cost of putting objects up there by over a factor of 100, and suddenly we could afford to experiment, to take a little bit of risk, and to realize a lot of innovation.
And a new generation of engineers and scientists, mostly out of universities, began launching these very small, breadbox-sized satellites called CubeSats.
And these were built with electronics obtained from RadioShack instead of Lockheed Martin.
Now it was using the lessons learned from these early missions that my friends and I began a series of sketches of our own satellite design.
And I can't remember a specific day where we made a conscious decision that we were actually going to go out and build these things, but once we got that idea in our minds of the world as a dataset, of being able to capture millions of data points on a daily basis describing the global economy, of being able to unearth billions of connections between them that had never before been found, it just seemed boring to go work on anything else.
And so we moved into a cramped, windowless office in Palo Alto, and began working to take our design from the drawing board into the lab.
The first major question we had to tackle was just how big to build this thing.
In space, size drives cost, and we had worked with these very small, breadbox-sized satellites in school, but as we began to better understand the laws of physics, we found that the quality of pictures those satellites could take was very limited, because the laws of physics dictate that the best picture you can take through a telescope is a function of the diameter of that telescope, and these satellites had a very small, very constrained volume.
And we found that the best picture we would have been able to get looked something like this.
Although this was the low-cost option, quite frankly it was just too blurry to see the things that make satellite imagery valuable.
So about three or four weeks later, we met a group of engineers randomly who had worked on the first private imaging satellite ever developed, and they told us that back in the 1970s, the U.S. government had found a powerful optimal tradeoff -- that in taking pictures at right about one meter resolution, being able to see objects one meter in size, they had found that they could not just get very high-quality images, but get a lot of them at an affordable price.
From our own computer simulations, we quickly found that one meter really was the minimum viable product to be able to see the drivers of our global economy, for the first time, being able to count the ships and cars and shipping containers and trucks that move around our world on a daily basis, while conveniently still not being able to see individuals.
We had found our compromise.
We would have to build something larger than the original breadbox, now more like a mini-fridge, but we still wouldn't have to build a pickup truck.
So now we had our constraint.
The laws of physics dictated the absolute minimum-sized telescope that we could build.
What came next was making the rest of the satellite as small and as simple as possible, basically a flying telescope with four walls and a set of electronics smaller than a phone book that used less power than a 100 watt lightbulb.
The big challenge became actually taking the pictures through that telescope.
Traditional imaging satellites use a line scanner, similar to a Xerox machine, and as they traverse the Earth, they take pictures, scanning row by row by row to build the complete image.
Now people use these because they get a lot of light, which means less of the noise you see in a low-cost cell phone image.
The problem with them is they require very sophisticated pointing.
You have to stay focused on a 50-centimeter target from over 600 miles away while moving at more than seven kilometers a second, which requires an awesome degree of complexity.
So instead, we turned to a new generation of video sensors, originally created for use in night vision goggles.
Instead of taking a single, high quality image, we could take a videostream of individually noisier frames, but then we could recombine all of those frames together into very high-quality images using sophisticated pixel processing techniques here on the ground, at a cost of one one hundredth a traditional system.
And we applied this technique to many of the other systems on the satellite as well, and day by day, our design evolved from CAD to prototypes to production units.
A few short weeks ago, we packed up SkySat 1, put our signatures on it, and waved goodbye for the last time on Earth.
Today, it's sitting in its final launch configuration ready to blast off in a few short weeks.
And soon, we'll turn our attention to launching a constellation of 24 or more of these satellites and beginning to build the scalable analytics that will allow us to unearth the insights in the petabytes of data we will collect.
So why do all of this? Why build these satellites?
Well, it turns out imaging satellites have a unique ability to provide global transparency, and providing that transparency on a timely basis is simply an idea whose time has come.
We see ourselves as pioneers of a new frontier, and beyond economic data, unlocking the human story, moment by moment.
For a data scientist that just happened to go to space camp as a kid, it just doesn't get much better than that.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You've all seen lots of articles on climate change, and here's yet another New York Times article, just like every other darn one you've seen.
It says all the same stuff as all the other ones you've seen.
It even has the same amount of headline as all the other ones you've seen.
What's unusual about this one, maybe, is that it's from 1953.
And the reason I'm saying this is that you may have the idea this problem is relatively recent.
That people have just sort of figured out about it, and now with Kyoto and the Governator and people beginning to actually do something, we may be on the road to a solution.
The fact is -- uh-uh.
We've known about this problem for 50 years, depending on how you count it.
We have talked about it endlessly over the last decade or so.
And we've accomplished close to zip.
This is the growth rate of CO2 in the atmosphere.
You've seen this in various forms, but maybe you haven't seen this one.
What this shows is that the rate of growth of our emissions is accelerating.
And that it's accelerating even faster than what we thought was the worst case just a few years back.
So that red line there was something that a lot of skeptics said the environmentalists only put in the projections to make the projections look as bad as possible, that emissions would never grow as fast as that red line.
But in fact, they're growing faster.
Here's some data from actually just 10 days ago, which shows this year's minimum of the Arctic Sea ice, and it's the lowest by far.
And the rate at which the Arctic Sea ice is going away is a lot quicker than models.
So despite all sorts of experts like me flying around the planet and burning jet fuel, and politicians signing treaties -- in fact, you could argue the net effect of all this has been negative, because it's just consumed a lot of jet fuel. (Laughter) No, no! In terms of what we really need to do to put the brakes on this very high inertial thing -- our big economy -- we've really hardly started.
Really, we're doing this, basically. Really, not very much.
I don't want to depress you too much.
The problem is absolutely soluble, and even soluble in a way that's reasonably cheap.
Cheap meaning sort of the cost of the military, not the cost of medical care.
Cheap meaning a few percent of GDP.
No, this is really important to have this sense of scale.
So the problem is soluble, and the way we should go about solving it is, say, dealing with electricity production, which causes something like 43-or-so percent and rising of CO2 emissions.
And we could do that by perfectly sensible things like conservation, and wind power, nuclear power and coal to CO2 capture, which are all things that are ready for giant scale deployment, and work.
All we lack is the action to actually spend the money to put those into place.
Instead, we spend our time talking.
But nevertheless, that's not what I'm going to talk to you about tonight.
What I'm going to talk to you about tonight is stuff we might do if we did nothing.
And it's this stuff in the middle here, which is what you do if you don't stop the emissions quickly enough.
And you need to deal -- somehow break the link between human actions that change climate, and the climate change itself. And that's particularly important because, of course, while we can adapt to climate change -- and it's important to be honest here, there will be some benefits to climate change.
Oh, yes, I think it's bad. I've spent my whole life working to stop it.
But one of the reasons it's politically hard is there are winners and losers -- not all losers.
But, of course, the natural world, polar bears.
I spent time skiing across the sea ice for weeks at a time in the high Arctic.
They will completely lose.
And there's no adaption.
So this problem is absolutely soluble.
This geo-engineering idea, in it's simplest form, is basically the following.
You could put signed particles, say sulfuric acid particles -- sulfates -- into the upper atmosphere, the stratosphere, where they'd reflect away sunlight and cool the planet.
And I know for certain that that will work.
Not that there aren't side effects, but I know for certain it will work.
And the reason is, it's been done.
And it was done not by us, not by me, but by nature.
Here's Mount Pinatubo in the early '90s. That put a whole bunch of sulfur in the stratosphere with a sort of atomic bomb-like cloud.
The result of that was pretty dramatic.
After that, and some previous volcanoes we have, you see a quite dramatic cooling of the atmosphere.
So this lower bar is the upper atmosphere, the stratosphere, and it heats up after these volcanoes.
But you'll notice that in the upper bar, which is the lower atmosphere and the surface, it cools down because we shielded the atmosphere a little bit.
There's no big mystery about it.
There's lots of mystery in the details, and there's some bad side effects, like it partially destroys the ozone layer -- and I'll get to that in a minute.
But it clearly cools down.
And one other thing: it's fast.
It's really important to say. So much of the other things that we ought to do, like slowing emissions, are intrinsically slow, because it takes time to build all the hardware we need to reduce emissions.
And not only that, when you cut emissions, you don't cut concentrations, because concentrations, the amount of CO2 in the air, is the sum of emissions over time.
So you can't step on the brakes very quickly.
But if you do this, it's quick.
And there are times you might like to do something quick.
Another thing you might wonder about is, does it work?
Can you shade some sunlight and effectively compensate for the added CO2, and produce a climate sort of back to what it was originally?
And the answer seems to be yes.
So here are the graphs you've seen lots of times before.
That's what the world looks like, under one particular climate model's view, with twice the amount of CO2 in the air.
The lower graph is with twice the amount of CO2 and 1.8 percent less sunlight, and you're back to the original climate.
And this graph from Ken Caldeira. It's important to say came, because Ken -- at a meeting that I believe Marty Hoffart was also at in the mid-'90s -- Ken and I stood up at the back of the meeting and said, "Geo-engineering won't work."
And to the person who was promoting it said, "The atmosphere's much more complicated."
Gave a bunch of physical reasons why it wouldn't do a very good compensation.
Ken went and ran his models, and found that it did.
This topic is also old.
That report that landed on President Johnson's desk when I was two years old -- 1965.
That report, in fact, which had all the modern climate science -- the only thing they talked about doing was geo-engineering.
It didn't even talk about cutting emissions, which is an incredible shift in our thinking about this problem.
I'm not saying we shouldn't cut emissions.
We should, but it made exactly this point.
So, in a sense, there's not much new.
The one new thing is this essay.
So I should say, I guess, that since the time of that original President Johnson report, and the various reports of the U.S. National Academy -- 1977, 1982, 1990 -- people always talked about this idea.
Not as something that was foolproof, but as an idea to think about.
But when climate became, politically, a hot topic -- if I may make the pun -- in the last 15 years, this became so un-PC, we couldn't talk about it.
It just sunk below the surface. We weren't allowed to speak about it.
But in the last year, Paul Crutzen published this essay saying roughly what's all been said before: that maybe, given our very slow rate of progress in solving this problem and the uncertain impacts, we should think about things like this.
He said roughly what's been said before.
The big deal was he happened to have won the Nobel prize for ozone chemistry.
And so people took him seriously when he said we should think about this, even though there will be some ozone impacts.
And in fact, he had some ideas to make them go away.
There was all sorts of press coverage, all over the world, going right down to "Dr. Strangelove Saves the Earth," from the Economist.
And that got me thinking. I've worked on this topic on and off, but not so much technically. And I was actually lying in bed thinking one night.
And I thought about this child's toy -- hence, the title of my talk -- and I wondered if you could use the same physics that makes that thing spin 'round in the child's radiometer, to levitate particles into the upper atmosphere and make them stay there.
One of the problems with sulfates is they fall out quickly.
The other problem is they're right in the ozone layer, and I'd prefer them above the ozone layer.
And it turns out, I woke up the next morning, and I started to calculate this.
It was very hard to calculate from first principles. I was stumped.
But then I found out that there were all sorts of papers already published that addressed this topic because it happens already in the natural atmosphere.
So it seems there are already fine particles that are levitated up to what we call the mesosphere, about 100 kilometers up, that already have this effect.
I'll tell you very quickly how the effect works.
There are a lot of fun complexities that I'd love to spend the whole evening on, but I won't.
But let's say you have sunlight hitting some particle and it's unevenly heated.
So the side facing the sun is warmer; the side away, cooler.
Gas molecules that bounce off the warm side bounce away with some extra velocity because it's warm.
And so you see a net force away from the sun.
That's called the photophoretic force.
There are a bunch of other versions of it that I and some collaborators have thought about how to exploit.
And of course, we may be wrong -- this hasn't all been peer reviewed, we're in the middle of thinking about it -- but so far, it seems good.
But it looks like we could achieve long atmospheric lifetimes -- much longer than before -- because they're levitated.
We can move things out of the stratosphere into the mesosphere, in principle solving the ozone problem.
I'm sure there will be other problems that arise.
Finally, we could make the particles migrate to over the poles, so we could arrange the climate engineering so it really focused on the poles.
Which would have minimal bad impacts in the middle of the planet, where we live, and do the maximum job of what we might need to do, which is cooling the poles in case of planetary emergency, if you like.
This is a new idea that's crept up that may be, essentially, a cleverer idea than putting sulfates in.
Whether this idea is right or some other idea is right, I think it's almost certain we will eventually think of cleverer things to do than just putting sulfur in.
That if engineers and scientists really turned their minds to this, it's amazing how we can affect the planet.
The one thing about this is it gives us extraordinary leverage.
This improved science and engineering will, whether we like it or not, give us more and more leverage to affect the planet, to control the planet, to give us weather and climate control -- not because we plan it, not because we want it, just because science delivers it to us bit by bit, with better knowledge of the way the system works and better engineering tools to effect it.
Now, suppose that space aliens arrived.
Maybe they're going to land at the U.N. headquarters down the road here, or maybe they'll pick a smarter spot -- but suppose they arrive and they give you a box.
And the box has two knobs.
One knob is the knob for controlling global temperature.
Maybe another knob is a knob for controlling CO2 concentrations.
You might imagine that we would fight wars over that box.
Because we have no way to agree about where to set the knobs.
We have no global governance.
And different people will have different places they want it set.
Now, I don't think that's going to happen. It's not very likely.
But we're building that box.
The scientists and engineers of the world are building it piece by piece, in their labs.
Even when they're doing it for other reasons.
Even when they're thinking they're just working on protecting the environment.
They have no interest in crazy ideas like engineering the whole planet.
They develop science that makes it easier and easier to do.
And so I guess my view on this is not that I want to do it -- I do not -- but that we should move this out of the shadows and talk about it seriously.
Because sooner or later, we'll be confronted with decisions about this, and it's better if we think hard about it, even if we want to think hard about reasons why we should never do it.
I'll give you two different ways to think about this problem that are the beginning of my thinking about how to think about it.
But what we need is not just a few oddballs like me thinking about this.
We need a broader debate.
A debate that involves musicians, scientists, philosophers, writers, who get engaged with this question about climate engineering and think seriously about what its implications are.
So here's one way to think about it, which is that we just do this instead of cutting emissions because it's cheaper.
I guess the thing I haven't said about this is, it is absurdly cheap.
It's conceivable that, say, using the sulfates method or this method I've come up with, you could create an ice age at a cost of .001 percent of GDP.
It's very cheap. We have a lot of leverage.
It's not a good idea, but it's just important. (Laughter) I'll tell you how big the lever is: the lever is that big.
And that calculation isn't much in dispute.
You might argue about the sanity of it, but the leverage is real. (Laughter) So because of this, we could deal with the problem simply by stopping reducing emissions, and just as the concentrations go up, we can increase the amount of geo-engineering.
I don't think anybody takes that seriously.
Because under this scenario, we walk further and further away from the current climate.
We have all sorts of other problems, like ocean acidification that come from CO2 in the atmosphere, anyway.
Nobody but maybe one or two very odd folks really suggest this.
But here's a case which is harder to reject.
Let's say that we don't do geo-engineering, we do what we ought to do, which is get serious about cutting emissions.
But we don't really know how quickly we have to cut them.
There's a lot of uncertainty about exactly how much climate change is too much.
So let's say that we work hard, and we actually don't just tap the brakes, but we step hard on the brakes and really reduce emissions and eventually reduce concentrations.
And maybe someday -- like 2075, October 23 -- we finally reach that glorious day where concentrations have peaked and are rolling down the other side.
And we have global celebrations, and we've actually started to -- you know, we've seen the worst of it.
But maybe on that day we also find that the Greenland ice sheet is really melting unacceptably fast, fast enough to put meters of sea level on the oceans in the next 100 years, and remove some of the biggest cities from the map.
That's an absolutely possible scenario.
We might decide at that point that even though geo-engineering was uncertain and morally unhappy, that it's a lot better than not geo-engineering.
And that's a very different way to look at the problem.
It's using this as risk control, not instead of action.
It's saying that you do some geo-engineering for a little while to take the worst of the heat off, not that you'd use it as a substitute for action.
But there is a problem with that view.
And the problem is the following: knowledge that geo-engineering is possible makes the climate impacts look less fearsome, and that makes a weaker commitment to cutting emissions today.
This is what economists call a moral hazard.
And that's one of the fundamental reasons that this problem is so hard to talk about, and, in general, I think it's the underlying reason that it's been politically unacceptable to talk about this.
But you don't make good policy by hiding things in a drawer.
I'll leave you with three questions, and then one final quote.
Should we do serious research on this topic?
Should we have a national research program that looks at this?
Not just at how you would do it better, but also what all the risks and downsides of it are.
Right now, you have a few enthusiasts talking about it, some in a positive side, some in a negative side -- but that's a dangerous state to be in because there's very little depth of knowledge on this topic.
A very small amount of money would get us some.
Many of us -- maybe now me -- think we should do that.
But I have a lot of reservations.
My reservations are principally about the moral hazard problem, and I don't really know how we can best avoid the moral hazard.
I think there is a serious problem: as you talk about this, people begin to think they don't need to work so hard to cut emissions.
Another thing is, maybe we need a treaty.
A treaty that decides who gets to do this.
Right now we may think of a big, rich country like the U.S. doing this.
But it might well be that, in fact, if China wakes up in 2030 and realizes that the climate impacts are just unacceptable, they may not be very interested in our moral conversations about how to do this, and they may just decide they'd really rather have a geo-engineered world than a non-geo-engineered world.
And we'll have no international mechanism to figure out who makes the decision.
So here's one last thought, which was said much, much better 25 years ago in the U.S. National Academy report than I can say today.
And I think it really summarizes where we are here.
That the CO2 problem, the climate problem that we've heard about, is driving lots of things -- innovations in the energy technologies that will reduce emissions -- but also, I think, inevitably, it will drive us towards thinking about climate and weather control, whether we like it or not.
And it's time to begin thinking about it, even if the reason we're thinking about it is to construct arguments for why we shouldn't do it.
Thank you very much.
The urban explosion of the last years of economic boom also produced dramatic marginalization, resulting in the explosion of slums in many parts of the world.
This polarization of enclaves of mega-wealth surrounded by sectors of poverty and the socioeconomic inequalities they have engendered is really at the center of today's urban crisis.
But I want to begin tonight by suggesting that this urban crisis is not only economic or environmental.
It's particularly a cultural crisis, a crisis of the institutions unable to reimagine the stupid ways which we have been growing, unable to challenge the oil-hungry, selfish urbanization that have perpetuated cities based on consumption, from southern California to New York to Dubai.
So I just really want to share with you a reflection that the future of cities today depends less on buildings and, in fact, depends more on the fundamental reorganization of socioeconomic relations, that the best ideas in the shaping of the city in the future will not come from enclaves of economic power and abundance, but in fact from sectors of conflict and scarcity from which an urgent imagination can really inspire us to rethink urban growth today.
And let me illustrate what I mean by understanding or engaging sites of conflict as harboring creativity, as I briefly introduce you to the Tijuana-San Diego border region, which has been the laboratory to rethink my practice as an architect.
This is the wall, the border wall, that separates San Diego and Tijuana, Latin America and the United States, a physical emblem of exclusionary planning policies that have perpetuated the division of communities, jurisdictions and resources across the world.
In this border region, we find some of the wealthiest real estate, as I once found in the edges of San Diego, barely 20 minutes away from some of the poorest settlements in Latin America.
And while these two cities have the same population, San Diego has grown six times larger than Tijuana in the last decades, immediately thrusting us to confront the tensions and conflicts between sprawl and density, which are at the center of today's discussion about environmental sustainability.
So I've been arguing in the last years that, in fact, the slums of Tijuana can teach a lot to the sprawls of San Diego when it comes to socioeconomic sustainability, that we should pay attention and learn from the many migrant communities on both sides of this border wall so that we can translate their informal processes of urbanization.
What do I mean by the informal in this case?
I'm really just talking about the compendium of social practices of adaptation that enable many of these migrant communities to transgress imposed political and economic recipes of urbanization.
I'm talking simply about the creative intelligence of the bottom-up, whether manifested in the slums of Tijuana that build themselves, in fact, with the waste of San Diego, or the many migrant neighborhoods in Southern California that have begun to be retrofitted with difference in the last decades.
So I've been interested as an artist in the measuring, the observation, of many of the trans-border informal flows across this border: in one direction, from south to north, the flow of immigrants into the United States, and from north to south the flow of waste from southern California into Tijuana.
I'm referring to the recycling of these old post-war bungalows that Mexican contractors bring to the border as American developers are disposing of them in the process of building a more inflated version of suburbia in the last decades.
So these are houses waiting to cross the border.
Not only people cross the border here, but entire chunks of one city move to the next, and when these houses are placed on top of these steel frames, they leave the first floor to become the second to be in-filled with more house, with a small business.
This layering of spaces and economies is very interesting to notice.
But not only houses, also small debris from one city, from San Diego, to Tijuana.
Probably a lot of you have seen the rubber tires that are used in the slums to build retaining walls.
But look at what people have done here in conditions of socioeconomic emergency.
They have figured out how to peel off the tire, how to thread it and interlock it to construct a more efficient retaining wall.
Or the garage doors that are brought from San Diego in trucks to become the new skin of emergency housing in many of these slums surrounding the edges of Tijuana.
So while, as an architect, this is a very compelling thing to witness, this creative intelligence, I also want to keep myself in check.
I don't want to romanticize poverty.
I just want to suggest that this informal urbanization is not just the image of precariousness, that informality here, the informal, is really a set of socioeconomic and political procedures that we could translate as artists, that this is about a bottom-up urbanization that performs.
See here, buildings are not important just for their looks, but, in fact, they are important for what they can do.
They truly perform as they transform through time and as communities negotiate the spaces and boundaries and resources.
So while waste flows southbound, people go north in search of dollars, and most of my research has had to do with the impact of immigration in the alteration of the homogeneity of many neighborhoods in the United States, particularly in San Diego.
And I'm talking about how this begins to suggest that the future of Southern California depends on the retrofitting of the large urbanization -- I mean, on steroids -- with the small programs, social and economic.
I'm referring to how immigrants, when they come to these neighborhoods, they begin to alter the one-dimensionality of parcels and properties into more socially and economically complex systems, as they begin to plug an informal economy into a garage, or as they build an illegal granny flat to support an extended family.
This socioeconomic entrepreneurship on the ground within these neighborhoods really begins to suggest ways of translating that into new, inclusive and more equitable land use policies.
So many stories emerge from these dynamics of alteration of space, such as &amp;quot;the informal Buddha,&amp;quot; which tells the story of a small house that saved itself, it did not travel to Mexico, but it was retrofitted in the end into a Buddhist temple, and in so doing, this small house transforms or mutates from a singular dwelling into a small, or a micro, socioeconomic and cultural infrastructure inside a neighborhood.
So these action neighborhoods, as I call them, really become the inspiration to imagine other interpretations of citizenship that have less to do, in fact, with belonging to the nation-state, and more with upholding the notion of citizenship as a creative act that reorganizes institutional protocols in the spaces of the city.
As an artist, I've been interested, in fact, in the visualization of citizenship, the gathering of many anecdotes, urban stories, in order to narrativize the relationship between social processes and spaces.
This is a story of a group of teenagers that one night, a few months ago, decided to invade this space under the freeway to begin constructing their own skateboard park.
With shovels in hand, they started to dig.
Two weeks later, the police stopped them.
They barricaded the place, and the teenagers were evicted, and the teenagers decided to fight back, not with bank cards or slogans but with constructing a critical process.
The first thing they did was to recognize the specificity of political jurisdiction inscribed in that empty space.
They found out that they had been lucky because they had not begun to dig under Caltrans territoy.
Caltrans is a state agency that governs the freeway, so it would have been very difficult to negotiate with them.
They were lucky, they said, because they began to dig under an arm of the freeway that belongs to the local municipality.
They were also lucky, they said, because they began to dig in a sort of Bermuda Triangle of jurisdiction, between port authority, airport authority, two city districts, and a review board.
All these red lines are the invisible political institutions that were inscribed in that leftover empty space.
With this knowledge, these teenagers as skaters confronted the city.
They came to the city attorney's office.
The city attorney told them that in order to continue the negotiation they had to become an NGO, and of course they didn't know what an NGO was.
They had to talk to their friends in Seattle who had gone through the same experience.
And they began to realize the necessity to organize themselves even deeper and began to fundraise, to organize budgets, to really be aware of all the knowledge embedded in the urban code in San Diego so that they could begin to redefine the very meaning of public space in the city, expanding it to other categories.
At the end, the teenagers won the case with that evidence, and they were able to construct their skateboard park under that freeway.
Now for many of you, this story might seem trivial or naive.
For me as an architect, it has become a fundamental narrative, because it begins to teach me that this micro-community not only designed another category of public space but they also designed the socioeconomic protocols that were necessary to be inscribed in that space for its long-term sustainability.
They also taught me that similar to the migrant communities on both sides of the border, they engaged conflict itself as a creative tool, because they had to produce a process that enabled them to reorganize resources and the politics of the city.
In that act, that informal, bottom-up act of transgression, really began to trickle up to transform top-down policy.
Now this journey from the bottom-up to the transformation of the top-down is where I find hope today.
And I'm thinking of how these modest alterations with space and with policy in many cities in the world, in primarily the urgency of a collective imagination as these communities reimagine their own forms of governance, social organization, and infrastructure, really is at the center of the new formation of democratic politics of the urban.
It is, in fact, this that could become the framework for producing new social and economic justice in the city.
I want to say this and emphasize it, because this is the only way I see that can enable us to move from urbanizations of consumption to neighborhoods of production today.
Thank you.
Hi. So today, I'd like to share some works in progress.
Since we are still realizing these works, we are largely working within the realm of intuition and mystery, still.
So I'm going to try and describe some of the experiences that we're looking for through each of the works.
So the first work is called the Imperial Monochromes.
A viewer sort of unsuspectingly walks into the room, and catches a glimpse of these panels in a messy composition on the wall.
Within seconds, as if the panels have noticed the presence of the viewer, they appear to panic and sort of get into a strict symmetry.
(Laughter) So this is the sketch of the two states.
One is total chaos. The other is absolute order.
And we were interested in seeing how little change it takes to move from one state to the other state.
This also reminded us of two very different pictorial traditions.
One is the altar tablets of the 15th century, and the other is about 100 years ago, Malevich's abstract compositions.
So I'm just going to take you to a video.
To give you a sense of scale, the largest panel is about two meters high.
That's about this much. And the smallest one is an A4.
So a viewer enters the space, and they snap to attention.
And after a while, if the viewer continues to remain in the space, the panels will sort of become immune to the presence of the viewer and become lax and autonomous again, until they sort of sense a presence in the room or a movement, when they will again snap to attention.
(Laughter) So here it appears as if it's the viewer that's sort of instigating the sense of order among the panels, but it could also be the other way around, that the panels are so stuck within their preconditioned behaviors that they sort of thrust the viewer with the role of a tyrant.
So this brings me to a quieter, small work called Handheld.
The viewer sees a piece of paper that's mounted on the far end of the wall, but when you go closer, you see that it's a blank A4, or a letter-sized piece of paper, that's held on either side by two small hands that appear to be carved with a great deal of attention and care from a small block of wood.
The viewer also sees that this entire sculpture is sort of moving very slightly, as if these two hands are trying to hold the paper very still for a long period of time, and somehow are not managing to.
So this instability in the movement very closely resembles the unsteady nature of images seen through a handheld camera.
So here I'm going to show you two tandem clips.
One is through a still camera and the other is through a handheld camera.
And you immediately see how the unsteady nature of the video suggests the presence of an observer and a subjective point of view.
So we've just removed the camera and transferred that movement onto the panel.
So here's a video.
You have to imagine the other hand. It's not there yet.
But to us, we're sort of trying to evoke a self-effacing gesture, as if there's a little person with outstretched arms behind this enormous piece of paper.
That sort of likens it to the amount of strain to be at the service of the observer and present this piece of paper very delicately to the viewer in front of them.
The next work is Decoy.
This is a cardboard model, so the object is about as tall as I am.
It has a rounded body, two arms, and a very tall, head-like antenna, and its sole purpose is to attract attention towards itself.
So when a viewer passes by, it sort of tilts from side to side, and moves its arms more and more frantically as the person gets closer.
So here is the first test scenario.
You see the two movements integrated, and the object seems to be employing its entire being in this expression of desperation.
But the idea is that once it's got the person's attention, it's no longer interested, and it looks for the next person whose attention to get.
(Laughter) So this is the final fabricated body of the Decoy.
It appears to be mass-manufactured like it came out of a factory like vacuum cleaners and washing machines.
Because we are always working from a very personal space, we like how this consumer aesthetic sort of depersonalizes the object and gives us a bit of distance in its appearance, at least.
And so to us this is a kind of sinister being which is trying to distract you from the things that actually need your attention, but it could also be a figure that needs a lot of help.
The next work is an object, that's also a kind of sound instrument.
In the shape of an amphitheater that's scaled to the size of an audience as perceived from somebody from the stage.
So from where I'm standing, each of you appears to be this big, and the audience sort of takes the entire field of my vision.
Seated in this audience are 996 small figures.
They're mechanically enabled to clap of their own free will.
This means that each of them can decide if and when they want to clap, how hard, for how long, how they want to be influenced by those around them or influence others, and if they want to contribute to innovation.
So when the viewer steps in front of the audience, there will be a response.
It could be a few claps or a strong applause, and then nothing happens until the viewer leaves the stage, and again the audience will respond.
It could be anything from a few feeble claps from members in the audience, or it could be a very loud ovation.
So to us, I think we're really looking at an audience as its own object or its own organism that's also got a sort of musical-like quality to it, an instrument.
So the viewer can play it by eliciting quite complex and varied, nuanced musical or sound patterns, but cannot really provoke the audience into any particular kind of response.
So there's a sense of judgment and capriciousness and uneasiness involved.
It also has an alluring and trap-like quality to it.
So here if you see we're quite excited about the image of the head splitting to form the two hands.
So here's a small visual animation, as if the two sides of the brain are sort of clashing against each other to kind of make sense of the duality and the tension.
And here is a prototype.
So we can't wait to be engulfed by 996 of them.
Okay, this is the last work. It's called the Framerunners.
It comes out of the idea of a window.
This is an actual window in our studio, and as you can see, it's made up of three different thicknesses of wooden sections.
So we used the same window vocabulary to construct our own frame or grid that's suspended in the room and that can be viewed from two sides.
This grid is inhabited by a tribe of small figures.
They're also made up of three different sizes, as if to suggest a kind of perspective or landscape on the single plain.
Each of these figures can also run backward and forward in the track and hide behind two adjacent tracks.
So in contrast to this very tight grid, we wanted to give these figures a very comical and slapstick-like quality, as if a puppeteer has taken them and physically animated them down the path.
So we like the idea of these figures sort of skipping along like they're oblivious and carefree and happy-go-lucky and content, until they sort of sense a movement from the viewer and they will hide behind the fastest wall.
So to us, this work also presents its own contradiction.
These figures are sort of entrapped within this very strong grid, which is like a prison, but also a fortress, because it allows them to be oblivious and naive and carefree and quite oblivious of the external world.
So all these real life qualities that I talk about are sort of translated to a very specific technical configuration, and we were very lucky to collaborate with ETH Zurich to develop the first prototype.
So you see they extracted the motion cogs from our animations and created a wiggle that integrated the head-bobbing movement and the back-and-forth movement.
So it's really quite small.
You can see it can fit into the palm of my hand.
So imagine our excitement when we saw it really working in the studio, and here it is.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
Intelligence -- what is it?
If we take a look back at the history of how intelligence has been viewed, one seminal example has been Edsger Dijkstra's famous quote that "the question of whether a machine can think is about as interesting as the question of whether a submarine can swim."
Now, Edsger Dijkstra, when he wrote this, intended it as a criticism of the early pioneers of computer science, like Alan Turing.
However, if you take a look back and think about what have been the most empowering innovations that enabled us to build artificial machines that swim and artificial machines that [fly], you find that it was only through understanding the underlying physical mechanisms of swimming and flight that we were able to build these machines.
And so, several years ago, I undertook a program to try to understand the fundamental physical mechanisms underlying intelligence.
Let's take a step back.
Let's first begin with a thought experiment.
Pretend that you're an alien race that doesn't know anything about Earth biology or Earth neuroscience or Earth intelligence, but you have amazing telescopes and you're able to watch the Earth, and you have amazingly long lives, so you're able to watch the Earth over millions, even billions of years.
And you observe a really strange effect.
You observe that, over the course of the millennia, Earth is continually bombarded with asteroids up until a point, and that at some point, corresponding roughly to our year, 2000 AD, asteroids that are on a collision course with the Earth that otherwise would have collided mysteriously get deflected or they detonate before they can hit the Earth.
Now of course, as earthlings, we know the reason would be that we're trying to save ourselves.
We're trying to prevent an impact.
But if you're an alien race who doesn't know any of this, doesn't have any concept of Earth intelligence, you'd be forced to put together a physical theory that explains how, up until a certain point in time, asteroids that would demolish the surface of a planet mysteriously stop doing that.
And so I claim that this is the same question as understanding the physical nature of intelligence.
So in this program that I undertook several years ago, I looked at a variety of different threads across science, across a variety of disciplines, that were pointing, I think, towards a single, underlying mechanism for intelligence.
In cosmology, for example, there have been a variety of different threads of evidence that our universe appears to be finely tuned for the development of intelligence, and, in particular, for the development of universal states that maximize the diversity of possible futures.
In game play, for example, in Go -- everyone remembers in 1997 when IBM's Deep Blue beat Garry Kasparov at chess -- fewer people are aware that in the past 10 years or so, the game of Go, arguably a much more challenging game because it has a much higher branching factor, has also started to succumb to computer game players for the same reason: the best techniques right now for computers playing Go are techniques that try to maximize future options during game play.
Finally, in robotic motion planning, there have been a variety of recent techniques that have tried to take advantage of abilities of robots to maximize future freedom of action in order to accomplish complex tasks.
And so, taking all of these different threads and putting them together, I asked, starting several years ago, is there an underlying mechanism for intelligence that we can factor out of all of these different threads?
Is there a single equation for intelligence?
And the answer, I believe, is yes. ["F = T ∇ Sτ"] What you're seeing is probably the closest equivalent to an E = mc² for intelligence that I've seen.
So what you're seeing here is a statement of correspondence that intelligence is a force, F, that acts so as to maximize future freedom of action.
It acts to maximize future freedom of action, or keep options open, with some strength T, with the diversity of possible accessible futures, S, up to some future time horizon, tau.
In short, intelligence doesn't like to get trapped.
Intelligence tries to maximize future freedom of action and keep options open.
And so, given this one equation, it's natural to ask, so what can you do with this?
How predictive is it?
Does it predict human-level intelligence?
Does it predict artificial intelligence?
So I'm going to show you now a video that will, I think, demonstrate some of the amazing applications of just this single equation.
(Video) Narrator: Recent research in cosmology has suggested that universes that produce more disorder, or "entropy," over their lifetimes should tend to have more favorable conditions for the existence of intelligent beings such as ourselves.
But what if that tentative cosmological connection between entropy and intelligence hints at a deeper relationship?
What if intelligent behavior doesn't just correlate with the production of long-term entropy, but actually emerges directly from it?
To find out, we developed a software engine called Entropica, designed to maximize the production of long-term entropy of any system that it finds itself in.
Amazingly, Entropica was able to pass multiple animal intelligence tests, play human games, and even earn money trading stocks, all without being instructed to do so.
Here are some examples of Entropica in action.
Just like a human standing upright without falling over, here we see Entropica automatically balancing a pole using a cart.
This behavior is remarkable in part because we never gave Entropica a goal.
It simply decided on its own to balance the pole.
This balancing ability will have appliactions for humanoid robotics and human assistive technologies.
Just as some animals can use objects in their environments as tools to reach into narrow spaces, here we see that Entropica, again on its own initiative, was able to move a large disk representing an animal around so as to cause a small disk, representing a tool, to reach into a confined space holding a third disk and release the third disk from its initially fixed position.
This tool use ability will have applications for smart manufacturing and agriculture.
In addition, just as some other animals are able to cooperate by pulling opposite ends of a rope at the same time to release food, here we see that Entropica is able to accomplish a model version of that task.
This cooperative ability has interesting implications for economic planning and a variety of other fields.
Entropica is broadly applicable to a variety of domains.
For example, here we see it successfully playing a game of pong against itself, illustrating its potential for gaming.
Here we see Entropica orchestrating new connections on a social network where friends are constantly falling out of touch and successfully keeping the network well connected.
This same network orchestration ability also has applications in health care, energy, and intelligence.
Here we see Entropica directing the paths of a fleet of ships, successfully discovering and utilizing the Panama Canal to globally extend its reach from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
By the same token, Entropica is broadly applicable to problems in autonomous defense, logistics and transportation.
Finally, here we see Entropica spontaneously discovering and executing a buy-low, sell-high strategy on a simulated range traded stock, successfully growing assets under management exponentially.
This risk management ability will have broad applications in finance and insurance.
Alex Wissner-Gross: So what you've just seen is that a variety of signature human intelligent cognitive behaviors such as tool use and walking upright and social cooperation all follow from a single equation, which drives a system to maximize its future freedom of action.
Now, there's a profound irony here.
Going back to the beginning of the usage of the term robot, the play "RUR," there was always a concept that if we developed machine intelligence, there would be a cybernetic revolt.
The machines would rise up against us.
One major consequence of this work is that maybe all of these decades, we've had the whole concept of cybernetic revolt in reverse.
It's not that machines first become intelligent and then megalomaniacal and try to take over the world.
It's quite the opposite, that the urge to take control of all possible futures is a more fundamental principle than that of intelligence, that general intelligence may in fact emerge directly from this sort of control-grabbing, rather than vice versa.
Another important consequence is goal seeking.
I'm often asked, how does the ability to seek goals follow from this sort of framework?
And the answer is, the ability to seek goals will follow directly from this in the following sense: just like you would travel through a tunnel, a bottleneck in your future path space, in order to achieve many other diverse objectives later on, or just like you would invest in a financial security, reducing your short-term liquidity in order to increase your wealth over the long term, goal seeking emerges directly from a long-term drive to increase future freedom of action.
Finally, Richard Feynman, famous physicist, once wrote that if human civilization were destroyed and you could pass only a single concept on to our descendants to help them rebuild civilization, that concept should be that all matter around us is made out of tiny elements that attract each other when they're far apart but repel each other when they're close together.
My equivalent of that statement to pass on to descendants to help them build artificial intelligences or to help them understand human intelligence, is the following: Intelligence should be viewed as a physical process that tries to maximize future freedom of action and avoid constraints in its own future.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'd like to start, if I may, with the story of the Paisley snail.
On the evening of the 26th of August, 1928, May Donoghue took a train from Glasgow to the town of Paisley, seven miles east of the city, and there at the Wellmeadow Café, she had a Scots ice cream float, a mix of ice cream and ginger beer bought for her by a friend.
The ginger beer came in a brown, opaque bottle labeled "D. Stevenson, Glen Lane, Paisley."
She drank some of the ice cream float, but as the remaining ginger beer was poured into her tumbler, a decomposed snail floated to the surface of her glass.
Three days later, she was admitted to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary and diagnosed with severe gastroenteritis and shock.
The case of Donoghue vs. Stevenson that followed set a very important legal precedent: Stevenson, the manufacturer of the ginger beer, was held to have a clear duty of care towards May Donoghue, even though there was no contract between them, and, indeed, she hadn't even bought the drink.
One of the judges, Lord Atkin, described it like this: You must take care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbor.
Indeed, one wonders that without a duty of care, how many people would have had to suffer from gastroenteritis before Stevenson eventually went out of business.
Now please hang on to that Paisley snail story, because it's an important principle.
Last year, the Hansard Society, a nonpartisan charity which seeks to strengthen parliamentary democracy and encourage greater public involvement in politics published, alongside their annual audit of political engagement, an additional section devoted entirely to politics and the media.
Here are a couple of rather depressing observations from that survey.
Tabloid newspapers do not appear to advance the political citizenship of their readers, relative even to those who read no newspapers whatsoever.
Tabloid-only readers are twice as likely to agree with a negative view of politics than readers of no newspapers.
They're not just less politically engaged.
They are consuming media that reinforces their negative evaluation of politics, thereby contributing to a fatalistic and cynical attitude to democracy and their own role within it.
Little wonder that the report concluded that in this respect, the press, particularly the tabloids, appear not to be living up to the importance of their role in our democracy.
Now I doubt if anyone in this room would seriously challenge that view.
But if Hansard are right, and they usually are, then we've got a very serious problem on our hands, and it's one that I'd like to spend the next 10 minutes focusing upon.
Since the Paisley snail, and especially over the past decade or so, a great deal of thinking has been developed around the notion of a duty of care as it relates to a number of aspects of civil society.
Generally a duty of care arises when one individual or a group of individuals undertakes an activity which has the potential to cause harm to another, either physically, mentally or economically.
This is principally focused on obvious areas, such as our empathetic response to children and young people, to our service personnel, and to the elderly and infirm.
It is seldom, if ever, extended to equally important arguments around the fragility of our present system of government, to the notion that honesty, accuracy and impartiality are fundamental to the process of building and embedding an informed, participatory democracy.
And the more you think about it, the stranger that is.
A couple of years ago, I had the pleasure of opening a brand new school in the northeast of England.
It had been renamed by its pupils as Academy 360.
As I walked through their impressive, glass-covered atrium, in front of me, emblazoned on the wall in letters of fire was Marcus Aurelius's famous injunction: If it's not true, don't say it; if it's not right, don't do it.
The head teacher saw me staring at it, and he said, "Oh, that's our school motto."
On the train back to London, I couldn't get it out of my mind.
I kept thinking, can it really have taken us over 2,000 years to come to terms with that simple notion as being our minimum expectation of each other?
Isn't it time that we develop this concept of a duty of care and extended it to include a care for our shared but increasingly endangered democratic values?
After all, the absence of a duty of care within many professions can all too easily amount to accusations of negligence, and that being the case, can we be really comfortable with the thought that we're in effect being negligent in respect of the health of our own societies and the values that necessarily underpin them?
Could anyone honestly suggest, on the evidence, that the same media which Hansard so roundly condemned have taken sufficient care to avoid behaving in ways which they could reasonably have foreseen would be likely to undermine or even damage our inherently fragile democratic settlement.
Now there will be those who will argue that this could all too easily drift into a form of censorship, albeit self-censorship, but I don't buy that argument.
It has to be possible to balance freedom of expression with wider moral and social responsibilities.
Let me explain why by taking the example from my own career as a filmmaker.
Throughout that career, I never accepted that a filmmaker should set about putting their own work outside or above what he or she believed to be a decent set of values for their own life, their own family, and the future of the society in which we all live.
I'd go further.
A responsible filmmaker should never devalue their work to a point at which it becomes less than true to the world they themselves wish to inhabit.
As I see it, filmmakers, journalists, even bloggers are all required to face up to the social expectations that come with combining the intrinsic power of their medium with their well-honed professional skills.
Obviously this is not a mandated duty, but for the gifted filmmaker and the responsible journalist or even blogger, it strikes me as being utterly inescapable.
We should always remember that our notion of individual freedom and its partner, creative freedom, is comparatively new in the history of Western ideas, and for that reason, it's often undervalued and can be very quickly undermined.
It's a prize easily lost, and once lost, once surrendered, it can prove very, very hard to reclaim.
And its first line of defense has to be our own standards, not those enforced on us by a censor or legislation, our own standards and our own integrity.
Our integrity as we deal with those with whom we work and our own standards as we operate within society.
And these standards of ours need to be all of a piece with a sustainable social agenda.
They're part of a collective responsibility, the responsibility of the artist or the journalist to deal with the world as it really is, and this, in turn, must go hand in hand with the responsibility of those governing society to also face up to that world, and not to be tempted to misappropriate the causes of its ills.
Yet, as has become strikingly clear over the last couple of years, such responsibility has to a very great extent been abrogated by large sections of the media.
And as a consequence, across the Western world, the over-simplistic policies of the parties of protest and their appeal to a largely disillusioned, older demographic, along with the apathy and obsession with the trivial that typifies at least some of the young, taken together, these and other similarly contemporary aberrations are threatening to squeeze the life out of active, informed debate and engagement, and I stress active.
The most ardent of libertarians might argue that Donoghue v. Stevenson should have been thrown out of court and that Stevenson would eventually have gone out of business if he'd continued to sell ginger beer with snails in it.
But most of us, I think, accept some small role for the state to enforce a duty of care, and the key word here is reasonable.
Judges must ask, did they take reasonable care and could they have reasonably foreseen the consequences of their actions?
Far from signifying overbearing state power, it's that small common sense test of reasonableness that I'd like us to apply to those in the media who, after all, set the tone and the content for much of our democratic discourse.
Democracy, in order to work, requires that reasonable men and women take the time to understand and debate difficult, sometimes complex issues, and they do so in an atmosphere which strives for the type of understanding that leads to, if not agreement, then at least a productive and workable compromise.
Politics is about choices, and within those choices, politics is about priorities.
It's about reconciling conflicting preferences wherever and whenever possibly based on fact.
But if the facts themselves are distorted, the resolutions are likely only to create further conflict, with all the stresses and strains on society that inevitably follow.
The media have to decide: Do they see their role as being to inflame or to inform?
Because in the end, it comes down to a combination of trust and leadership.
Fifty years ago this week, President John F. Kennedy made two epoch-making speeches, the first on disarmament and the second on civil rights.
The first led almost immediately to the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, and the second led to the 1964 Civil Rights Act, both of which represented giant leaps forward.
Democracy, well-led and well-informed, can achieve very great things, but there's a precondition.
We have to trust that those making those decisions are acting in the best interest not of themselves but of the whole of the people.
We need factually-based options, clearly laid out, not those of a few powerful and potentially manipulative corporations pursuing their own frequently narrow agendas, but accurate, unprejudiced information with which to make our own judgments.
If we want to provide decent, fulfilling lives for our children and our children's children, we need to exercise to the very greatest degree possible that duty of care for a vibrant, and hopefully a lasting, democracy.
Thank you very much for listening to me.
(Applause)
What is love?
It's a hard term to define in so far as it has a very wide application.
I can love jogging.
I can love a book, a movie.
I can love escalopes.
I can love my wife.
(Laughter) But there's a great difference between an escalope and my wife, for instance.
That is, if I value the escalope, the escalope, on the other hand, it doesn't value me back.
Whereas my wife, she calls me the star of her life.
(Laughter) Therefore, only another desiring conscience can conceive me as a desirable being.
I know this, that's why love can be defined in a more accurate way as the desire of being desired.
Hence the eternal problem of love: how to become and remain desirable?
The individual used to find an answer to this problem by submitting his life to community rules.
You had a specific part to play according to your sex, your age, your social status, and you only had to play your part to be valued and loved by the whole community.
Think about the young woman who must remain chaste before marriage.
Think about the youngest son who must obey the eldest son, who in turn must obey the patriarch.
But a phenomenon started in the 13th century, mainly in the Renaissance, in the West, that caused the biggest identity crisis in the history of humankind.
This phenomenon is modernity.
We can basically summarize it through a triple process.
First, a process of rationalization of scientific research, which has accelerated technical progress.
Next, a process of political democratization, which has fostered individual rights.
And finally, a process of rationalization of economic production and of trade liberalization.
These three intertwined processes have completely annihilated all the traditional bearings of Western societies, with radical consequences for the individual.
Now individuals are free to value or disvalue any attitude, any choice, any object.
But as a result, they are themselves confronted with this same freedom that others have to value or disvalue them.
In other words, my value was once ensured by submitting myself to the traditional authorities.
Now it is quoted in the stock exchange.
On the free market of individual desires, I negotiate my value every day.
Hence the anxiety of contemporary man.
He is obsessed: "Am I desirable? How desirable?
How many people are going to love me?"
And how does he respond to this anxiety?
Well, by hysterically collecting symbols of desirability.
(Laughter) I call this act of collecting, along with others, seduction capital.
Indeed, our consumer society is largely based on seduction capital.
It is said about this consumption that our age is materialistic.
But it's not true! We only accumulate objects in order to communicate with other minds.
We do it to make them love us, to seduce them.
Nothing could be less materialistic, or more sentimental, than a teenager buying brand new jeans and tearing them at the knees, because he wants to please Jennifer.
(Laughter) Consumerism is not materialism.
It is rather what is swallowed up and sacrificed in the name of the god of love, or rather in the name of seduction capital.
In light of this observation on contemporary love, how can we think of love in the years to come?
We can envision two hypotheses: The first one consists of betting that this process of narcissistic capitalization will intensify.
It is hard to say what shape this intensification will take, because it largely depends on social and technical innovations, which are by definition difficult to predict.
But we can, for instance, imagine a dating website which, a bit like those loyalty points programs, uses seduction capital points that vary according to my age, my height/weight ratio, my degree, my salary, or the number of clicks on my profile.
We can also imagine a chemical treatment for breakups that weakens the feelings of attachment.
By the way, there's a program on MTV already in which seduction teachers treat heartache as a disease.
These teachers call themselves "pick-up artists."
"Artist" in French is easy, it means "artiste."
"Pick-up" is to pick someone up, but not just any picking up -- it's picking up chicks.
So they are artists of picking up chicks.
(Laughter) And they call heartache "one-itis."
In English, "itis" is a suffix that signifies infection.
One-itis can be translated as "an infection from one."
It's a bit disgusting. Indeed, for the pick-up artists, falling in love with someone is a waste of time, it's squandering your seduction capital, so it must be eliminated like a disease, like an infection.
We can also envision a romantic use of the genome.
Everyone would carry it around and present it like a business card to verify if seduction can progress to reproduction.
(Laughter) Of course, this race for seduction, like every fierce competition, will create huge disparities in narcissistic satisfaction, and therefore a lot of loneliness and frustration too.
So we can expect that modernity itself, which is the origin of seduction capital, would be called into question.
I'm thinking particularly of the reaction of neo-fascist or religious communes.
But such a future doesn't have to be.
Another path to thinking about love may be possible.
But how?
How to renounce the hysterical need to be valued?
Well, by becoming aware of my uselessness.
(Laughter) Yes, I'm useless.
But rest assured: so are you.
(Laughter) (Applause) We are all useless.
This uselessness is easily demonstrated, because in order to be valued I need another to desire me, which shows that I do not have any value of my own.
I don't have any inherent value.
We all pretend to have an idol; we all pretend to be an idol for someone else, but actually we are all impostors, a bit like a man on the street who appears totally cool and indifferent, while he has actually anticipated and calculated so that all eyes are on him.
I think that becoming aware of this general imposture that concerns all of us would ease our love relationships.
It is because I want to be loved from head to toe, justified in my every choice, that the seduction hysteria exists.
And therefore I want to seem perfect so that another can love me.
I want them to be perfect so that I can be reassured of my value.
It leads to couples obsessed with performance who will break up, just like that, at the slightest underachievement.
In contrast to this attitude, I call upon tenderness -- love as tenderness.
What is tenderness?
To be tender is to accept the loved one's weaknesses.
It's not about becoming a sad couple of orderlies.
(Laughter) That's pretty bad.
On the contrary, there's plenty of charm and happiness in tenderness.
I refer specifically to a kind of humor that is unfortunately underused.
It is a sort of poetry of deliberate awkwardness.
I refer to self-mockery.
For a couple who is no longer sustained, supported by the constraints of tradition, I believe that self-mockery is one of the best means for the relationship to endure.
So imagine, you're in the supermarket, you're buying some groceries, and you get given the option for a plastic or a paper shopping bag.
Which one do you choose if you want to do the right thing by the environment?
Most people do pick the paper.
Okay, let's think of why.
It's brown to start with.
Therefore, it must be good for the environment.
It's biodegradable. It's reusable.
In some cases, it's recyclable.
So when people are looking at the plastic bag, it's likely they're thinking of something like this, which we all know is absolutely terrible, and we should be avoiding at all expenses these kinds of environmental damages.
But people are often not thinking of something like this, which is the other end of the spectrum.
When we produce materials, we need to extract them from the environment, and we need a whole bunch of environmental impacts.
You see, what happens is, when we need to make complex choices, us humans like really simple solutions, and so we often ask for simple solutions.
And I work in design.
I advise designers and innovators around sustainability, and everyone always says to me, "Oh Leyla, I just want the eco-materials."
And I say, "Well, that's very complex, and we'll have to spend four hours talking about what exactly an eco-material means, because everything at some point comes from nature, and it's how you use the material that dictates the environmental impact.
So what happens is, we have to rely on some sort of intuitive framework when we make decisions.
So I like to call that intuitive framework our environmental folklore.
It's either the little voice at the back of your head, or it's that gut feeling you get when you've done the right thing, so when you've picked the paper bag or when you've bought a fuel-efficient car.
And environmental folklore is a really important thing because we're trying to do the right thing.
But how do we know if we're actually reducing the net environmental impacts that our actions as individuals and as professionals and as a society are actually having on the natural environment?
So the thing about environmental folklore is it tends to be based on our experiences, the things we've heard from other people.
It doesn't tend to be based on any scientific framework.
And this is really hard, because we live in incredibly complex systems.
We have the human systems of how we communicate and interrelate and have our whole constructed society, We have the industrial systems, which is essentially the entire economy, and then all of that has to operate within the biggest system, and, I would argue, the most important, the ecosystem.
And you see, the choices that we make as an individual, but the choices that we make in every single job that we have, no matter how high or low you are in the pecking order, has an impact on all of these systems.
And the thing is that we have to find ways if we're actually going to address sustainability of interlocking those complex systems and making better choices that result in net environmental gains.
What we need to do is we need to learn to do more with less.
We have an increasing population, and everybody likes their mobile phones, especially in this situation here.
So we need to find innovative ways of solving some of these problems that we face.
And that's where this process called life cycle thinking comes in.
So essentially, everything that is created goes through a series of life cycle stages, and we use this scientific process called life cycle assessment, or in America, you guys say life cycle analysis, in order to have a clearer picture of how everything that we do in the technical part of those systems affects the natural environment.
So we go all the way back to the extraction of raw materials, and then we look at manufacturing, we look at packaging and transportation, use, and end of life, and at every single one of these stages, the things that we do have an interaction with the natural environment, and we can monitor how that interaction is actually affecting the systems and services that make life on Earth possible.
And through doing this, we've learned some absolutely fascinating things.
And we've busted a bunch of myths.
So to start with, there's a word that's used a lot.
It's used a lot in marketing, and it's used a lot, I think, in our conversation when we're talking about sustainability, and that's the word biodegradability.
Now biodegradability is a material property; it is not a definition of environmental benefits.
Allow me to explain.
When something natural, something that's made from a cellulose fiber like a piece of bread, even, or any food waste, or even a piece of paper, when something natural ends up in the natural environment, it degrades normally.
Its little carbon molecules that it stored up as it was growing are naturally released back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide, but this is a net situation.
Most natural things don't actually end up in nature.
Most of the things, the waste that we produce, end up in landfill.
Landfill is a different environment.
In landfill, those same carbon molecules degrade in a different way, because a landfill is anaerobic.
It's got no oxygen. It's tightly compacted and hot.
Those same molecules, they become methane, and methane is a 25 times more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.
So our old lettuces and products that we have thrown out that are made out of biodegradable materials, if they end up in landfill, contribute to climate change.
You see, there are facilities now that can actually capture that methane and generate power, displacing the need for fossil fuel power, but we need to be smart about this.
We need to identify how we can start to leverage these types of things that are already happening and start to design systems and services that alleviate these problems.
Because right now, what people do is they turn around and they say, "Let's ban plastic bags. We'll give people paper because that is better for the environment."
But if you're throwing it in the bin, and your local landfill facility is just a normal one, then we're having what's called a double negative.
I'm a product designer by trade.
I then did social science.
And so I'm absolutely fascinated by consumer goods and how the consumer goods that we have kind of become immune to that fill our lives have an impact on the natural environment.
And these guys are, like, serial offenders, and I'm pretty sure everyone in this room has a refrigerator.
Now America has this amazing ability to keep growing refrigerators.
In the last few years, they've grown one cubic foot on average, the standard size of a refrigerator.
And the problem is, they're so big now, it's easier for us to buy more food that we can't eat or find.
I mean, I have things at the back of my refrigerator that have been there for years, all right?
And so what happens is, we waste more food.
And as I was just explaining, food waste is a problem.
In fact, here in the U.S., 40 percent of food purchased for the home is wasted.
Half of the world's produced food is wasted.
That's the latest U.N. stats. Up to half of the food.
It's insane. It's 1.3 billion tons of food per annum.
And I blame it on the refrigerator, well, especially in Western cultures, because it makes it easier.
I mean, there's a lot of complex systems going on here.
I don't want to make it so simplistic.
But the refrigerator is a serious contributor to this, and one of the features of it is the crisper drawer.
You all got crisper drawers?
The drawer that you put your lettuces in?
Lettuces have a habit of going soggy in the crisper drawers, don't they?
Yeah? Soggy lettuces?
In the U.K., this is such a problem that there was a government report a few years ago that actually said the second biggest offender of wasted food in the U.K. is the soggy lettuce.
It was called the Soggy Lettuce Report.
Okay? So this is a problem, people.
These poor little lettuces are getting thrown out left, right and center because the crisper drawers are not designed to actually keep things crisp.
Okay. You need a tight environment.
You need, like, an airless environment to prevent the degrading that would happen naturally.
But the crisper drawers, they're just a drawer with a slightly better seal.
Anyway, I'm clearly obsessed.
Don't ever invite me over because I'll just start going through your refrigerator and looking at all sorts of things like that.
But essentially, this is a big problem.
Because when we lose something like the lettuce from the system, not only do we have that impact I just explained at the end of life, but we actually have had to grow that lettuce.
The life cycle impact of that lettuce is astronomical.
We've had to clear land.
We've had to plant seeds, phosphorus, fertilizers, nutrients, water, sunlight.
All of the embodied impacts in that lettuce get lost from the system, which makes it a far bigger environmental impact than the loss of the energy from the fridge.
So we need to design things like this far better if we're going to start addressing serious environmental problems.
We could start with the crisper drawer and the size.
For those of you in the room who do design fridges, that would be great.
The problem is, imagine if we actually started to reconsider how we designed things.
So I look at the refrigerator as a sign of modernity, but we actually haven't really changed the design of them that much since the 1950s.
A little bit, but essentially they're still big boxes, cold boxes that we store stuff in.
So imagine if we actually really started to identify these problems and use that as the foundation for finding innovative and elegant design solutions that will solve those problems.
This is design-led system change, design dictating the way in which the system can be far more sustainable.
Forty percent food waste is a major problem.
Imagine if we designed fridges that halved that.
Another item that I find fascinating is the electric tea kettle, which I found out that you don't do tea kettles in this country, really, do you?
But that's really big in the U.K.
Ninety-seven percent of households in the United Kingdom own an electric tea kettle.
So they're very popular.
And, I mean, if I were to work with a design firm or a designer, and they were designing one of these, and they wanted to do it eco, they'd usually ask me two things.
They'd say, "Leyla, how do I make it technically efficient?"
Because obviously energy's a problem with this product.
Or, "How do I make it green materials?
How do I make the materials green in the manufacturing?"
Would you ask me those questions?
They seem logical, right? Yeah.
Well I'd say, "You're looking at the wrong problems."
Because the problem is with use.
It's with how people use the product.
Sixty-five percent of Brits admit to over-filling their kettle when they only need one cup of tea.
All of this extra water that's being boiled requires energy, and it's been calculated that in one day of extra energy use from boiling kettles is enough to light all of the streetlights in England for a night.
But this is the thing.
This is what I call a product-person failure.
But we've got a product-system failure going on with these little guys, and they're so ubiquitous, you don't even notice they're there.
And this guy over here, though, he does. He's named Simon.
Simon works for the national electricity company in the U.K.
He has a very important job of monitoring all of the electricity coming into the system to make sure there is enough so it powers everybody's homes.
He's also watching television.
The reason is because there's a unique phenomenon that happens in the U.K.
the moment that very popular TV shows end.
The minute the ad break comes on, this man has to rush to buy nuclear power from France, because everybody turns their kettles on at the same time.
(Laughter) 1.5 million kettles, seriously problematic.
So imagine if you designed kettles, you actually found a way to solve these system failures, because this is a huge amount of pressure on the system, just because the product hasn't thought about the problem that it's going to have when it exists in the world.
Now, I looked at a number of kettles available on the market, and found the minimum fill lines, so the little piece of information that tells you how much you need to put in there, was between two and a five-and-a-half cups of water just to make one cup of tea.
So this kettle here is an example of one where it actually has two reservoirs.
One's a boiling chamber, and one's the water holder.
The user actually has to push that button to get their hot water boiled, which means, because we're all lazy, you only fill exactly what you need.
And this is what I call behavior-changing products: products, systems or services that intervene and solve these problems up front.
Now, this is a technology arena, so obviously these things are quite popular, but I think if we're going to keep designing, buying and using and throwing out these kinds of products at the rate we currently do, which is astronomically high, there are seven billion people who live in the world right now.
There are six billion mobile phone subscriptions as of last year.
Every single year, 1.5 billion mobile phones roll off production lines, and some companies report their production rate as being greater than the human birth rate.
One hundred fifty-two million phones were thrown out in the U.S. last year; only 11 percent were recycled.
I'm from Australia. We have a population of 22 million -- don't laugh -- and it's been reported that 22 million phones are in people's drawers.
We need to find ways of solving the problems around this, because these things are so complicated.
They have so much locked up inside them.
Gold! Did you know that it's actually cheaper now to get gold out of a ton of old mobile phones than it is out of a ton of gold ore?
There's a number of highly complex and valuable materials embodied inside these things, so we need to find ways of encouraging disassembly, because this is otherwise what happens.
This is a community in Ghana, and e-waste is reported, or electronic waste is reported by the U.N.
as being up to 50 million tons trafficked.
This is how they get the gold and the other valuable materials out.
They burn the electronic waste in open spaces.
These are communities, and this is happening all over the world.
And because we don't see the ramifications of the choices that we make as designers, as businesspeople, as consumers, then these kinds of externalities happen, and these are people's lives.
So we need to find smarter, more systems-based, innovative solutions to these problems, if we're going to start to live sustainably within this world.
So imagine if, when you bought your mobile phone, your new one because you replaced your old one -- after 15 to 18 months is the average time that people replace their phones, by the way — so if we're going to keep this kind of expedient mobile phone replacing, then we should be looking at closing the loop on these systems.
The people who produce these phones, and some of which I'm sure are in the room right now, could potentially look at doing what we call closed-loop systems, or product system services, so identifying that there is a market demand and that market demand's not going to go anywhere, so you design the product to solve the problem.
Design for disassembly, design for light-weighting.
We heard some of those kinds of strategies being used in the Tesla Motors car today.
These kinds of approaches are not hard, but understanding the system and then looking for viable, market-driven consumer demand alternatives is how we can start radically altering the sustainability agenda, because I hate to break it to you all: Consumption is the biggest problem.
But design is one of the best solutions.
These kinds of products are everywhere.
By identifying alternative ways of doing things, we can actually start to innovate, and I say actually start to innovate.
I'm sure everyone in this room is very innovative.
But in the regards to using sustainability as a parameter, as a criteria for fueling systems-based solutions, because as I've just demonstrated with these simple products, they're participating in these major problems.
So we need to look across the entire life of the things that we do.
If you just had paper or plastic -- obviously reusable is far more beneficial -- then the paper is worse, and the paper is worse because it weighs four to 10 times more than the plastic, and when we actually compare, from a life cycle perspective, a kilo of plastic and a kilo of paper, the paper is far better, but the functionality of a plastic or a paper bag to carry your groceries home is not done with a kilo of each material.
It's done with a very small amount of plastic and quite a lot more paper.
Because functionality defines environmental impact, and I said earlier that the designers always ask me for the eco-materials.
I say, there's only a few materials that you should completely avoid.
The rest of them, it's all about application, and at the end of the day, everything we design and produce in the economy or buy as consumers is done so for function.
We want something, therefore we buy it.
So breaking things back down and delivering smartly, elegantly, sophisticated solutions that take into consideration the entire system and the entire life of the thing, everything, all the way back to the extraction through to the end of life, we can start to actually find really innovative solutions.
And I'll just leave you with one very quick thing that a designer said to me recently who I work with, a senior designer.
I said, "How come you're not doing sustainability? I know you know this."
And he said, "Well, recently I pitched a sustainability project to a client, and turned and he said to me, 'I know it's going to cost less, I know it's going to sell more, but we're not pioneers, because pioneers have arrows in their backs.'" I think we've got a roomful of pioneers, and I hope there are far more pioneers out there, because we need to solve these problems.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The world is changing in some really profound ways, and I worry that investors aren't paying enough attention to some of the biggest drivers of change, especially when it comes to sustainability.
And by sustainability, I mean the really juicy things, like environmental and social issues and corporate governance.
I think it's reckless to ignore these things, because doing so can jeopardize future long-term returns.
And here's something that may surprise you: the balance of power to really influence sustainability rests with institutional investors, the large investors like pension funds, foundations and endowments.
I believe that sustainable investing is less complicated than you think, better-performing than you believe, and more important than we can imagine.
Let me remind you what we already know.
We have a population that's both growing and aging; we have seven billion souls today heading to 10 billion at the end of the century; we consume natural resources faster than they can be replenished; and the emissions that are mainly responsible for climate change just keep increasing.
Now clearly, these are environmental and social issues, but that's not all.
They're economic issues, and that makes them relevant to risk and return.
And they are really complex and they can seem really far off, that the temptation may be to do this: bury our heads in the sand and not think about it.
Resist this, if you can. Don't do this at home.
(Laughter) But it makes me wonder if the investment rules of today are fit for purpose tomorrow.
We know that investors, when they look at a company and decide whether to invest, they look at financial data, metrics like sales growth, cash flow, market share, valuation -- you know, the really sexy stuff.
And these things are fundamental, of course, but they're not enough.
Investors should also look at performance metrics in what we call ESG: environment, social and governance.
Environment includes energy consumption, water availability, waste and pollution, just making efficient uses of resources.
Social includes human capital, things like employee engagement and innovation capacity, as well as supply chain management and labor rights and human rights.
And governance relates to the oversight of companies by their boards and investors.
See, I told you this is the really juicy stuff.
But ESG is the measure of sustainability, and sustainable investing incorporates ESG factors with financial factors into the investment process.
It means limiting future risk by minimizing harm to people and planet, and it means providing capital to users who deploy it towards productive and sustainable outcomes.
So if sustainability matters financially today, and all signs indicate more tomorrow, is the private sector paying attention?
Well, the really cool thing is that most CEOs are.
They started to see sustainability not just as important but crucial to business success.
About 80 percent of global CEOs see sustainability as the root to growth in innovation and leading to competitive advantage in their industries.
But 93 percent see ESG as the future, or as important to the future of their business.
So the views of CEOs are clear.
There's tremendous opportunity in sustainability.
So how are companies actually leveraging ESG to drive hard business results?
One example is near and dear to our hearts.
In 2012, State Street migrated 54 applications to the cloud environment, and we retired another 85.
We virtualized our operating system environments, and we completed numerous automation projects.
Now these initiatives create a more mobile workplace, and they reduce our real estate footprint, and they yield savings of 23 million dollars in operating costs annually, and avoid the emissions of a 100,000 metric tons of carbon.
That's the equivalent of taking 21,000 cars off the road.
So awesome, right?
Another example is Pentair.
Pentair is a U.S. industrial conglomerate, and about a decade ago, they sold their core power tools business and reinvested those proceeds in a water business.
That's a really big bet. Why did they do that?
Well, with apologies to the Home Improvement fans, there's more growth in water than in power tools, and this company has their sights set on what they call "the new New World."
That's four billion middle class people demanding food, energy and water.
Now, you may be asking yourself, are these just isolated cases?
I mean, come on, really?
Do companies that take sustainability into account really do well financially?
The answer that may surprise you is yes.
The data shows that stocks with better ESG performance perform just as well as others.
In blue, we see the MSCI World.
It's an index of large companies from developed markets across the world.
And in gold, we see a subset of companies rated as having the best ESG performance.
Over three plus years, no performance tradeoff.
So that's okay, right? We want more. I want more.
In some cases, there may be outperformance from ESG.
In blue, we see the performance of the 500 largest global companies, and in gold, we see a subset of companies with best practice in climate change strategy and risk management.
Now over almost eight years, they've outperformed by about two thirds.
So yes, this is correlation. It's not causation.
But it does illustrate that environmental leadership is compatible with good returns.
So if the returns are the same or better and the planet benefits, wouldn't this be the norm?
Are investors, particularly institutional investors, engaged?
Well, some are, and a few are really at the vanguard.
Hesta.
Hesta is a retirement fund for health and community services employees in Australia, with assets of 22 billion [dollars].
They believe that ESG has the potential to impact risks and returns, so incorporating it into the investment process is core to their duty to act in the best interest of fund members, core to their duty.
You gotta love the Aussies, right?
CalPERS is another example.
CalPERS is the pension fund for public employees in California, and with assets of 244 billion [dollars], they are the second largest in the U.S.
and the sixth largest in the world.
Now, they're moving toward 100 percent sustainable investment by systematically integrated ESG across the entire fund.
Why? They believe it's critical to superior long-term returns, full stop.
In their own words, "long-term value creation requires the effective management of three forms of capital: financial, human, and physical.
This is why we are concerned with ESG."
Now, I do speak to a lot of investors as part of my job, and not all of them see it this way.
Often I hear, "We are required to maximize returns, so we don't do that here," or, "We don't want to use the portfolio to make policy statements."
The one that just really gets under my skin is, "If you want to do something about that, just make money, give the profits to charities."
It's eyes rolling, eyes rolling.
I mean, let me clarify something right here.
Companies and investors are not singularly responsible for the fate of the planet.
They don't have indefinite social obligations, and prudent investing and finance theory aren't subordinate to sustainability.
They're compatible.
So I'm not talking about tradeoffs here.
But institutional investors are the x-factor in sustainability.
Why do they hold the key?
The answer, quite simply, is, they have the money.
(Laughter) A lot of it.
I mean, a really lot of it.
The global stock market is worth 55 trillion dollars.
The global bond market, 78 trillion.
That's 133 trillion combined.
That's eight and a half times the GDP of the U.S.
That's the world's largest economy.
That's some serious freaking firepower.
So we can reconsider some of these pressing challenges, like fresh water, clean air, feeding 10 billion mouths, if institutional investors integrated ESG into investment.
What if they used that firepower to allocate more of their capital to companies working the hardest at solving these challenges or at least not exacerbating them?
What if we work and save and invest, only to find that the world we retire into is more stressed and less secure than it is now?
What if there isn't enough clean air and fresh water?
Now a fair question might be, what if all this sustainability risk stuff is exaggerated, overstated, it's not urgent, something for virtuous consumers or lifestyle choice?
Well, President John F. Kennedy said something about this that is just spot on: "There are risks and costs to a program of action, but they are far less than the long-range risks and costs of comfortable inaction."
I can appreciate that there is estimation risk in this, but since this is based on widespread scientific consensus, the odds that it's not completely wrong are better than the odds that our house will burn down or we'll get in a car accident.
Well, maybe not if you live in Boston. (Laughter) But my point is that we buy insurance to protect ourselves financially in case those things happen, right?
So by investing sustainably we're doing two things.
We're creating insurance, reducing the risk to our planet and to our economy, and at the same time, in the short term, we're not sacrificing performance.
[Man in comic: "What if it's a big hoax and we create a better world for nothing?"] Good, you like it. I like it too.
(Laughter) I like it because it pokes fun at both sides of the climate change issue.
I bet you can't guess which side I'm on.
But what I really like about it is that it reminds me of something Mark Twain said, which is, "Plan for the future, because that's where you're going to spend the rest of your life."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to talk today about a powerful and fundamental aspect of who we are: our voice.
Each one of us has a unique voiceprint that reflects our age, our size, even our lifestyle and personality.
In the words of the poet Longfellow, "the human voice is the organ of the soul."
As a speech scientist, I'm fascinated by how the voice is produced, and I have an idea for how it can be engineered.
That's what I'd like to share with you.
I'm going to start by playing you a sample of a voice that you may recognize.
(Recording) Stephen Hawking: "I would have thought it was fairly obvious what I meant."
Rupal Patel: That was the voice of Professor Stephen Hawking.
What you may not know is that same voice may also be used by this little girl who is unable to speak because of a neurological condition.
In fact, all of these individuals may be using the same voice, and that's because there's only a few options available.
In the U.S. alone, there are 2.5 million Americans who are unable to speak, and many of whom use computerized devices to communicate.
Now that's millions of people worldwide who are using generic voices, including Professor Hawking, who uses an American-accented voice.
This lack of individuation of the synthetic voice really hit home when I was at an assistive technology conference a few years ago, and I recall walking into an exhibit hall and seeing a little girl and a grown man having a conversation using their devices, different devices, but the same voice.
And I looked around and I saw this happening all around me, literally hundreds of individuals using a handful of voices, voices that didn't fit their bodies or their personalities.
We wouldn't dream of fitting a little girl with the prosthetic limb of a grown man.
So why then the same prosthetic voice?
It really struck me, and I wanted to do something about this.
I'm going to play you now a sample of someone who has, two people actually, who have severe speech disorders.
I want you to take a listen to how they sound.
They're saying the same utterance.
(First voice) (Second voice) You probably didn't understand what they said, but I hope that you heard their unique vocal identities.
So what I wanted to do next is, I wanted to find out how we could harness these residual vocal abilities and build a technology that could be customized for them, voices that could be customized for them.
So I reached out to my collaborator, Tim Bunnell.
Dr. Bunnell is an expert in speech synthesis, and what he'd been doing is building personalized voices for people by putting together pre-recorded samples of their voice and reconstructing a voice for them.
These are people who had lost their voice later in life.
We didn't have the luxury of pre-recorded samples of speech for those born with speech disorder.
But I thought, there had to be a way to reverse engineer a voice from whatever little is left over.
So we decided to do exactly that.
We set out with a little bit of funding from the National Science Foundation, to create custom-crafted voices that captured their unique vocal identities.
We call this project VocaliD, or vocal I.D., for vocal identity.
Now before I get into the details of how the voice is made and let you listen to it, I need to give you a real quick speech science lesson. Okay?
So first, we know that the voice is changing dramatically over the course of development.
Children sound different from teens who sound different from adults.
We've all experienced this.
Fact number two is that speech is a combination of the source, which is the vibrations generated by your voice box, which are then pushed through the rest of the vocal tract.
These are the chambers of your head and neck that vibrate, and they actually filter that source sound to produce consonants and vowels.
So the combination of source and filter is how we produce speech.
And that happens in one individual.
Now I told you earlier that I'd spent a good part of my career understanding and studying the source characteristics of people with severe speech disorder, and what I've found is that even though their filters were impaired, they were able to modulate their source: the pitch, the loudness, the tempo of their voice.
These are called prosody, and I've been documenting for years that the prosodic abilities of these individuals are preserved.
So when I realized that those same cues are also important for speaker identity, I had this idea.
Why don't we take the source from the person we want the voice to sound like, because it's preserved, and borrow the filter from someone about the same age and size, because they can articulate speech, and then mix them?
Because when we mix them, we can get a voice that's as clear as our surrogate talker -- that's the person we borrowed the filter from— and is similar in identity to our target talker.
It's that simple.
That's the science behind what we're doing.
So once you have that in mind, how do you go about building this voice?
Well, you have to find someone who is willing to be a surrogate.
It's not such an ominous thing.
Being a surrogate donor only requires you to say a few hundred to a few thousand utterances.
The process goes something like this.
(Video) Voice: Things happen in pairs.
I love to sleep.
The sky is blue without clouds.
RP: Now she's going to go on like this for about three to four hours, and the idea is not for her to say everything that the target is going to want to say, but the idea is to cover all the different combinations of the sounds that occur in the language.
The more speech you have, the better sounding voice you're going to have.
Once you have those recordings, what we need to do is we have to parse these recordings into little snippets of speech, one- or two-sound combinations, sometimes even whole words that start populating a dataset or a database.
We're going to call this database a voice bank.
Now the power of the voice bank is that from this voice bank, we can now say any new utterance, like, "I love chocolate" -- everyone needs to be able to say that— fish through that database and find all the segments necessary to say that utterance.
(Video) Voice: I love chocolate.
RP: So that's speech synthesis.
It's called concatenative synthesis, and that's what we're using.
That's not the novel part.
What's novel is how we make it sound like this young woman.
This is Samantha.
I met her when she was nine, and since then, my team and I have been trying to build her a personalized voice.
We first had to find a surrogate donor, and then we had to have Samantha produce some utterances.
What she can produce are mostly vowel-like sounds, but that's enough for us to extract her source characteristics.
What happens next is best described by my daughter's analogy. She's six.
She calls it mixing colors to paint voices.
It's beautiful. It's exactly that.
Samantha's voice is like a concentrated sample of red food dye which we can infuse into the recordings of her surrogate to get a pink voice just like this.
(Video) Samantha: Aaaaaah.
RP: So now, Samantha can say this.
(Video) Samantha: This voice is only for me.
I can't wait to use my new voice with my friends.
RP: Thank you. (Applause) I'll never forget the gentle smile that spread across her face when she heard that voice for the first time.
Now there's millions of people around the world like Samantha, millions, and we've only begun to scratch the surface.
What we've done so far is we have a few surrogate talkers from around the U.S.
who have donated their voices, and we have been using those to build our first few personalized voices.
But there's so much more work to be done.
For Samantha, her surrogate came from somewhere in the Midwest, a stranger who gave her the gift of voice.
And as a scientist, I'm so excited to take this work out of the laboratory and finally into the real world so it can have real-world impact.
What I want to share with you next is how I envision taking this work to that next level.
I imagine a whole world of surrogate donors from all walks of life, different sizes, different ages, coming together in this voice drive to give people voices that are as colorful as their personalities.
To do that as a first step, we've put together this website, VocaliD.org, as a way to bring together those who want to join us as voice donors, as expertise donors, in whatever way to make this vision a reality.
They say that giving blood can save lives.
Well, giving your voice can change lives.
All we need is a few hours of speech from our surrogate talker, and as little as a vowel from our target talker, to create a unique vocal identity.
So that's the science behind what we're doing.
I want to end by circling back to the human side that is really the inspiration for this work.
About five years ago, we built our very first voice for a little boy named William.
When his mom first heard this voice, she said, "This is what William would have sounded like had he been able to speak."
And then I saw William typing a message on his device.
I wondered, what was he thinking?
Imagine carrying around someone else's voice for nine years and finally finding your own voice.
Imagine that.
This is what William said: "Never heard me before."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Thirteen years ago, we set ourselves a goal to end poverty.
After some success, we've hit a big hurdle.
The aftermath of the financial crisis has begun to hit aid payments, which have fallen for two consecutive years.
My question is whether the lessons learned from saving the financial system can be used to help us overcome that hurdle and help millions.
Can we simply print money for aid?
"Surely not."
It's a common reaction.
(Laughter) It's a quick talk.
Others channel John McEnroe.
"You cannot be serious!"
Now, I can't do the accent, but I am serious, thanks to these two children, who, as you'll learn, are very much at the heart of my talk.
On the left, we have Pia.
She lives in England.
She has two loving parents, one of whom is standing right here.
Dorothy, on the right, lives in rural Kenya.
She's one of 13,000 orphans and vulnerable children who are assisted by a charity that I support.
I do that because I believe that Dorothy, like Pia, deserves the best life chances that we can afford to give her.
You'll all agree with me, I'm sure.
The U.N. agrees too.
Their overriding aim for international aid is to strive for a life of dignity for all.
But -- and here's that hurdle -- can we afford our aid aspirations?
History suggests not.
In 1970, governments set themselves a target to increase overseas aid payments to 0.7 percent of their national income.
As you can see, a big gap opens up between actual aid and that target.
But then come the Millennium Development Goals, eight ambitious targets to be met by 2015.
If I tell you that just one of those targets is to eradicate extreme hunger and poverty, you get a sense of the ambition.
There's also been some success.
The number of people living on less than $1.25 a day has halved.
But a lot remains to be done in two years.
One in eight remain hungry.
In the context of this auditorium, the front two rows aren't going to get any food.
We can't settle for that, which is why the concern about the eighth goal, which relates to funding, which I said at the beginning is falling, is so troubling.
So what can be done?
Well, I work in financial markets, not development.
I study the behavior of investors, how they react to policy and the economy.
It gives me a different angle on the aid issue.
But it took an innocent question from my then-four-year-old daughter to make me appreciate that.
Pia and I were on the way to a local cafe and we passed a man collecting for charity.
I didn't have any change to give him, and she was disappointed.
Once in the cafe, Pia takes out her coloring book and starts scribbling.
After a little while, I ask her what she's doing, and she shows me a drawing of a £5 note to give to the man outside.
It's so sweet, and more generous than Dad would have been.
But of course I explained to her, "You can't do that; it's not allowed."
To which I get the classic four-year-old response: "Why not?"
Now I'm excited, because I actually think I can answer this time.
So I launch into an explanation of how an unlimited supply of money chasing a limited number of goods sends prices to the moon.
Something about that exchange stuck with me, not because of the look of relief on Pia's face when I finally finished, but because it related to the sanctity of the money supply, a sanctity that had been challenged and questioned by the reaction of central banks to the financial crisis.
To reassure investors, central banks began buying assets to try and encourage investors to do the same.
They funded these purchases with money they created themselves.
The money wasn't actually physically printed.
It's still sort of locked away in the banking system today.
But the amount created was unprecedented.
Together, the central banks of the U.S., U.K and Japan increased the stock of money in their economies by 3.7 trillion dollars.
That's three times, in fact that's more than three times, the total physical stock of dollar notes in circulation.
Three times!
Before the crisis, this would have been utterly unthinkable, yet it was accepted remarkably quickly.
The price of gold, an asset thought to protect against inflation, did jump, but investors bought other assets that offered little protection from inflation.
They bought fixed income securities, bonds.
They bought equities too.
For all the scare stories, the actual actions of investors spoke of rapid acceptance and confidence.
That confidence was based on two pillars.
The first was that, after years of keeping inflation under control, central banks were trusted to take the money-printing away if inflation became a threat.
Secondly, inflation simply never became a threat.
As you can see, in the United States, inflation for most of this period remained below average.
It was the same elsewhere.
So how does all this relate to aid?
Well, this is where Dorothy and the Mango Tree charity that supports her comes in.
I was at one of their fundraising events earlier this year, and I was inspired to give a one-off donation when I remembered that my firm offers to match the charitable contributions its employees make.
So think of this: Instead of just being able to help Dorothy and four of her classmates to go through secondary school for a few years, I was able to double my contribution.
Brilliant.
So following that conversation with my daughter, and seeing the absence of inflation in the face of money-printing, and knowing that international aid payments were falling at just the wrong time, this made me wonder: Could we match but just on a much grander scale?
Let's call this scheme "Print Aid."
And here's how it might work.
Provided it saw little inflation risk from doing so, the central bank would be mandated to match the government's overseas aid payments up to a certain limit.
Governments have been aiming to get aid to 0.7 percent for years, so let's set the limit at half of that, 0.35 percent of their income.
So it would work like this: If in a given year the government gave 0.2 percent of its income to overseas aid, the central bank would simply top it up with a further 0.2 percent.
So far so good.
How risky is this?
Well, this involves the creation of money to buy goods, not assets.
It sounds more inflationary already, doesn't it.
But there are two important mitigating factors here.
The first is that by definition, this money printed would be spent overseas.
So it's not obvious how it leads to inflation in the country doing the actual printing unless it leads to a currency depreciation of that country.
That is unlikely for the second reason: the scale of the money that would be printed under this scheme.
So let's think of an example where Print Aid was in place in the U.S., U.K. and Japan.
To match the aid payments made by those governments over the last four years, Print Aid would have generated 200 billion dollars' worth of extra aid.
What would that look like in the context of the increase in the money stock that had already happened in those countries to save the financial system?
Are you read for this?
You might struggle to see that at the back, because the gap is quite small.
So what we're saying here is that we took a $3.7 trillion gamble to save our financial systems, and you know what, it paid off.
There was no inflation.
Are we really saying that it's not worth the risk to print an extra 200 billion for aid?
Would the risks really be that different?
To me, it's not that clear.
What is clear is the impact on aid.
Even though this is the printing of just three central banks, the global aid that's given over this period is up by almost 40 percent.
Aid as a proportion of national income all of a sudden is at a 40-year high.
Now, we don't get to 0.7 percent.
Governments are still incentivized to give.
But you know what, that's the point of a matching scheme.
So I think what we've learned is that the risks from this money creation scheme are quite modest, but the benefits are potentially huge.
Imagine what we could do with 40 percent more funding.
We might be able to feed the front row.
The thing that I fear, the only thing that I fear, apart from the fact that I've run out of time, is that the window of opportunity for this idea is a short one.
Today, money creation by central banks is an accepted policy tool.
That may not always be the case.
Today there are universally agreed aims for international aid.
That may not always be the case.
Today might be the only time that these two things coincide, such that we can afford the aid that we've always aspired to give.
So, can we print money for international aid?
I seriously believe the question should be, why not?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
What is bioenergy? Bioenergy is not ethanol.
Bioenergy isn't global warming. Bioenergy is something which seems counterintuitive. Bioenergy is oil. It's gas. It's coal. And part of building that bridge to the future, to the point where we can actually see the oceans in a rational way, or put up these geo-spatial orbits that will twirl or do microwaves or stuff, is going to depend on how we understand bioenergy and manage it. And to do that, you really have to look first at agriculture.
So we've been planting stuff for 11,000 years. And in the measure that we plant stuff, what we learn from agriculture is you've got to deal with pests, you've got to deal with all types of awful things, you've got to cultivate stuff. In the measure that you learn how to use water to cultivate, then you're going to be able to spread beyond the Nile.
You're going to be able to power stuff, so irrigation makes a difference.
Irrigation starts to make you be allowed to plant stuff where you want it, as opposed to where the rivers flood. You start getting this organic agriculture; you start putting machinery onto this stuff. Machinery, with a whole bunch of water, leads to very large-scale agriculture.
You put together machines and water, and you get landscapes that look like this. And then you get sales that look like this. It's brute force. So what you've been doing in agriculture is you start out with something that's a reasonably natural system. You start taming that natural system. You put a lot of force behind that natural system. You put a whole bunch of pesticides and herbicides -- (Laughter) -- behind that natural system, and you end up with systems that look like this.
And it's all brute force. And that's the way we've been approaching energy. So the lesson in agriculture is that you can actually change the system that's based on brute force as you start merging that system and learning that system and actually applying biology. And you move from a discipline of engineering, you move from a discipline of chemistry, into a discipline of biology. And probably one of the most important human beings on the planet is this guy behind me.
This is a guy called Norman Borlaug. He won the Nobel Prize. He's got the Congressional Medal of Honor. He deserves all of this stuff. And he deserves this stuff because he probably has fed more people than any other human being alive because he researched how to put biology behind seeds. He did this in Mexico. The reason why India and China no longer have these massive famines is because Norman Borlaug taught them how to grow grains in a more efficient way and launched the Green Revolution. That is something that a lot of people have criticized. But of course, those are people who don't realize that China and India, instead of having huge amounts of starving people, are exporting grains.
And the irony of this particular system is the place where he did the research, which was Mexico, didn't adopt this technology, ignored this technology, talked about why this technology should be thought about, but not really applied.
And Mexico remains one of the largest grain importers on the planet because it doesn't apply technology that was discovered in Mexico. And in fact, hasn't recognized this man, to the point where there aren't statues of this man all over Mexico. There are in China and India. And the Institute that this guy ran has now moved to India. That is the difference between adopting technologies and discussing technologies.
Now, it's not just that this guy fed a huge amount of people in the world. It's that this is the net effect in terms of what technology does, if you understand biology.
What happened in agriculture? Well, if you take agriculture over a century, agriculture in about 1900 would have been recognizable to somebody planting a thousand years earlier. Yeah, the plows look different. The machines were tractors or stuff instead of mules, but the farmer would have understood: this is what the guy's doing, this is why he's doing it, this is where he's going. What really started to change in agriculture is when you started moving from this brute force engineering and chemistry into biology, and that's where you get your productivity increases. And as you do that stuff, here's what happens to productivity.
Basically, you go from 250 hours to produce 100 bushels, to 40, to 15, to five. Agricultural labor productivity increased seven times, 1950 to 2000, whereas the rest of the economy increased about 2.5 times. This is an absolutely massive increase in how much is produced per person.
The effect of this, of course, is it's not just amber waves of grain, it is mountains of stuff.
And 50 percent of the EU budget is going to subsidize agriculture from mountains of stuff that people have overproduced.
This would be a good outcome for energy. And of course, by now, you're probably saying to yourself, "Self, I thought I came to a talk about energy and here's this guy talking about biology."
So where's the link between these two things?
One of the ironies of this whole system is we're discussing what to do about a system that we don't understand. We don't even know what oil is. We don't know where oil comes from. I mean, literally, it's still a source of debate what this black river of stuff is and where it comes from. The best assumption, and one of the best guesses in this stuff, is that this stuff comes out of this stuff, that these things absorb sunlight, rot under pressure for millions of years, and you get these black rivers.
Now, the interesting thing about that thesis -- if that thesis turns out to be true -- is that oil, and all hydrocarbons, turned out to be concentrated sunlight. And if you think of bioenergy, bioenergy isn't ethanol. Bioenergy is taking the sun, concentrating it in amoebas, concentrating it in plants, and maybe that's why you get these rainbows.
And as you're looking at this system, if hydrocarbons are concentrated sunlight, then bioenergy works in a different way. And we've got to start thinking of oil and other hydrocarbons as part of these solar panels.
Maybe that's one of the reasons why if you fly over west Texas, the types of wells that you're beginning to see don't look unlike those pictures of Kansas and those irrigated plots.
This is how you farm oil. And as you think of farming oil and how oil has evolved, we started with this brute force approach. And then what did we learn? Then we learned we had to go bigger. And then what'd we learn? Then we have to go even bigger. And we are getting really destructive as we're going out and farming this bioenergy.
These are the Athabasca tar sands, and there's an enormous amount -- first of mining, the largest trucks in the world are working here, and then you've got to pull out this black sludge, which is basically oil that doesn't flow. It's tied to the sand. And then you've got to use a lot of steam to separate it, which only works at today's oil prices.
Coal. Coal turns out to be virtually the same stuff. It is probably plants, except that these have been burned and crushed under pressure.
So you take something like this, you burn it, you put it under pressure, and likely as not, you get this. Although, again, I stress: we don't know.
Which is curious as we debate all this stuff. But as you think of coal, this is what burned wheat kernels look like. Not entirely unlike coal.
And of course, coalmines are very dangerous places because in some of these coalmines, you get gas. When that gas blows up, people die. So you're producing a biogas out of coal in some mines, but not in others.
Any place you see a differential, there're some interesting questions. There's some questions as to what you should be doing with this stuff. But again, coal. Maybe the same stuff, maybe the same system, maybe bioenergy, and you're applying exactly the same technology.
Here's your brute force approach. Once you get through your brute force approach, then you just rip off whole mountaintops. And you end up with the single largest source of carbon emissions, which are coal-fired gas plants. That is probably not the best use of bioenergy.
As you think of what are the alternatives to this system -- it's important to find alternatives because it turns out that the U.S. is dwindling in its petroleum reserves, but it is not dwindling in its coal reserves, nor is China. There are huge coal reserves that are sitting out there, and we've got to start thinking of them as biological energy, because if we keep treating them as chemical energy, or engineering energy, we're going to be in deep doo-doo.
Gas is a similar issue. Gas is also a biological product. And as you think of gas, well, you're familiar with gas. And here's a different way of mining coal.
This is called coal bed methane. Why is this picture interesting? Because if coal turns out to be concentrated plant life, the reason why you may get a differential in gas output between one mine and another -- the reason why one mine may blow up and another one may not blow up -- may be because there's stuff eating that stuff and producing gas.
This is a well-known phenomenon. (Laughter) You eat certain things, you produce a lot of gas. It may turn out that biological processes in coalmines have the same process. If that is true, then one of the ways of getting the energy out of coal may not be to rip whole mountaintops off, and it may not be to burn coal. It may be to have stuff process that coal in a biological fashion as you did in agriculture.
That is what bioenergy is. It is not ethanol. It is not subsidies to a few companies. It is not importing corn into Iowa because you've built so many of these ethanol plants. It is beginning to understand the transition that occurred in agriculture, from brute force into biological force. And in the measure that you can do that, you can clean some stuff, and you can clean it pretty quickly.
We already have some indicators of productivity on this stuff. OK, if you put steam into coal fields or petroleum fields that have been running for decades, you can get a really substantial increase, like an eight-fold increase, in your output. This is just the beginning stages of this stuff.
And as you think of biomaterials, this guy -- who did part of the sequencing of the human genome, who just doubled the databases of genes and proteins known on earth by sailing around the world -- has been thinking about how you structure this. And there's a series of smart people thinking about this. And they've been putting together companies like Synthetic Genomics, like, a Cambria, like Codon, and what those companies are trying to do is to think of, how do you apply biological principles to avoid brute force?
Think of it in the following terms. Think of it as beginning to program stuff for specific purposes.
Think of the cell as a hardware. Think of the genes as a software. And in the measure that you begin to think of life as code that is interchangeable, that can become energy, that can become food, that can become fiber, that can become human beings, that can become a whole series of things, then you've got to shift your approach as to how you're going to structure and deal and think about energy in a very different way.
What are the first principles of this stuff and where are we heading? This is one of the gentle giants on the planet. He's one of the nicest human beings you've ever met. His name is Hamilton Smith. He won the Nobel for figuring out how to cut genes -- something called restriction enzymes.
He was at Hopkins when he did this, and he's such a modest guy that the day he won, his mother called him and said, "I didn't realize there was another Ham Smith at Hopkins. Do you know he just won the Nobel?" (Laughter) I mean, that was Mom, but anyway, this guy is just a class act. You find him at the bench every single day, working on a pipette and building stuff. And one of the things this guy just built are these things.
What is this? This is the first transplant of naked DNA, where you take an entire DNA operating system out of one cell, insert it into a different cell, and have that cell boot up as a separate species. That's one month old. You will see stuff in the next month that will be just as important as this stuff.
And as you think about this stuff and what the implications of this are, we're going to start not just converting ethanol from corn with very high subsidies. We're going to start thinking about biology entering energy. It is very expensive to process this stuff, both in economic terms and in energy terms.
This is what accumulates in the tar sands of Alberta. These are sulfur blocks. Because as you separate that petroleum from the sand, and use an enormous amount of energy inside that vapor -- steam to separate this stuff -- you also have to separate out the sulfur. The difference between light crude and heavy crude -- well, it's about 14 bucks a barrel. That's why you're building these pyramids of sulfur blocks. And by the way, the scale on these things is pretty large.
Now, if you can take part of the energy content out of doing this, you reduce the system, and you really do start applying biological principles to energy. This has to be a bridge to the point where you can get to wind, to the point where you can get to solar, to the point where you can get to nuclear -- and hopefully you won't build the next nuclear plant on a beautiful seashore next to an earthquake fault. (Laughter) Just a thought.
But in the meantime, for the next decade at least, the name of the game is hydrocarbons. And be that oil, be that gas, be that coal, this is what we're dealing with. And before I make this talk too long, here's what's happening in the current energy system.
86 percent of the energy we consume are hydrocarbons. That means 86 percent of the stuff we're consuming are probably processed plants and amoebas and the rest of the stuff. And there's a role in here for conservation. There's a role in here for alternative stuff, but we've also got to get that other portion right.
How we deal with that other portion is our bridge to the future. And as we think of this bridge to the future, one of the things you should ponder is: we are leaving about two-thirds of the oil today inside those wells. So we're spending an enormous amount of money and leaving most of the energy down there. Which, of course, requires more energy to go out and get energy. The ratios become idiotic by the time you get to ethanol. It may even be a one-to-one ratio on the energy input and the energy output. That is a stupid way of managing this system.
Last point, last graph. One of the things that we've got to do is to stabilize oil prices. This is what oil prices look like, OK?
This is a very bad system because what happens is your hurdle rate gets set very low. People come up with really smart ideas for solar panels, or for wind, or for something else, and then guess what?
The oil price goes through the floor. That company goes out of business, and then you can bring the oil price back up.
So if I had one closing and modest suggestion, let's set a stable oil price in Europe and the United States. How do you do that? Well, let's put a tax on oil that is a non-revenue tax, and it basically says for the next 20 years, the price of oil will be -- whatever you want, 35 bucks, 40 bucks. If the OPEC price falls below that, we tax it. If the OPEC price goes above that, the tax goes away.
What does that do for entrepreneurs? What does it do for companies? It tells people, if you can produce energy for less than 35 bucks a barrel, or less than 40 bucks a barrel, or less than 50 bucks a barrel -- let's debate it -- you will have a business. But let's not put people through this cycle where it doesn't pay to research because your company will go out of business as OPEC drives alternatives and keeps bioenergy from happening. Thank you.
What makes a great leader today?
Many of us carry this image of this all-knowing superhero who stands and commands and protects his followers.
But that's kind of an image from another time, and what's also outdated are the leadership development programs that are based on success models for a world that was, not a world that is or that is coming.
We conducted a study of 4,000 companies, and we asked them, let's see the effectiveness of your leadership development programs.
Fifty-eight percent of the companies cited significant talent gaps for critical leadership roles.
That means that despite corporate training programs, off-sites, assessments, coaching, all of these things, more than half the companies had failed to grow enough great leaders.
You may be asking yourself, is my company helping me to prepare to be a great 21st-century leader?
The odds are, probably not.
Now, I've spent 25 years of my professional life observing what makes great leaders.
I've worked inside Fortune 500 companies, I've advised over 200 CEOs, and I've cultivated more leadership pipelines than you can imagine.
But a few years ago, I noticed a disturbing trend in leadership preparation.
I noticed that, despite all the efforts, there were familiar stories that kept resurfacing about individuals.
One story was about Chris, a high-potential, superstar leader who moves to a new unit and fails, destroying unrecoverable value.
And then there were stories like Sidney, the CEO, who was so frustrated because her company is cited as a best company for leaders, but only one of the top 50 leaders is equipped to lead their crucial initiatives.
And then there were stories like the senior leadership team of a once-thriving business that's surprised by a market shift, finds itself having to force the company to reduce its size in half or go out of business.
Now, these recurring stories cause me to ask two questions.
Why are the leadership gaps widening when there's so much more investment in leadership development?
And what are the great leaders doing distinctly different to thrive and grow?
One of the things that I did, I was so consumed by these questions and also frustrated by those stories, that I left my job so that I could study this full time, and I took a year to travel to different parts of the world to learn about effective and ineffective leadership practices in companies, countries and nonprofit organizations.
And so I did things like travel to South Africa, where I had an opportunity to understand how Nelson Mandela was ahead of his time in anticipating and navigating his political, social and economic context.
I also met a number of nonprofit leaders who, despite very limited financial resources, were making a huge impact in the world, often bringing together seeming adversaries.
And I spent countless hours in presidential libraries trying to understand how the environment had shaped the leaders, the moves that they made, and then the impact of those moves beyond their tenure.
And then, when I returned to work full time, in this role, I joined with wonderful colleagues who were also interested in these questions.
Now, from all this, I distilled the characteristics of leaders who are thriving and what they do differently, and then I also distilled the preparation practices that enable people to grow to their potential.
I want to share some of those with you now.
("What makes a great leader in the 21st century?") In a 21st-century world, which is more global, digitally enabled and transparent, with faster speeds of information flow and innovation, and where nothing big gets done without some kind of a complex matrix, relying on traditional development practices will stunt your growth as a leader.
In fact, traditional assessments like narrow 360 surveys or outdated performance criteria will give you false positives, lulling you into thinking that you are more prepared than you really are.
Leadership in the 21st century is defined and evidenced by three questions.
Where are you looking to anticipate the next change to your business model or your life?
The answer to this question is on your calendar.
Who are you spending time with? On what topics?
Where are you traveling? What are you reading?
And then how are you distilling this into understanding potential discontinuities, and then making a decision to do something right now so that you're prepared and ready?
There's a leadership team that does a practice where they bring together each member collecting, here are trends that impact me, here are trends that impact another team member, and they share these, and then make decisions, to course-correct a strategy or to anticipate a new move.
Great leaders are not head-down.
They see around corners, shaping their future, not just reacting to it.
The second question is, what is the diversity measure of your personal and professional stakeholder network?
You know, we hear often about good ol' boy networks and they're certainly alive and well in many institutions.
But to some extent, we all have a network of people that we're comfortable with.
So this question is about your capacity to develop relationships with people that are very different than you.
And those differences can be biological, physical, functional, political, cultural, socioeconomic.
And yet, despite all these differences, they connect with you and they trust you enough to cooperate with you in achieving a shared goal.
Great leaders understand that having a more diverse network is a source of pattern identification at greater levels and also of solutions, because you have people that are thinking differently than you are.
Third question: are you courageous enough to abandon a practice that has made you successful in the past?
There's an expression: Go along to get along.
But if you follow this advice, chances are as a leader, you're going to keep doing what's familiar and comfortable.
Great leaders dare to be different.
They don't just talk about risk-taking, they actually do it.
And one of the leaders shared with me the fact that the most impactful development comes when you are able to build the emotional stamina to withstand people telling you that your new idea is naïve or reckless or just plain stupid.
Now interestingly, the people who will join you are not your usual suspects in your network.
They're often people that think differently and therefore are willing to join you in taking a courageous leap.
And it's a leap, not a step.
More than traditional leadership programs, answering these three questions will determine your effectiveness as a 21st-century leader.
So what makes a great leader in the 21st century?
I've met many, and they stand out.
They are women and men who are preparing themselves not for the comfortable predictability of yesterday but also for the realities of today and all of those unknown possibilities of tomorrow.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to go off script and make Chris quite nervous here by making this audience participation.
All right. Are you with me? Yeah. Yeah. All right.
So what I'd like to do is have you raise your hand if you've ever heard a heterosexual couple having sex.
Could be the neighbors, hotel room, your parents. Sorry.
Okay. Pretty much everybody.
Now raise your hand if the man was making more noise than the woman.
I see one guy there.
It doesn't count if it was you, sir.
(Laughter) So his hand's down. And one woman. Okay.
Sitting next to a loud guy.
Now what does this tell us?
It tells us that human beings make noise when they have sex, and it's generally the woman who makes more noise.
This is known as female copulatory vocalization to the clipboard crowd.
I wasn't even going to mention this, but somebody told me that Meg Ryan might be here, and she is the world's most famous female copulatory vocalizer.
So I thought, got to talk about that.
We'll get back to that a little bit later.
Let me start by saying human beings are not descended from apes, despite what you may have heard. We are apes.
We are more closely related to the chimp and the bonobo than the African elephant is to the Indian elephant, as Jared Diamond pointed out in one of his early books.
We're more closely related to chimps and bonobos than chimps and bonobos are related to any other primate -- gorillas, orangutans, what have you.
So we're extremely closely related to them, and as you'll see in terms of our behavior, we've got some relationship as well.
So what I'm asking today, the question I want to explore with you today is, what kind of ape are we in terms of our sexuality?
Now, since Darwin's day there's been what Cacilda and I have called the standard narrative of human sexual evolution, and you're all familiar with it, even if you haven't read this stuff.
The idea is that, as part of human nature, from the beginning of our species' time, men have sort of leased women's reproductive potential by providing them with certain goods and services.
Generally we're talking about meat, shelter, status, protection, things like that.
And in exchange, women have offered fidelity, or at least a promise of fidelity.
Now this sets men and women up in an oppositional relationship.
The war between the sexes is built right into our DNA, according to this vision. Right?
What Cacilda and I have argued is that no, this economic relationship, this oppositional relationship, is actually an artifact of agriculture, which only arose about 10,000 years ago at the earliest.
Anatomically modern human beings have been around for about 200,000 years, so we're talking about five percent, at most, of our time as a modern, distinct species.
So before agriculture, before the agricultural revolution, it's important to understand that human beings lived in hunter-gatherer groups that are characterized wherever they're found in the world by what anthropologists called fierce egalitarianism.
They not only share things, they demand that things be shared: meat, shelter, protection, all these things that were supposedly being traded to women for their sexual fidelity, it turns out, are shared widely among these societies.
Now I'm not saying that our ancestors were noble savages, and I'm not saying modern day hunter-gatherers are noble savages either.
What I'm saying is that this is simply the best way to mitigate risk in a foraging context.
And there's really no argument about this among anthropologists.
All Cacilda and I have done is extend this sharing behavior to sexuality.
So we've argued that human sexuality has essentially evolved, until agriculture, as a way of establishing and maintaining the complex, flexible social systems, networks, that our ancestors were very good at, and that's why our species has survived so well.
Now, this makes some people uncomfortable, and so I always need to take a moment in these talks to say, listen, I'm saying our ancestors were promiscuous, but I'm not saying they were having sex with strangers.
There were no strangers. Right?
In a hunter-gatherer band, there are no strangers.
You've known these people your entire life.
So I'm saying, yes, there were overlapping sexual relationships, that our ancestors probably had several different sexual relationships going on at any given moment in their adult lives.
But I'm not saying they were having sex with strangers.
I'm not saying that they didn't love the people they were having sex with.
And I'm not saying there was no pair-bonding going on.
I'm just saying it wasn't sexually exclusive.
And those of us who have chosen to be monogamous -- my parents, for example, have been married for 52 years monogamously, and if it wasn't monogamously, Mom and Dad, I don't want to hear about it— I'm not criticizing this and I'm not saying there's anything wrong with this.
What I'm saying is that to argue that our ancestors were sexual omnivores is no more a criticism of monogamy than to argue that our ancestors were dietary omnivores is a criticism of vegetarianism.
You can choose to be a vegetarian, but don't think that just because you've made that decision, bacon suddenly stops smelling good.
Okay? So this is my point.
(Laughter) That one took a minute to sink in, huh?
Now, in addition to being a great genius, a wonderful man, a wonderful husband, a wonderful father, Charles Darwin was also a world-class Victorian prude.
All right? He was perplexed by the sexual swellings of certain primates, including chimps and bonobos, because these sexual swellings tend to provoke many males to mate with the females.
So he couldn't understand why on Earth would the female have developed this thing if all they were supposed to be doing is forming their pair bond, right?
Chimps and bonobos, Darwin didn't really know this, but chimps and bonobos mate one to four times per hour with up to a dozen males per day when they have their sexual swellings.
Interestingly, chimps have sexual swellings through 40 percent, roughly, of their menstrual cycle, bonobos 90 percent, and humans are among the only species on the planet where the female is available for sex throughout the menstrual cycle, whether she's menstruating, whether she's post-menopausal, whether she's already pregnant.
This is vanishingly rare among mammals.
So it's a very interesting aspect of human sexuality.
Now, Darwin ignored the reflections of the sexual swelling in his own day, as scientists tend to do sometimes.
So what we're talking about is sperm competition.
Now the average human ejaculate has about 300 million sperm cells, so it's already a competitive environment.
The question is whether these sperm are competing against other men's sperm or just their own.
There's a lot to talk about in this chart.
The one thing I'll call your attention to right away is the little musical note above the female chimp and bonobo and human.
That indicates female copulatory vocalization.
Just look at the numbers.
The average human has sex about 1,000 times per birth.
If that number seems high for some of you, I assure you it seems low for others in the room.
We share that ratio with chimps and bonobos.
We don't share it with the other three apes, the gorilla, the orangutan and the gibbon, who are more typical of mammals, having sex only about a dozen times per birth.
Humans and bonobos are the only animals that have sex face-to-face when both of them are alive.
(Laughter) And you'll see that the human, chimp and bonobo all have external testicles, which in our book we equate to a special fridge you have in the garage just for beer.
If you're the kind of guy who has a beer fridge in the garage, you expect a party to happen at any moment, and you need to be ready.
That's what the external testicles are.
They keep the sperm cells cool so you can have frequent ejaculations.
I'm sorry. It's true.
The human, some of you will be happy to hear, has the largest, thickest penis of any primate.
Now, this evidence goes way beyond anatomy.
It goes into anthropology as well.
Historical records are full of accounts of people around the world who have sexual practices that should be impossible given what we have assumed about human sexual evolution.
These women are the Mosuo from southwestern China.
In their society, everyone, men and women, are completely sexually autonomous.
There's no shame associated with sexual behavior.
Women have hundreds of partners.
It doesn't matter. Nobody cares. Nobody gossips. It's not an issue.
When the woman becomes pregnant, the child is cared for by her, her sisters, and her brothers.
The biological father is a nonissue.
On the other side of the planet, in the Amazon, we've got many tribes which practice what anthropologists call partible paternity.
These people actually believe -- and they have no contact among them, no common language or anything, so it's not an idea that spread, it's an idea that's arisen around the world -- they believe that a fetus is literally made of accumulated semen.
So a woman who wants to have a child who's smart and funny and strong makes sure she has lots of sex with the smart guy, the funny guy and the strong guy, to get the essence of each of these men into the baby, and then when the child is born, these different men will come forward and acknowledge their paternity of the child.
So paternity is actually sort of a team endeavor in this society.
So there are all sorts of examples like this that we go through in the book.
Now, why does this matter?
Edward Wilson says we need to understand that human sexuality is first a bonding device and only secondarily procreation.
I think that's true. This matters because our evolved sexuality is in direct conflict with many aspects of the modern world.
The contradictions between what we're told we should feel and what we actually do feel generates a huge amount of unnecessary suffering.
My hope is that a more accurate, updated understanding of human sexuality will lead us to have greater tolerance for ourselves, for each other, greater respect for unconventional relationship configurations like same-sex marriage or polyamorous unions, and that we'll finally put to rest the idea that men have some innate, instinctive right to monitor and control women's sexual behavior.
(Applause) Thank you.
And we'll see that it's not only gay people that have to come out of the closet.
We all have closets we have to come out of. Right?
And when we do come out of those closets, we'll recognize that our fight is not with each other, our fight is with an outdated, Victorian sense of human sexuality that conflates desire with property rights, generates shame and confusion in place of understanding and empathy.
It's time we moved beyond Mars and Venus, because the truth is that men are from Africa and women are from Africa.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you. Christopher Ryan: Thank you.
CA: So a question.
It's so perplexing, trying to use arguments about evolutionary history to turn that into what we ought to do today.
Someone could give a talk and say, look at us, we've got these really sharp teeth and muscles and a brain that's really good at throwing weapons, and if you look at lots of societies around the world, you'll see very high rates of violence.
Nonviolence is a choice like vegetarianism, but it's not who you are.
How is that different from the talk you gave?
CR: Well first of all, the evidence for high levels of violence in prehistory is very debatable.
But that's just an example.
Certainly, you know, lots of people say to me, just because we lived a certain way in the past doesn't mean we should live that way now, and I agree with that.
Everyone has to respond to the modern world.
But the body does have its inherent evolved trajectories.
And so you could live on McDonald's and milkshakes, but your body will rebel against that. We have appetites.
I think it was Schopenhauer who said, a person can do what they want but not want what they want.
And so what I'm arguing against is the shame that's associated with desires.
It's the idea that if you love your husband or wife but you still are attracted to other people, there's something wrong with you, there's something wrong with your marriage, something wrong with your partner.
I think a lot of families are fractured by unrealistic expectations that are based upon this false vision of human sexuality.
That's what I'm trying to get at.
CA: Thank you. Communicated powerfully. Thanks a lot.
CR: Thank you, Chris. (Applause)
I'm going to talk to you tonight about coming out of the closet, and not in the traditional sense, not just the gay closet.
I think we all have closets.
Your closet may be telling someone you love her for the first time, or telling someone that you're pregnant, or telling someone you have cancer, or any of the other hard conversations we have throughout our lives.
All a closet is is a hard conversation, and although our topics may vary tremendously, the experience of being in and coming out of the closet is universal.
It is scary, and we hate it, and it needs to be done.
Several years ago, I was working at the South Side Walnut Cafe, a local diner in town, and during my time there I would go through phases of militant lesbian intensity: not shaving my armpits, quoting Ani DiFranco lyrics as gospel.
And depending on the bagginess of my cargo shorts and how recently I had shaved my head, the question would often be sprung on me, usually by a little kid: "Um, are you a boy or are you a girl?"
And there would be an awkward silence at the table.
I'd clench my jaw a little tighter, hold my coffee pot with a little more vengeance.
The dad would awkwardly shuffle his newspaper and the mom would shoot a chilling stare at her kid.
But I would say nothing, and I would seethe inside.
And it got to the point where every time I walked up to a table that had a kid anywhere between three and 10 years old, I was ready to fight.
(Laughter) And that is a terrible feeling.
So I promised myself, the next time, I would say something.
I would have that hard conversation.
So within a matter of weeks, it happens again.
"Are you a boy or are you a girl?"
Familiar silence, but this time I'm ready, and I am about to go all Women's Studies 101 on this table. (Laughter) I've got my Betty Friedan quotes.
I've got my Gloria Steinem quotes.
I've even got this little bit from "Vagina Monologues" I'm going to do.
So I take a deep breath and I look down and staring back at me is a four-year-old girl in a pink dress, not a challenge to a feminist duel, just a kid with a question: "Are you a boy or are you a girl?"
So I take another deep breath, squat down to next to her, and say, "Hey, I know it's kind of confusing.
My hair is short like a boy's, and I wear boy's clothes, but I'm a girl, and you know how sometimes you like to wear a pink dress, and sometimes you like to wear your comfy jammies?
Well, I'm more of a comfy jammies kind of girl."
And this kid looks me dead in the eye, without missing a beat, and says, "My favorite pajamas are purple with fish.
Can I get a pancake, please?"
(Laughter) And that was it. Just, "Oh, okay. You're a girl.
How about that pancake?"
It was the easiest hard conversation I have ever had.
And why? Because Pancake Girl and I, we were both real with each other.
So like many of us, I've lived in a few closets in my life, and yeah, most often, my walls happened to be rainbow.
But inside, in the dark, you can't tell what color the walls are.
You just know what it feels like to live in a closet.
So really, my closet is no different than yours or yours or yours.
Sure, I'll give you 100 reasons why coming out of my closet was harder than coming out of yours, but here's the thing: Hard is not relative.
Hard is hard.
Who can tell me that explaining to someone you've just declared bankruptcy is harder than telling someone you just cheated on them?
Who can tell me that his coming out story is harder than telling your five-year-old you're getting a divorce?
There is no harder, there is just hard.
We need to stop ranking our hard against everyone else's hard to make us feel better or worse about our closets and just commiserate on the fact that we all have hard.
At some point in our lives, we all live in closets, and they may feel safe, or at least safer than what lies on the other side of that door.
But I am here to tell you, no matter what your walls are made of, a closet is no place for a person to live.
Thanks. (Applause) So imagine yourself 20 years ago.
Me, I had a ponytail, a strapless dress, and high-heeled shoes.
I was not the militant lesbian ready to fight any four-year-old that walked into the cafe.
I was frozen by fear, curled up in the corner of my pitch-black closet clutching my gay grenade, and moving one muscle is the scariest thing I have ever done.
My family, my friends, complete strangers -- I had spent my entire life trying to not disappoint these people, and now I was turning the world upside down on purpose.
I was burning the pages of the script we had all followed for so long, but if you do not throw that grenade, it will kill you.
One of my most memorable grenade tosses was at my sister's wedding.
(Laughter) It was the first time that many in attendance knew I was gay, so in doing my maid of honor duties, in my black dress and heels, I walked around to tables and finally landed on a table of my parents' friends, folks that had known me for years.
And after a little small talk, one of the women shouted out, "I love Nathan Lane!"
And the battle of gay relatability had begun.
"Ash, have you ever been to the Castro?"
"Well, yeah, actually, we have friends in San Francisco."
"Well, we've never been there but we've heard it's fabulous."
"Ash, do you know my hairdresser Antonio?
He's really good and he has never talked about a girlfriend."
"Ash, what's your favorite TV show?
Our favorite TV show? Favorite: Will &amp; Grace.
And you know who we love? Jack.
Jack is our favorite."
And then one woman, stumped but wanting so desperately to show her support, to let me know she was on my side, she finally blurted out, "Well, sometimes my husband wears pink shirts."
(Laughter) And I had a choice in that moment, as all grenade throwers do.
I could go back to my girlfriend and my gay-loving table and mock their responses, chastise their unworldliness and their inability to jump through the politically correct gay hoops I had brought with me, or I could empathize with them and realize that that was maybe one of the hardest things they had ever done, that starting and having that conversation was them coming out of their closets.
Sure, it would have been easy to point out where they felt short.
It's a lot harder to meet them where they are and acknowledge the fact that they were trying.
And what else can you ask someone to do but try?
If you're going to be real with someone, you gotta be ready for real in return.
So hard conversations are still not my strong suit.
Ask anybody I have ever dated.
But I'm getting better, and I follow what I like to call the three Pancake Girl principles.
Now, please view this through gay-colored lenses, but know what it takes to come out of any closet is essentially the same.
Number one: Be authentic.
Take the armor off. Be yourself.
That kid in the cafe had no armor, but I was ready for battle.
If you want someone to be real with you, they need to know that you bleed too.
Number two: Be direct. Just say it. Rip the Band-Aid off.
If you know you are gay, just say it.
If you tell your parents you might be gay, they will hold out hope that this will change.
Do not give them that sense of false hope.
(Laughter) And number three, and most important -- (Laughter) Be unapologetic.
You are speaking your truth.
Never apologize for that.
And some folks may have gotten hurt along the way, so sure, apologize for what you've done, but never apologize for who you are.
And yeah, some folks may be disappointed, but that is on them, not on you.
Those are their expectations of who you are, not yours.
That is their story, not yours.
The only story that matters is the one that you want to write.
So the next time you find yourself in a pitch-black closet clutching your grenade, know we have all been there before.
And you may feel so very alone, but you are not.
And we know it's hard but we need you out here, no matter what your walls are made of, because I guarantee you there are others peering through the keyholes of their closets looking for the next brave soul to bust a door open, so be that person and show the world that we are bigger than our closets and that a closet is no place for a person to truly live.
Thank you, Boulder. Enjoy your night. (Applause)
I love airplanes.
Oh -- I love airplanes.
So, when I went to college in the late 90s, it was obvious that I was going to study aerospace.
And you wouldn't believe how many people told me, "Oh no, not aerospace.
Aerospace is going to be boring, everything in aerospace has already been done."
Well, they were a little bit off the mark.
And in fact, I think the next decade is going to be another golden age for aviation.
For one thing, and this is where I get excited, flight is about to get a lot more personal.
So, a little compare and contrast.
In the last century, large commercial airplanes have connected cities across the globe.
And 100 years ago, it would have been unthinkable for all of us to fly here from around the world for a five-day conference.
But we did, and most of us probably without a second thought.
And that's a remarkable achievement for humanity.
But on a day-to-day basis, we still spend a lot of time in cars.
Or actively trying to avoid it.
Some of my best friends live in San Francisco, I live in Mountain View, about 40 miles away.
We're all busy.
At the end of the day, we're separated by something like two hours of heavy traffic.
So frankly, we haven't seen each other in a few months.
Now, I work in downtown San Jose, which is near the airport.
And there are actually days when I can leave work, get on a plane and fly to Los Angeles faster than I can drive to San Francisco.
Cities are only getting more populated, the roads are full, and it's really difficult to expand them.
And so in a lot of places, there really aren't a lot of good solutions for getting around traffic.
But what if you could fly over it?
The sky is underutilized, and I would argue it will never be as congested as the roads are.
First of all, you've got a whole other dimension, but also just safety considerations and air-traffic management will not allow bumper-to-bumper traffic in the sky.
Which means, in many cases, flying can be a long-term, compelling alternative to traveling on the ground.
So imagine this: you call an Uber, it takes you to a nearby landing spot -- we call these vertiports -- there's an airplane waiting for you there, flies you over all of the traffic in the middle, and on the other side, another Uber takes you to your friend's house.
And I said Uber, but I really think we need to congratulate the Lyft branding team for their forward thinking in choosing their brand.
(Laughter) So in that example, OK, there are a few extra steps, I admit.
But it's 30 minutes versus two hours, it costs around 60 dollars, and you get to fly.
We're not there yet, but we are a lot closer than you might think.
So one of the first things we need is we need an aircraft that can take off and land in small spaces and quickly take you where you want to go.
And helicopters can do that today, but traditionally, helicopters have been just a little bit too expensive, just a little too hard to pilot and just a little too noisy to be used for daily transportation in cities.
Well, electric flight and autonomy are changing that.
Electric flight, in particular, unlocks new possibilities for vehicle configurations that we just could not explore in the past.
If you use electric motors, you can have many of them around the aircraft, and it doesn't add a lot of extra weight.
And that gives you redundancy and safety.
And also, they are cleaner, cheaper and quieter than internal combustion engines.
Autonomy allows the transportation network to scale, and I actually think it makes the aircraft safer.
Commercial flights are already automated for most of their duration, and I believe there will come a day when we won't even trust an airplane that required a human to fly.
So, one of our teams at A3 wanted to see just how close this future really was.
So they built and flew a prototype of one such vehicle.
And they made a point of only using mature, commercially available technologies today.
We call it Vahana.
It's fully electric.
It takes off and lands vertically, but flies forward like a regular airplane.
It's fully self-piloted.
You push a button, it takes off, flies and lands, all by itself.
The prototype that you see here is designed to carry a single passenger and luggage.
And it can go about 20 miles in 15 minutes.
And our estimate for a trip like that is it would cost around 40 dollars, which you can really build a business around.
It has multiple redundant motors and batteries, you can lose one, it will continue flying and land normally.
It's pretty quiet.
When it's flying overhead, it will be quieter than a Prius on the highway.
It's intelligent and has cameras, lidar and radar, so it can detect and avoid unexpected obstacles.
And the team really focused on making it efficient, so the batteries are small, light, and they last longer.
For reference, the Vahana battery is less than half the size of a Tesla Model S battery.
It's about 40 kilowatt-hours.
And you can hot swap the batteries in just a few minutes.
And I do think that in a few years, people will be comfortable getting by themselves in a self-piloted, electric, VTOL air taxi.
But the team is busy working on the next version, which is going to carry at least two passengers and fly quite a bit farther.
But more importantly, there are over 20 companies around the world working on vehicles just like this one right now.
My best guess is in the next five years, you'll start seeing vertiports in some cities, and little airplane icons on your ride-sharing apps.
And it might begin with a dozen, but eventually, we could have hundreds of these, flying around our cities.
And it will fundamentally transform our relationship with local travel.
In the past century, flight connected our planet, in the next, it will reconnect our local communities, and I hope it will reconnect us to each other.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: OK, so when these things first roll out -- right now, it's a single person aircraft, right?
Rodin Lyasoff: Ours is, yes.
CA: Yours is.
I mean, someone comes out of their car, the door opens, they get in, there's no one else in there.
This thing takes off.
Could we do a poll here?
Because these are early adopters in this room.
I want to know who here is excited about the idea of being picked up solo in an auto-flying -- Well, there you go!
RL: It's pretty good.
CA: That is pretty awesome, half of TED is completely stark staring bonkers.
(Laughter) RL: So, one of the things we're really focusing on is, really, the cost.
So you can really wrap a business around that.
And so, that's why some of the features are really driven by price.
And the 40-dollar price tag is really a target that we're aiming for.
Which should make it accessible to a larger crowd than this one.
CA: The biggest blockage in terms of when this rolls out is probably not the technology at this point -- it's regulation, right?
RL: That's probably true, yes, I would agree with that.
The technology need to mature in terms of safety, to get to the safety levels that we expect from aircraft.
But I don't think there are any blockers there, just work needs to get done.
CA: So, first, this is ride sharing.
Are we that far away from a time when lots of people have one of these in their garage and just kind of, go direct to their friend's house?
RL: My personal view is that ride sharing actually allows you to operate that entire business much more efficiently.
You know, there are millennials that say they never want to own a car.
I think they'll probably feel even stronger about aircraft.
So -- (Laughter) I really think that the network scales and operates a lot better as a ride-sharing platform, also because the integration with air-traffic management works a lot better if it's handled centrally.
CA: Cool. Thank you for that.
RL: Thank you. CA: That was amazing.
I'm going to talk about hackers.
And the image that comes to your mind when I say that word is probably not of Benjamin Franklin, but I'm going to explain to you why it should be.
The image that comes to your mind is probably more likely of a pasty kid sitting in a basement doing something mischievous, or of a shady criminal who is trying to steal your identity, or of an international rogue with a political agenda.
And mainstream culture has kind of fed this idea that hackers are people that we should be afraid of.
But like most things in technology and the technology world, hacking has equal power for good as it has for evil.
For every hacker that's trying to steal your identity there's one that's building a tool that will help you find your loved ones after a disaster or to monitor environmental quality after an oil spill.
Hacking is really just any amateur innovation on an existing system, and it is a deeply democratic activity.
It's about critical thinking.
It's about questioning existing ways of doing things.
It's the idea that if you see a problem, you work to fix it, and not just complain about it.
And in many ways, hacking is what built America.
Betsy Ross was a hacker.
The Underground Railroad was a brilliant hack.
And from the Wright brothers to Steve Jobs, hacking has always been at the foundation of American democracy.
So if there's one thing I want to leave you here with today, it's that the next time you think about who a hacker is, you think not of this guy but of this guy, Benjamin Franklin, who was one of the greatest hackers of all time.
He was one of America's most prolific inventors, though he famously never filed a patent, because he thought that all human knowledge should be freely available.
He brought us bifocals and the lightning rod, and of course there was his collaboration on the invention of American democracy.
And in Code For America, we really try to embody the spirit of Ben Franklin.
He was a tinkerer and a statesman whose conception of citizenship was always predicated on action.
He believed that government could be built by the people, and we call those people civic hackers.
So it's no wonder that the values that underly a healthy democracy, like collaboration and empowerment and participation and enterprise, are the same values that underly the Internet.
And so it's no surprise that many hackers are turning their attention to the problem of government.
But before I give you a few examples of what civic hacking looks like, I want to make clear that you don't have to be a programmer to be a civic hacker.
You just have to believe that you can bring a 21st-century tool set to bear on the problems that government faces.
And we hear all the time from our community of civic hackers at Code for America that they didn't understand how much nontechnical work actually went into civic hacking projects.
So keep that in mind.
All of you are potential civic hackers.
So what does civic hacking look like?
Our team last year in Honolulu, which in this case was three full-time fellows who were doing a year of public service, were asked by the city to rebuild the website.
And it's a massive thing of tens of thousands of pages which just wasn't going to be possible in the few months that they had.
So instead, they decided to build a parallel site that better conformed to how citizens actually want to interact with information on a city website.
They're looking for answers to questions, and they want to take action when they're done, which is really hard to do from a site that looks like this.
So our team built Honolulu Answers, which is a super-simple search interface where you enter a search term or a question and get back plain language answers that drive a user towards action.
Now the site itself was easy enough to build, but the team was faced with the challenge of how they populate all of the content.
It would have taken the three of them a very long time, especially given that none of them are actually from Honolulu.
And so they did something that's really radical, when you think about how government is used to working.
They asked citizens to write the content.
So you've heard of a hack-a-thon.
They held a write-a-thon, where on one Saturday afternoon -- ("What do I do about wild pigs being a nuisance?") (Laughter) — Wild pigs are a huge problem in Honolulu, apparently.
In one Saturday afternoon, they were able to populate most of the content for most of the frequently asked questions, but more importantly than that, they created a new way for citizens to participate in their government.
Now, I think this is a really cool story in and of itself, but it gets more awesome.
On the National Day of Civic Hacking this past June in Oakland, where I live, the Code For America team in Oakland took the open source code base of Honolulu Answers and turned it into Oakland Answers, and again we held a write-a-thon where we took the most frequently asked questions and had citizens write the answers to them, and I got into the act.
I authored this answer, and a few others.
And I'm trying to this day to articulate the sense of empowerment and responsibility that I feel for the place that I live based simply on this small act of participation.
And by stitching together my small act with the thousands of other small acts of participation that we're enabling through civic hacking, we think we can reenergize citizenship and restore trust in government.
At this point, you may be wondering what city officials think of all this.
They actually love it.
As most of you guys know, cities are being asked every day to do more with less, and they're always looking for innovative solutions to entrenched problems.
So when you give citizens a way to participate beyond attending a town hall meeting, cities can actually capture the capacity in their communities to do the business of government.
Now I don't want to leave the impression that civic hacking is just an American phenomenon.
It's happening across the globe, and one of my favorite examples is from Mexico City, where earlier this year, the Mexico House of Representatives entered into a contract with a software development firm to build an app that legislators would use to track bills.
So this was just for the handful of legislators in the House.
And the contract was a two-year contract for 9.3 million dollars.
Now a lot of people were really angry about this, especially geeks who knew that 9.3 million dollars was an absolutely outrageous amount of money for what was a very simple app.
But instead of taking to the streets, they issued a challenge.
They asked programmers in Mexico to build something better and cheaper, and they offered a prize of 9,300 dollars -- 10,000 times cheaper than the government contract, and they gave the entrants 10 days.
And in those 10 days, they submitted 173 apps, five of which were presented to Congress and are still in the app store today.
And because of this action, that contract was vacated, and now this has sparked a movement in Mexico City which is home to one of our partners, Code for Mexico City.
And so what you see in all three of these places, in Honolulu and in Oakland and in Mexico City, are the elements that are at the core of civic hacking.
It's citizens who saw things that could be working better and they decided to fix them, and through that work, they're creating a 21st-century ecosystem of participation.
They're creating a whole new set of ways for citizens to be involved, besides voting or signing a petition or protesting.
They can actually build government.
So back to our friend Ben Franklin, who, one of his lesser-known accomplishments was that in 1736 he founded the first volunteer firefighting company in Philadelphia, called a brigade.
And it's because he and his friends noticed that the city was having trouble keeping up with all the fires that were happening in the city, so in true civic hacker fashion, they built a solution.
And we have our own brigades at Code for America working on the projects that I've just described, and we want to ask you to follow in Ben Franklin's footsteps and come join us.
We have 31 brigades in the U.S.
We are pleased to announce today that we're opening up the brigade to international cities for the first time, starting with cities in Poland and Japan and Ireland.
You can find out if there's a brigade where you live at brigade.codeforamerica.org, and if there's not a brigade where you live, we will help you.
We've created a tool kit which also lives at brigade.codeforamerica.org, and we will support you along the way.
Our goal is to create a global network of civic hackers who are innovating on the existing system in order to build tools that will solve entrenched problems, that will support local government, and that will empower citizens.
So please come hack with us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I work with children with autism.
Specifically, I make technologies to help them communicate.
Now, many of the problems that children with autism face, they have a common source, and that source is that they find it difficult to understand abstraction, symbolism.
And because of this, they have a lot of difficulty with language.
Let me tell you a little bit about why this is.
You see that this is a picture of a bowl of soup.
All of us can see it. All of us understand this.
These are two other pictures of soup, but you can see that these are more abstract These are not quite as concrete.
And when you get to language, you see that it becomes a word whose look, the way it looks and the way it sounds, has absolutely nothing to do with what it started with, or what it represents, which is the bowl of soup.
So it's essentially a completely abstract, a completely arbitrary representation of something which is in the real world, and this is something that children with autism have an incredible amount of difficulty with.
Now that's why most of the people that work with children with autism -- speech therapists, educators -- what they do is, they try to help children with autism communicate not with words, but with pictures.
So if a child with autism wanted to say, "I want soup," that child would pick three different pictures, "I," "want," and "soup," and they would put these together, and then the therapist or the parent would understand that this is what the kid wants to say.
And this has been incredibly effective; for the last 30, 40 years people have been doing this.
In fact, a few years back, I developed an app for the iPad which does exactly this. It's called Avaz, and the way it works is that kids select different pictures.
These pictures are sequenced together to form sentences, and these sentences are spoken out.
So Avaz is essentially converting pictures, it's a translator, it converts pictures into speech.
Now, this was very effective.
There are thousands of children using this, you know, all over the world, and I started thinking about what it does and what it doesn't do.
And I realized something interesting: Avaz helps children with autism learn words.
What it doesn't help them do is to learn word patterns.
Let me explain this in a little more detail.
Take this sentence: "I want soup tonight."
Now it's not just the words here that convey the meaning.
It's also the way in which these words are arranged, the way these words are modified and arranged.
And that's why a sentence like "I want soup tonight" is different from a sentence like "Soup want I tonight," which is completely meaningless.
So there is another hidden abstraction here which children with autism find a lot of difficulty coping with, and that's the fact that you can modify words and you can arrange them to have different meanings, to convey different ideas.
Now, this is what we call grammar.
And grammar is incredibly powerful, because grammar is this one component of language which takes this finite vocabulary that all of us have and allows us to convey an infinite amount of information, an infinite amount of ideas.
It's the way in which you can put things together in order to convey anything you want to.
And so after I developed Avaz, I worried for a very long time about how I could give grammar to children with autism.
The solution came to me from a very interesting perspective.
I happened to chance upon a child with autism conversing with her mom, and this is what happened.
Completely out of the blue, very spontaneously, the child got up and said, "Eat."
Now what was interesting was the way in which the mom was trying to tease out the meaning of what the child wanted to say by talking to her in questions.
So she asked, "Eat what? Do you want to eat ice cream?
You want to eat? Somebody else wants to eat?
You want to eat cream now? You want to eat ice cream in the evening?"
And then it struck me that what the mother had done was something incredible.
She had been able to get that child to communicate an idea to her without grammar.
And it struck me that maybe this is what I was looking for.
Instead of arranging words in an order, in sequence, as a sentence, you arrange them in this map, where they're all linked together not by placing them one after the other but in questions, in question-answer pairs.
And so if you do this, then what you're conveying is not a sentence in English, but what you're conveying is really a meaning, the meaning of a sentence in English.
Now, meaning is really the underbelly, in some sense, of language.
It's what comes after thought but before language.
And the idea was that this particular representation might convey meaning in its raw form.
So I was very excited by this, you know, hopping around all over the place, trying to figure out if I can convert all possible sentences that I hear into this.
And I found that this is not enough.
Why is this not enough?
This is not enough because if you wanted to convey something like negation, you want to say, "I don't want soup," then you can't do that by asking a question.
You do that by changing the word "want."
Again, if you wanted to say, "I wanted soup yesterday," you do that by converting the word "want" into "wanted."
It's a past tense.
So this is a flourish which I added to make the system complete.
This is a map of words joined together as questions and answers, and with these filters applied on top of them in order to modify them to represent certain nuances.
Let me show you this with a different example.
Let's take this sentence: "I told the carpenter I could not pay him."
It's a fairly complicated sentence.
The way that this particular system works, you can start with any part of this sentence.
I'm going to start with the word "tell."
So this is the word "tell."
Now this happened in the past, so I'm going to make that "told."
Now, what I'm going to do is, I'm going to ask questions.
So, who told? I told.
I told whom? I told the carpenter.
Now we start with a different part of the sentence.
We start with the word "pay," and we add the ability filter to it to make it "can pay."
Then we make it "can't pay," and we can make it "couldn't pay" by making it the past tense.
So who couldn't pay? I couldn't pay.
Couldn't pay whom? I couldn't pay the carpenter.
And then you join these two together by asking this question: What did I tell the carpenter?
I told the carpenter I could not pay him.
Now think about this. This is —(Applause)— this is a representation of this sentence without language.
And there are two or three interesting things about this.
First of all, I could have started anywhere.
I didn't have to start with the word "tell."
I could have started anywhere in the sentence, and I could have made this entire thing.
The second thing is, if I wasn't an English speaker, if I was speaking in some other language, this map would actually hold true in any language.
So long as the questions are standardized, the map is actually independent of language.
So I call this FreeSpeech, and I was playing with this for many, many months.
I was trying out so many different combinations of this.
And then I noticed something very interesting about FreeSpeech.
I was trying to convert language, convert sentences in English into sentences in FreeSpeech, and vice versa, and back and forth.
And I realized that this particular configuration, this particular way of representing language, it allowed me to actually create very concise rules that go between FreeSpeech on one side and English on the other.
So I could actually write this set of rules that translates from this particular representation into English.
And so I developed this thing.
I developed this thing called the FreeSpeech Engine which takes any FreeSpeech sentence as the input and gives out perfectly grammatical English text.
And by putting these two pieces together, the representation and the engine, I was able to create an app, a technology for children with autism, that not only gives them words but also gives them grammar.
So I tried this out with kids with autism, and I found that there was an incredible amount of identification.
They were able to create sentences in FreeSpeech which were much more complicated but much more effective than equivalent sentences in English, and I started thinking about why that might be the case.
And I had an idea, and I want to talk to you about this idea next.
In about 1997, about 15 years back, there were a group of scientists that were trying to understand how the brain processes language, and they found something very interesting.
They found that when you learn a language as a child, as a two-year-old, you learn it with a certain part of your brain, and when you learn a language as an adult -- for example, if I wanted to learn Japanese right now — a completely different part of my brain is used.
Now I don't know why that's the case, but my guess is that that's because when you learn a language as an adult, you almost invariably learn it through your native language, or through your first language.
So what's interesting about FreeSpeech is that when you create a sentence or when you create language, a child with autism creates language with FreeSpeech, they're not using this support language, they're not using this bridge language.
They're directly constructing the sentence.
And so this gave me this idea.
Is it possible to use FreeSpeech not for children with autism but to teach language to people without disabilities?
And so I tried a number of experiments.
The first thing I did was I built a jigsaw puzzle in which these questions and answers are coded in the form of shapes, in the form of colors, and you have people putting these together and trying to understand how this works.
And I built an app out of it, a game out of it, in which children can play with words and with a reinforcement, a sound reinforcement of visual structures, they're able to learn language.
And this, this has a lot of potential, a lot of promise, and the government of India recently licensed this technology from us, and they're going to try it out with millions of different children trying to teach them English.
And the dream, the hope, the vision, really, is that when they learn English this way, they learn it with the same proficiency as their mother tongue.
All right, let's talk about something else.
Let's talk about speech.
This is speech.
So speech is the primary mode of communication delivered between all of us.
Now what's interesting about speech is that speech is one-dimensional.
Why is it one-dimensional?
It's one-dimensional because it's sound.
It's also one-dimensional because our mouths are built that way.
Our mouths are built to create one-dimensional sound.
But if you think about the brain, the thoughts that we have in our heads are not one-dimensional.
I mean, we have these rich, complicated, multi-dimensional ideas.
Now, it seems to me that language is really the brain's invention to convert this rich, multi-dimensional thought on one hand into speech on the other hand.
Now what's interesting is that we do a lot of work in information nowadays, and almost all of that is done in the language domain.
Take Google, for example.
Google trawls all these countless billions of websites, all of which are in English, and when you want to use Google, you go into Google search, and you type in English, and it matches the English with the English.
What if we could do this in FreeSpeech instead?
I have a suspicion that if we did this, we'd find that algorithms like searching, like retrieval, all of these things, are much simpler and also more effective, because they don't process the data structure of speech.
Instead they're processing the data structure of thought.
The data structure of thought.
That's a provocative idea.
But let's look at this in a little more detail.
So this is the FreeSpeech ecosystem.
We have the Free Speech representation on one side, and we have the FreeSpeech Engine, which generates English.
Now if you think about it, FreeSpeech, I told you, is completely language-independent.
It doesn't have any specific information in it which is about English.
So everything that this system knows about English is actually encoded into the engine.
That's a pretty interesting concept in itself.
You've encoded an entire human language into a software program.
But if you look at what's inside the engine, it's actually not very complicated.
It's not very complicated code.
And what's more interesting is the fact that the vast majority of the code in that engine is not really English-specific.
And that gives this interesting idea.
It might be very easy for us to actually create these engines in many, many different languages, in Hindi, in French, in German, in Swahili.
And that gives another interesting idea.
For example, supposing I was a writer, say, for a newspaper or for a magazine.
I could create content in one language, FreeSpeech, and the person who's consuming that content, the person who's reading that particular information could choose any engine, and they could read it in their own mother tongue, in their native language.
I mean, this is an incredibly attractive idea, especially for India.
We have so many different languages.
There's a song about India, and there's a description of the country as, it says, (in Sanskrit).
That means "ever-smiling speaker of beautiful languages."
Language is beautiful.
I think it's the most beautiful of human creations.
I think it's the loveliest thing that our brains have invented.
It entertains, it educates, it enlightens, but what I like the most about language is that it empowers.
I want to leave you with this.
This is a photograph of my collaborators, my earliest collaborators when I started working on language and autism and various other things.
The girl's name is Pavna, and that's her mother, Kalpana.
And Pavna's an entrepreneur, but her story is much more remarkable than mine, because Pavna is about 23.
She has quadriplegic cerebral palsy, so ever since she was born, she could neither move nor talk.
And everything that she's accomplished so far, finishing school, going to college, starting a company, collaborating with me to develop Avaz, all of these things she's done with nothing more than moving her eyes.
Daniel Webster said this: He said, "If all of my possessions were taken from me with one exception, I would choose to keep the power of communication, for with it, I would regain all the rest."
And that's why, of all of these incredible applications of FreeSpeech, the one that's closest to my heart still remains the ability for this to empower children with disabilities to be able to communicate, the power of communication, to get back all the rest.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause)
I'm very pleased to be here today to talk to you all about how we might repair the damaged brain, and I'm particularly excited by this field, because as a neurologist myself, I believe that this offers one of the great ways that we might be able to offer hope for patients who today live with devastating and yet untreatable diseases of the brain.
So here's the problem.
You can see here the picture of somebody's brain with Alzheimer's disease next to a healthy brain, and what's obvious is, in the Alzheimer's brain, ringed red, there's obvious damage -- atrophy, scarring.
And I could show you equivalent pictures from other disease: multiple sclerosis, motor neuron disease, Parkinson's disease, even Huntington's disease, and they would all tell a similar story.
And collectively these brain disorders represent one of the major public health threats of our time.
And the numbers here are really rather staggering.
At any one time, there are 35 million people today living with one of these brain diseases, and the annual cost globally is 700 billion dollars.
I mean, just think about that.
That's greater than one percent of the global GDP.
And it gets worse, because all these numbers are rising because these are by and large age-related diseases, and we're living longer.
So the question we really need to ask ourselves is, why, given the devastating impact of these diseases to the individual, never mind the scale of the societal problem, why are there no effective treatments?
Now in order to consider this, I first need to give you a crash course in how the brain works.
So in other words, I need to tell you everything I learned at medical school.
(Laughter) But believe me, this isn't going to take very long.
Okay? (Laughter) So the brain is terribly simple: it's made up of four cells, and two of them are shown here.
There's the nerve cell, and then there's the myelinating cell, or the insulating cell.
It's called oligodendrocyte.
And when these four cells work together in health and harmony, they create an extraordinary symphony of electrical activity, and it is this electrical activity that underpins our ability to think, to emote, to remember, to learn, move, feel and so on.
But equally, each of these individual four cells alone or together, can go rogue or die, and when that happens, you get damage.
You get damaged wiring.
You get disrupted connections.
And that's evident here with the slower conduction.
But ultimately, this damage will manifest as disease, clearly.
And if the starting dying nerve cell is a motor nerve, for example, you'll get motor neuron disease.
So I'd like to give you a real-life illustration of what happens with motor neuron disease.
So this is a patient of mine called John.
John I saw just last week in the clinic.
And I've asked John to tell us something about what were his problems that led to the initial diagnosis of motor neuron disease.
John: I was diagnosed in October in 2011, and the main problem was a breathing problem, difficulty breathing.
Siddharthan Chandran: I don't know if you caught all of that, but what John was telling us was that difficulty with breathing led eventually to the diagnosis of motor neuron disease.
So John's now 18 months further down in that journey, and I've now asked him to tell us something about his current predicament.
John: What I've got now is the breathing's gotten worse.
I've got weakness in my hands, my arms and my legs.
So basically I'm in a wheelchair most of the time.
SC: John's just told us he's in a wheelchair most of the time.
So what these two clips show is not just the devastating consequence of the disease, but they also tell us something about the shocking pace of the disease, because in just 18 months, a fit adult man has been rendered wheelchair- and respirator-dependent.
And let's face it, John could be anybody's father, brother or friend.
So that's what happens when the motor nerve dies.
But what happens when that myelin cell dies?
You get multiple sclerosis.
So the scan on your left is an illustration of the brain, and it's a map of the connections of the brain, and superimposed upon which are areas of damage.
We call them lesions of demyelination.
But they're damage, and they're white.
So I know what you're thinking here.
You're thinking, "My God, this bloke came up and said he's going to talk about hope, and all he's done is give a really rather bleak and depressing tale."
I've told you these diseases are terrible.
They're devastating, numbers are rising, the costs are ridiculous, and worst of all, we have no treatment. Where's the hope?
Well, you know what? I think there is hope.
And there's hope in this next section, of this brain section of somebody else with M.S., because what it illustrates is, amazingly, the brain can repair itself.
It just doesn't do it well enough.
And so again, there are two things I want to show you.
First of all is the damage of this patient with M.S.
And again, it's another one of these white masses.
But crucially, the area that's ringed red highlights an area that is pale blue.
But that area that is pale blue was once white.
So it was damaged. It's now repaired.
Just to be clear: It's not because of doctors.
It's in spite of doctors, not because of doctors.
This is spontaneous repair.
It's amazing and it's occurred because there are stem cells in the brain, even, which can enable new myelin, new insulation, to be laid down over the damaged nerves.
And this observation is important for two reasons.
The first is it challenges one of the orthodoxies that we learnt at medical school, or at least I did, admittedly last century, which is that the brain doesn't repair itself, unlike, say, the bone or the liver.
But actually it does, but it just doesn't do it well enough.
And the second thing it does, and it gives us a very clear direction of travel for new therapies -- I mean, you don't need to be a rocket scientist to know what to do here.
You simply need to find ways of promoting the endogenous, spontaneous repair that occurs anyway.
So the question is, why, if we've known that for some time, as we have, why do we not have those treatments?
And that in part reflects the complexity of drug development.
Now, drug development you might think of as a rather expensive but risky bet, and the odds of this bet are roughly this: they're 10,000 to one against, because you need to screen about 10,000 compounds to find that one potential winner.
And then you need to spend 15 years and spend over a billion dollars, and even then, you may not have a winner.
So the question for us is, can you change the rules of the game and can you shorten the odds?
And in order to do that, you have to think, where is the bottleneck in this drug discovery?
And one of the bottlenecks is early in drug discovery.
All that screening occurs in animal models.
But we know that the proper study of mankind is man, to borrow from Alexander Pope.
So the question is, can we study these diseases using human material?
And of course, absolutely we can.
We can use stem cells, and specifically we can use human stem cells.
And human stem cells are these extraordinary but simple cells that can do two things: they can self-renew or make more of themselves, but they can also become specialized to make bone, liver or, crucially, nerve cells, maybe even the motor nerve cell or the myelin cell.
And the challenge has long been, can we harness the power, the undoubted power of these stem cells in order to realize their promise for regenerative neurology?
And I think we can now, and the reason we can is because there have been several major discoveries in the last 10, 20 years.
One of them was here in Edinburgh, and it must be the only celebrity sheep, Dolly.
So Dolly was made in Edinburgh, and Dolly was an example of the first cloning of a mammal from an adult cell.
But I think the even more significant breakthrough for the purposes of our discussion today was made in 2006 by a Japanese scientist called Yamanaka.
And what Yamaka did, in a fantastic form of scientific cookery, was he showed that four ingredients, just four ingredients, could effectively convert any cell, adult cell, into a master stem cell.
And the significance of this is difficult to exaggerate, because what it means that from anybody in this room, but particularly patients, you could now generate a bespoke, personalized tissue repair kit.
Take a skin cell, make it a master pluripotent cell, so you could then make those cells that are relevant to their disease, both to study but potentially to treat.
Now, the idea of that at medical school -- this is a recurring theme, isn't it, me and medical school? — would have been ridiculous, but it's an absolute reality today.
And I see this as the cornerstone of regeneration, repair and hope.
And whilst we're on the theme of hope, for those of you who might have failed at school, there's hope for you as well, because this is the school report of John Gerdon.
["I believe he has ideas about becoming a scientist; on his present showing this is quite ridiculous."] So they didn't think much of him then.
But what you may not know is that he got the Nobel Prize for medicine just three months ago.
So to return to the original problem, what is the opportunity of these stem cells, or this disruptive technology, for repairing the damaged brain, which we call regenerative neurology?
I think there are two ways you can think about this: as a fantastic 21st-century drug discovery tool, and/or as a form of therapy.
So I want to tell you a little bit about both of those in the next few moments.
Drug discovery in a dish is how people often talk about this.
It's very simple: You take a patient with a disease, let's say motor neuron disease, you take a skin sample, you do the pluripotent reprogramming, as I've already told you, and you generate live motor nerve cells.
That's straightforward, because that's what pluripotent cells can do.
But crucially, you can then compare their behavior to their equivalent but healthy counterparts, ideally from an unaffected relative.
That way, you're matching for genetic variation.
And that's exactly what we did here.
This was a collaboration with colleagues: in London, Chris Shaw; in the U.S., Steve Finkbeiner and Tom Maniatis.
And what you're looking at, and this is amazing, these are living, growing, motor nerve cells from a patient with motor neuron disease.
It happens to be an inherited form.
I mean, just imagine that.
This would have been unimaginable 10 years ago.
So apart from seeing them grow and put out processes, we can also engineer them so that they fluoresce, but crucially, we can then track their individual health and compare the diseased motor nerve cells to the healthy ones.
And when you do all that and put it together, you realize that the diseased ones, which is represented in the red line, are two and a half times more likely to die than the healthy counterpart.
And the crucial point about this is that you then have a fantastic assay to discover drugs, because what would you ask of the drugs, and you could do this through a high-throughput automated screening system, you'd ask the drugs, give me one thing: find me a drug that will bring the red line closer to the blue line, because that drug will be a high-value candidate that you could probably take direct to human trial and almost bypass that bottleneck that I've told you about in drug discovery with the animal models, if that makes sense. It's fantastic.
But I want to come back to how you might use stem cells directly to repair damage.
And again there are two ways to think about this, and they're not mutually exclusive.
The first, and I think in the long run the one that will give us the biggest dividend, but it's not thought of that way just yet, is to think about those stem cells that are already in your brain, and I've told you that.
All of us have stem cells in the brain, even the diseased brain, and surely the smart way forward is to find ways that you can promote and activate those stem cells in your brain already to react and respond appropriately to damage to repair it.
That will be the future.
There will be drugs that will do that.
But the other way is to effectively parachute in cells, transplant them in, to replace dying or lost cells, even in the brain.
And I want to tell you now an experiment, it's a clinical trial that we did, which recently completed, which is with colleagues in UCL, David Miller in particular.
So this study was very simple.
We took patients with multiple sclerosis and asked a simple question: Would stem cells from the bone marrow be protective of their nerves?
So what we did was we took this bone marrow, grew up the stem cells in the lab, and then injected them back into the vein.
I'm making this sound really simple.
It took five years off a lot of people, okay?
And it put gray hair on me and caused all kinds of issues.
But conceptually, it's essentially simple.
So we've given them into the vein, right?
So in order to measure whether this was successful or not, we measured the optic nerve as our outcome measure.
And that's a good thing to measure in M.S., because patients with M.S. sadly suffer with problems with vision -- loss of vision, unclear vision.
And so we measured the size of the optic nerve using the scans with David Miller three times -- 12 months, six months, and before the infusion -- and you can see the gently declining red line.
And that's telling you that the optic nerve is shrinking, which makes sense, because their nerves are dying.
We then gave the stem cell infusion and repeated the measurement twice -- three months and six months -- and to our surprise, almost, the line's gone up.
That suggests that the intervention has been protective.
I don't think myself that what's happened is that those stem cells have made new myelin or new nerves.
What I think they've done is they've promoted the endogenous stem cells, or precursor cells, to do their job, wake up, lay down new myelin.
So this is a proof of concept.
I'm very excited about that.
So I just want to end with the theme I began on, which was regeneration and hope.
So here I've asked John what his hopes are for the future.
John: I would hope that sometime in the future through the research that you people are doing, we can come up with a cure so that people like me can lead a normal life.
SC: I mean, that speaks volumes.
But I'd like to close by first of all thanking John -- thanking John for allowing me to share his insights and these clips with you all.
But I'd also like to add to John and to others that my own view is, I'm hopeful for the future.
I do believe that the disruptive technologies like stem cells that I've tried to explain to you do offer very real hope.
And I do think that the day that we might be able to repair the damaged brain is sooner than we think.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Here are some images of clusters of galaxies.
They're exactly what they sound like.
They are these huge collections of galaxies, bound together by their mutual gravity.
So most of the points that you see on the screen are not individual stars, but collections of stars, or galaxies.
Now, by showing you some of these images, I hope that you will quickly see that galaxy clusters are these beautiful objects, but more than that, I think galaxy clusters are mysterious, they are surprising, and they're useful.
Useful as the universe's most massive laboratories.
And as laboratories, to describe galaxy clusters is to describe the experiments that you can do with them.
And I think there are four major types, and the first type that I want to describe is probing the very big.
So, how big?
Well, here is an image of a particular galaxy cluster.
It is so massive that the light passing through it is being bent, it's being distorted by the extreme gravity of this cluster.
And, in fact, if you look very carefully you'll be able to see rings around this cluster.
Now, to give you a number, this particular galaxy cluster has a mass of over one million billion suns.
It's just mind-boggling how massive these systems can get.
But more than their mass, they have this additional feature.
They are essentially isolated systems, so if we like, we can think of them as a scaled-down version of the entire universe.
And many of the questions that we might have about the universe at large scales, such as, how does gravity work?
might be answered by studying these systems.
So that was very big.
The second things is very hot.
Okay, if I take an image of a galaxy cluster, and I subtract away all of the starlight, what I'm left with is this big, blue blob.
This is in false color.
It's actually X-ray light that we're seeing.
And the question is, if it's not galaxies, what is emitting this light?
The answer is hot gas, million-degree gas -- in fact, it's plasma.
And the reason why it's so hot goes back to the previous slide.
The extreme gravity of these systems is accelerating particles of gas to great speeds, and great speeds means great temperatures.
So this is the main idea, but science is a rough draft.
There are many basic properties about this plasma that still confuse us, still puzzle us, and still push our understanding of the physics of the very hot.
Third thing: probing the very small.
Now, to explain this, I need to tell you a very disturbing fact.
Most of the universe's matter is not made up of atoms.
You were lied to.
Most of it is made up of something very, very mysterious, which we call dark matter.
Dark matter is something that doesn't like to interact very much, except through gravity, and of course we would like to learn more about it.
If you're a particle physicist, you want to know what happens when we smash things together.
And dark matter is no exception.
Well, how do we do this?
To answer that question, I'm going to have to ask another one, which is, what happens when galaxy clusters collide?
Here is an image.
Since galaxy clusters are representative slices of the universe, scaled-down versions.
They are mostly made up of dark matter, and that's what you see in this bluish purple.
The red represents the hot gas, and, of course, you can see many galaxies.
What's happened is a particle accelerator at a huge, huge scale.
And this is very important, because what it means is that very, very small effects that might be difficult to detect in the lab, might be compounded and compounded into something that we could possibly observe in nature.
So, it's very funny.
The reason why galaxy clusters can teach us about dark matter, the reason why galaxy clusters can teach us about the physics of the very small, is precisely because they are so very big.
Fourth thing: the physics of the very strange.
Certainly what I've said so far is crazy.
Okay, if there's anything stranger I think it has to be dark energy.
If I throw a ball into the air, I expect it to go up.
What I don't expect is that it go up at an ever-increasing rate.
Similarly, cosmologists understand why the universe is expanding.
They don't understand why it's expanding at an ever-increasing rate.
They give the cause of this accelerated expansion a name, and they call it dark energy.
And, again, we want to learn more about it.
So, one particular question that we have is, how does dark energy affect the universe at the largest scales?
Depending on how strong it is, maybe structure forms faster or slower.
Well, the problem with the large-scale structure of the universe is that it's horribly complicated.
Here is a computer simulation.
And we need a way to simplify it.
Well, I like to think about this using an analogy.
If I want to understand the sinking of the Titanic, the most important thing to do is not to model the little positions of every single little piece of the boat that broke off.
The most important thing to do is to track the two biggest parts.
Similarly, I can learn a lot about the universe at the largest scales by tracking its biggest pieces and those biggest pieces are clusters of galaxies.
So, as I come to a close, you might feel slightly cheated.
I mean, I began by talking about how galaxy clusters are useful, and I've given some reasons, but what is their use really?
Well, to answer this, I want to give you a quote by Henry Ford when he was asked about cars.
He had this to say: "If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses."
Today, we as a society are faced with many, many difficult problems.
And the solutions to these problems are not obvious.
They are not faster horses.
They will require an enormous amount of scientific ingenuity.
So, yes, we need to focus, yes, we need to concentrate, but we also need to remember that innovation, ingenuity, inspiration -- these things come when we broaden our field of vision when we step back when we zoom out.
And I can't think of a better way to do this than by studying the universe around us. Thanks.
(Applause)
Almost two years ago, I was driving in my car in Germany, and I turned on the radio.
Europe at the time was in the middle of the Euro crisis, and all the headlines were about European countries getting downgraded by rating agencies in the United States.
I listened and thought to myself, "What are these rating agencies, and why is everybody so upset about their work?"
Well, if you were sitting next to me in the car that day and would have told me that I would devote the next years to trying to reform them, obviously I would have called you crazy.
But guess what's really crazy: the way these rating agencies are run.
And I would like to explain to you not only why it's time to change this, but also how we can do it.
So let me tell you a little bit about what rating agencies really do.
As you would read a car magazine before purchasing a new car or taking a look at a product review before deciding which kind of tablet or phone to get, investors are reading ratings before they decide in which kind of product they are investing their money.
A rating can range from a so-called AAA, which means it's a top-performing product, and it can go down to the level of the so-called BBB-, which means it's a fairly risky investment.
Rating agencies are rating companies.
They are rating banks.
They are rating even financial products like the infamous mortgage-backed securities.
But they can also rate countries, and these ratings are called sovereign ratings, and I would like to focus in particular on these sovereign ratings.
And I can tell, as you're listening to me right now, you're thinking, so why should I really care about this, right?
Be honest.
Well, ratings affect you.
They affect all of us.
If a rating agency rates a country, it basically assesses and evaluates a country's debt and the ability and willingness of a country to repay its debt.
So if a country gets downgraded by a rating agency, the country has to pay more in order to borrow money on the international markets.
So it affects you as a citizen and as a taxpayer, because you and your fellow countrymen have to pony up more in order to borrow.
But what if a country can't afford to pay more because it's maybe too expensive?
Well, then the country has less available for other services, like roads, schools, healthcare.
And this is the reason why you should care, because sovereign ratings affect everyone.
And that is the reason why I believe they should be defined as public goods.
They should be transparent, accessible, and available to everyone at no cost.
But here's the situation: the rating agency market is dominated by three players and three players only -- Standard &amp; Poor's, Moody's, and Fitch -- and we know whenever there is a market concentration, there is really no competition.
There is no incentive to improve the quality of your product.
And let's face it, the credit rating agencies have contributed, putting the global economy on the brink, and yet they have to change the way they operate.
The second point, would you really buy a car just based on the advice of the dealer?
Obviously not, right? That would be irresponsible.
But that's actually what's going on in the rating agency sector every single day.
The customers of these rating agencies, like countries or companies, they are paying for their own ratings, and obviously this is creating a conflict of interest.
The third point is, the rating agencies are not really telling us how they are coming up with their ratings, but in this day and age, you can't even sell a candy bar without listing everything that's inside.
But for ratings, a crucial element of our economy, we really do not know what all the different ingredients are.
We are allowing the rating agencies to be intransparent about their work, and we need to change this.
I think there is no doubt that the sector needs a complete overhaul, not just a trimming at the margins.
I think it's time for a bold move.
I think it's time to upgrade the system.
And this is why we at the Bertelsmann Foundation have invested a lot of time and effort thinking about an alternative for the sector.
And we have developed the first model for a nonprofit rating agency for sovereign risk, and we call it by its acronym, INCRA.
INCRA would make a difference to the current system by adding another nonprofit player to the mix.
It would be based on a nonprofit model that would be based on a sustainable endowment.
The endowment would create income that would allow us to run the operation, to run the rating agency, and it would also allow us to make our ratings publicly available.
But this is not enough to make a difference, right?
INCRA would also be based on a very, very clear governance structure that would avoid any conflict of interest, and it would include many stakeholders from society.
INCRA would not only be a European or an American rating agency, it would be a truly international one, in which, in particular, the emerging economies would have an equal interest, voice and representation.
The second big difference that INCRA would make is that would it base its sovereign risk assessment on a broader set of indicators.
Think about it that way.
If we conduct a sovereign rating, we basically take a look at the economic soil of a country, its macroeconomic fundamentals.
But we also have to ask the question, who is cultivating the economic soil of a country, right?
Well, a country has many gardeners, and one of them is the government, so we have to ask the question, how is a country governed?
How is it managed?
And this is the reason why we have developed what we call forward-looking indicators.
These are indicators that give you a much better read about the socioeconomic development of a country.
I hope you would agree it's important for you to know if your government is willing to invest in renewable energy and education.
It's important for you to know if the government of your country is able to manage a crisis, if the government is finally able to implement the reforms that it's promised.
For example, if INCRA would rate South Africa right now, of course we would take a very, very close look at the youth unemployment of the country, the highest in the world.
If over 70 percent of a country's population under the age of 35 is unemployed, of course this has a huge impact on the economy today and even more so in the future.
Well, our friends at Moody's, Standard &amp; Poor's, and Fitch will tell us we would take this into account as well.
But guess what? We do not know exactly how they will take this into account.
And this leads me to the third big difference that INCRA would make.
INCRA would not only release its ratings but it would also release its indicators and methodology.
So in contrast to the current system, INCRA would be fully transparent.
So in a nutshell, INCRA would offer an alternative to the current system of the big three rating agencies by adding a new, nonprofit player to the mix that would increase the competition, it would increase the transparency of the sector, and it would also increase the quality.
I can tell that sovereign ratings may still look to you like this very small piece of this very complex global financial world, but I tell you it's a very important one, and a very important one to fix, because sovereign ratings affect all of us, and they should be addressed and should be defined as public goods.
And this is why we are testing our model right now, and why we are trying to find out if it can bring together a group of able and willing actors to bring INCRA to life.
I truly believe building up INCRA is in everyone's interest, and that we have the unique opportunity right now to turn INCRA into a cornerstone of a new, more inclusive financial system.
Because for way too long, we have left the big financial players on their own.
It's time to give them some company.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk a little bit about strategy and its relationship with technology.
We tend to think of business strategy as being a rather abstract body of essentially economic thought, perhaps rather timeless.
I'm going to argue that, in fact, business strategy has always been premised on assumptions about technology, that those assumptions are changing, and, in fact, changing quite dramatically, and that therefore what that will drive us to is a different concept of what we mean by business strategy.
Let me start, if I may, with a little bit of history.
The idea of strategy in business owes its origins to two intellectual giants: Bruce Henderson, the founder of BCG, and Michael Porter, professor at the Harvard Business School.
Henderson's central idea was what you might call the Napoleonic idea of concentrating mass against weakness, of overwhelming the enemy.
What Henderson recognized was that, in the business world, there are many phenomena which are characterized by what economists would call increasing returns -- scale, experience.
The more you do of something, disproportionately the better you get.
And therefore he found a logic for investing in such kinds of overwhelming mass in order to achieve competitive advantage.
And that was the first introduction of essentially a military concept of strategy into the business world.
Porter agreed with that premise, but he qualified it.
He pointed out, correctly, that that's all very well, but businesses actually have multiple steps to them.
They have different components, and each of those components might be driven by a different kind of strategy.
A company or a business might actually be advantaged in some activities but disadvantaged in others.
He formed the concept of the value chain, essentially the sequence of steps with which a, shall we say, raw material, becomes a component, becomes assembled into a finished product, and then is distributed, for example, and he argued that advantage accrued to each of those components, and that the advantage of the whole was in some sense the sum or the average of that of its parts.
And this idea of the value chain was predicated on the recognition that what holds a business together is transaction costs, that in essence you need to coordinate, organizations are more efficient at coordination than markets, very often, and therefore the nature and role and boundaries of the cooperation are defined by transaction costs.
It was on those two ideas, Henderson's idea of increasing returns to scale and experience, and Porter's idea of the value chain, encompassing heterogenous elements, that the whole edifice of business strategy was subsequently erected.
Now what I'm going to argue is that those premises are, in fact, being invalidated.
First of all, let's think about transaction costs.
There are really two components to transaction costs.
One is about processing information, and the other is about communication.
These are the economics of processing and communicating as they have evolved over a long period of time.
As we all know from so many contexts, they have been radically transformed since the days when Porter and Henderson first formulated their theories.
In particular, since the mid-'90s, communications costs have actually been falling even faster than transaction costs, which is why communication, the Internet, has exploded in such a dramatic fashion.
Now, those falling transaction costs have profound consequences, because if transaction costs are the glue that hold value chains together, and they are falling, there is less to economize on.
There is less need for vertically integrated organization, and value chains at least can break up.
They needn't necessarily, but they can.
In particular, it then becomes possible for a competitor in one business to use their position in one step of the value chain in order to penetrate or attack or disintermediate the competitor in another.
That is not just an abstract proposition.
There are many very specific stories of how that actually happened.
A poster child example was the encyclopedia business.
The encyclopedia business in the days of leatherbound books was basically a distribution business.
Most of the cost was the commission to the salesmen.
The CD-ROM and then the Internet came along, new technologies made the distribution of knowledge many orders of magnitude cheaper, and the encyclopedia industry collapsed.
It's now, of course, a very familiar story.
This, in fact, more generally was the story of the first generation of the Internet economy.
It was about falling transaction costs breaking up value chains and therefore allowing disintermediation, or what we call deconstruction.
One of the questions I was occasionally asked was, well, what's going to replace the encyclopedia when Britannica no longer has a business model?
And it was a while before the answer became manifest.
Now, of course, we know what it is: it's the Wikipedia.
Now what's special about the Wikipedia is not its distribution.
What's special about the Wikipedia is the way it's produced.
The Wikipedia, of course, is an encyclopedia created by its users.
And this, in fact, defines what you might call the second decade of the Internet economy, the decade in which the Internet as a noun became the Internet as a verb.
It became a set of conversations, the era in which user-generated content and social networks became the dominant phenomenon.
Now what that really meant in terms of the Porter-Henderson framework was the collapse of certain kinds of economies of scale.
It turned out that tens of thousands of autonomous individuals writing an encyclopedia could do just as good a job, and certainly a much cheaper job, than professionals in a hierarchical organization.
So basically what was happening was that one layer of this value chain was becoming fragmented, as individuals could take over where organizations were no longer needed.
But there's another question that obviously this graph poses, which is, okay, we've gone through two decades -- does anything distinguish the third?
And what I'm going to argue is that indeed something does distinguish the third, and it maps exactly on to the kind of Porter-Henderson logic that we've been talking about.
And that is, about data.
If we go back to around 2000, a lot of people were talking about the information revolution, and it was indeed true that the world's stock of data was growing, indeed growing quite fast.
but it was still at that point overwhelmingly analog.
We go forward to 2007, not only had the world's stock of data exploded, but there'd been this massive substitution of digital for analog.
And more important even than that, if you look more carefully at this graph, what you will observe is that about a half of that digital data is information that has an I.P. address.
It's on a server or it's on a P.C.
But having an I.P. address means that it can be connected to any other data that has an I.P. address.
It means it becomes possible to put together half of the world's knowledge in order to see patterns, an entirely new thing.
If we run the numbers forward to today, it probably looks something like this.
We're not really sure.
If we run the numbers forward to 2020, we of course have an exact number, courtesy of IDC.
It's curious that the future is so much more predictable than the present.
And what it implies is a hundredfold multiplication in the stock of information that is connected via an I.P. address.
Now, if the number of connections that we can make is proportional to the number of pairs of data points, a hundredfold multiplication in the quantity of data is a ten-thousandfold multiplication in the number of patterns that we can see in that data, this just in the last 10 or 11 years.
This, I would submit, is a sea change, a profound change in the economics of the world that we live in.
The first human genome, that of James Watson, was mapped as the culmination of the Human Genome Project in the year 2000, and it took about 200 million dollars and about 10 years of work to map just one person's genomic makeup.
Since then, the costs of mapping the genome have come down.
In fact, they've come down in recent years very dramatically indeed, to the point where the cost is now below 1,000 dollars, and it's confidently predicted that by the year 2015 it will be below 100 dollars -- a five or six order of magnitude drop in the cost of genomic mapping in just a 15-year period, an extraordinary phenomenon.
Now, in the days when mapping a genome cost millions, or even tens of thousands, it was basically a research enterprise.
Scientists would gather some representative people, and they would see patterns, and they would try and make generalizations about human nature and disease from the abstract patterns they find from these particular selected individuals.
But when the genome can be mapped for 100 bucks, 99 dollars while you wait, then what happens is, it becomes retail.
It becomes above all clinical.
You go the doctor with a cold, and if he or she hasn't done it already, the first thing they do is map your genome, at which point what they're now doing is not starting from some abstract knowledge of genomic medicine and trying to work out how it applies to you, but they're starting from your particular genome.
Now think of the power of that.
Think of where that takes us when we can combine genomic data with clinical data with data about drug interactions with the kind of ambient data that devices like our phone and medical sensors will increasingly be collecting.
Think what happens when we collect all of that data and we can put it together in order to find patterns we wouldn't see before.
This, I would suggest, perhaps it will take a while, but this will drive a revolution in medicine.
Fabulous, lots of people talk about this.
But there's one thing that doesn't get much attention.
How is that model of colossal sharing across all of those kinds of databases compatible with the business models of institutions and organizations and corporations that are involved in this business today?
If your business is based on proprietary data, if your competitive advantage is defined by your data, how on Earth is that company or is that society in fact going to achieve the value that's implicit in the technology? They can't.
So essentially what's happening here, and genomics is merely one example of this, is that technology is driving the natural scaling of the activity beyond the institutional boundaries within which we have been used to thinking about it, and in particular beyond the institutional boundaries in terms of which business strategy as a discipline is formulated.
The basic story here is that what used to be vertically integrated, oligopolistic competition among essentially similar kinds of competitors is evolving, by one means or another, from a vertical structure to a horizontal one.
Why is that happening?
It's happening because transaction costs are plummeting and because scale is polarizing.
The plummeting of transaction costs weakens the glue that holds value chains together, and allows them to separate.
The polarization of scale economies towards the very small -- small is beautiful -- allows for scalable communities to substitute for conventional corporate production.
The scaling in the opposite direction, towards things like big data, drive the structure of business towards the creation of new kinds of institutions that can achieve that scale.
But either way, the typically vertical structure gets driven to becoming more horizontal.
The logic isn't just about big data.
If we were to look, for example, at the telecommunications industry, you can tell the same story about fiber optics.
If we look at the pharmaceutical industry, or, for that matter, university research, you can say exactly the same story about so-called "big science."
And in the opposite direction, if we look, say, at the energy sector, where all the talk is about how households will be efficient producers of green energy and efficient conservers of energy, that is, in fact, the reverse phenomenon.
That is the fragmentation of scale because the very small can substitute for the traditional corporate scale.
Either way, what we are driven to is this horizontalization of the structure of industries, and that implies fundamental changes in how we think about strategy.
It means, for example, that we need to think about strategy as the curation of these kinds of horizontal structure, where things like business definition and even industry definition are actually the outcomes of strategy, not something that the strategy presupposes.
It means, for example, we need to work out how to accommodate collaboration and competition simultaneously.
Think about the genome.
We need to accommodate the very large and the very small simultaneously.
And we need industry structures that will accommodate very, very different motivations, from the amateur motivations of people in communities to maybe the social motivations of infrastructure built by governments, or, for that matter, cooperative institutions built by companies that are otherwise competing, because that is the only way that they can get to scale.
These kinds of transformations render the traditional premises of business strategy obsolete.
They drive us into a completely new world.
They require us, whether we are in the public sector or the private sector, to think very fundamentally differently about the structure of business, and, at last, it makes strategy interesting again.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I had brain surgery 18 years ago, and since that time, brain science has become a personal passion of mine.
I'm actually an engineer.
And first let me say, I recently joined Google's Moonshot group, where I had a division, the display division in Google X, and the brain science work I'm speaking about today is work I did before I joined Google and on the side outside of Google.
So that said, there's a stigma when you have brain surgery.
Are you still smart or not?
And if not, can you make yourself smart again?
After my neurosurgery, part of my brain was missing, and I had to deal with that.
It wasn't the grey matter, but it was the gooey part dead center that makes key hormones and neurotransmitters.
Immediately after my surgery, I had to decide what amounts of each of over a dozen powerful chemicals to take each day, because if I just took nothing, I would die within hours.
Every day now for 18 years -- every single day -- I've had to try to decide the combinations and mixtures of chemicals, and try to get them, to stay alive.
There have been several close calls.
But luckily, I'm an experimentalist at heart, so I decided I would experiment to try to find more optimal dosages because there really isn't a clear road map on this that's detailed.
I began to try different mixtures, and I was blown away by how tiny changes in dosages dramatically changed my sense of self, my sense of who I was, my thinking, my behavior towards people.
One particularly dramatic case: for a couple months I actually tried dosages and chemicals typical of a man in his early 20s, and I was blown away by how my thoughts changed.
(Laughter) I was angry all the time, I thought about sex constantly, and I thought I was the smartest person in the entire world, and —(Laughter)— of course over the years I'd met guys kind of like that, or maybe kind of toned-down versions of that.
I was kind of extreme.
But to me, the surprise was, I wasn't trying to be arrogant.
I was actually trying, with a little bit of insecurity, to actually fix a problem in front of me, and it just didn't come out that way.
So I couldn't handle it.
I changed my dosages.
But that experience, I think, gave me a new appreciation for men and what they might walk through, and I've gotten along with men a lot better since then.
What I was trying to do with tuning these hormones and neurotransmitters and so forth was to try to get my intelligence back after my illness and surgery, my creative thought, my idea flow.
And I think mostly in images, and so for me that became a key metric -- how to get these mental images that I use as a way of rapid prototyping, if you will, my ideas, trying on different new ideas for size, playing out scenarios.
This kind of thinking isn't new.
Philiosophers like Hume and Descartes and Hobbes saw things similarly.
They thought that mental images and ideas were actually the same thing.
There are those today that dispute that, and lots of debates about how the mind works, but for me it's simple: Mental images, for most of us, are central in inventive and creative thinking.
So after several years, I tuned myself up and I have lots of great, really vivid mental images with a lot of sophistication and the analytical backbone behind them.
And so now I'm working on, how can I get these mental images in my mind out to my computer screen faster?
Can you imagine, if you will, a movie director being able to use her imagination alone to direct the world in front of her?
Or a musician to get the music out of his head?
There are incredible possibilities with this as a way for creative people to share at light speed.
And the truth is, the remaining bottleneck in being able to do this is just upping the resolution of brain scan systems.
So let me show you why I think we're pretty close to getting there by sharing with you two recent experiments from two top neuroscience groups.
Both used fMRI technology -- functional magnetic resonance imaging technology -- to image the brain, and here is a brain scan set from Giorgio Ganis and his colleagues at Harvard.
And the left-hand column shows a brain scan of a person looking at an image.
The middle column shows the brainscan of that same individual imagining, seeing that same image.
And the right column was created by subtracting the middle column from the left column, showing the difference to be nearly zero.
This was repeated on lots of different individuals with lots of different images, always with a similar result.
The difference between seeing an image and imagining seeing that same image is next to nothing.
Next let me share with you one other experiment, this from Jack Gallant's lab at Cal Berkeley.
They've been able to decode brainwaves into recognizable visual fields.
So let me set this up for you.
In this experiment, individuals were shown hundreds of hours of YouTube videos while scans were made of their brains to create a large library of their brain reacting to video sequences.
Then a new movie was shown with new images, new people, new animals in it, and a new scan set was recorded.
The computer, using brain scan data alone, decoded that new brain scan to show what it thought the individual was actually seeing.
On the right-hand side, you see the computer's guess, and on the left-hand side, the presented clip.
This is the jaw-dropper.
We are so close to being able to do this.
We just need to up the resolution.
And now remember that when you see an image versus when you imagine that same image, it creates the same brain scan.
So this was done with the highest-resolution brain scan systems available today, and their resolution has increased really about a thousandfold in the last several years.
Next we need to increase the resolution another thousandfold to get a deeper glimpse.
How do we do that?
There's a lot of techniques in this approach.
One way is to crack open your skull and put in electrodes.
I'm not for that.
There's a lot of new imaging techniques being proposed, some even by me, but given the recent success of MRI, first we need to ask the question, is it the end of the road with this technology?
Conventional wisdom says the only way to get higher resolution is with bigger magnets, but at this point bigger magnets only offer incremental resolution improvements, not the thousandfold we need.
I'm putting forward an idea: instead of bigger magnets, let's make better magnets.
There's some new technology breakthroughs in nanoscience when applied to magnetic structures that have created a whole new class of magnets, and with these magnets, we can lay down very fine detailed magnetic field patterns throughout the brain, and using those, we can actually create holographic-like interference structures to get precision control over many patterns, as is shown here by shifting things.
We can create much more complicated structures with slightly different arrangements, kind of like making Spirograph.
So why does that matter?
A lot of effort in MRI over the years has gone into making really big, really huge magnets, right?
But yet most of the recent advances in resolution have actually come from ingeniously clever encoding and decoding solutions in the F.M. radio frequency transmitters and receivers in the MRI systems.
Let's also, instead of a uniform magnetic field, put down structured magnetic patterns in addition to the F.M. radio frequencies.
So by combining the magnetics patterns with the patterns in the F.M. radio frequencies processing which can massively increase the information that we can extract in a single scan.
And on top of that, we can then layer our ever-growing knowledge of brain structure and memory to create a thousandfold increase that we need.
And using fMRI, we should be able to measure not just oxygenated blood flow, but the hormones and neurotransmitters I've talked about and maybe even the direct neural activity, which is the dream.
We're going to be able to dump our ideas directly to digital media.
Could you imagine if we could leapfrog language and communicate directly with human thought?
What would we be capable of then?
And how will we learn to deal with the truths of unfiltered human thought?
You think the Internet was big.
These are huge questions.
It might be irresistible as a tool to amplify our thinking and communication skills.
And indeed, this very same tool may prove to lead to the cure for Alzheimer's and similar diseases.
We have little option but to open this door.
Regardless, pick a year -- will it happen in five years or 15 years?
It's hard to imagine it taking much longer.
We need to learn how to take this step together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Thank you for putting up these pictures of my colleagues over here.
(Laughter) We'll be talking about them.
Now, I'm going try an experiment. I don't do experiments, normally. I'm a theorist.
But I'm going see what happens if I press this button.
Sure enough. OK. I used to work in this field of elementary particles.
What happens to matter if you chop it up very fine?
What is it made of?
And the laws of these particles are valid throughout the universe, and they're very much connected with the history of the universe.
We know a lot about four forces. There must be a lot more, but those are at very, very small distances, and we haven't really interacted with them very much yet.
The main thing I want to talk about is this: that we have this remarkable experience in this field of fundamental physics that beauty is a very successful criterion for choosing the right theory.
And why on earth could that be so?
Well, here's an example from my own experience.
It's fairly dramatic, actually, to have this happen.
Three or four of us, in 1957, put forward a partially complete theory of one of these forces, this weak force.
And it was in disagreement with seven -- seven, count them, seven experiments.
Experiments were all wrong.
And we published before knowing that, because we figured it was so beautiful, it's gotta be right!
The experiments had to be wrong, and they were.
Now our friend over there, Albert Einstein, used to pay very little attention when people said, "You know, there's a man with an experiment that seems to disagree with special relativity.
DC Miller. What about that?" And he would say, "Aw, that'll go away." (Laughter) Now, why does stuff like that work? That's the question.
Now, yeah, what do we mean by beautiful? That's one thing.
I'll try to make that clear -- partially clear.
Why should it work, and is this something to do with human beings?
I'll let you in on the answer to the last one that I offer, and that is, it has nothing to do with human beings.
Somewhere in some other planet, orbiting some very distant star, maybe in a another galaxy, there could well be entities that are at least as intelligent as we are, and are interested in science. It's not impossible; I think there probably are lots.
Very likely, none is close enough to interact with us.
But they could be out there, very easily.
And suppose they have, you know, very different sensory apparatus, and so on.
They have seven tentacles, and they have 14 little funny-looking compound eyes, and a brain shaped like a pretzel.
Would they really have different laws?
There are lots of people who believe that, and I think it is utter baloney.
I think there are laws out there, and we of course don't understand them at any given time very well -- but we try. And we try to get closer and closer.
And someday, we may actually figure out the fundamental unified theory of the particles and forces, what I call the "fundamental law."
We may not even be terribly far from it.
But even if we don't run across it in our lifetimes, we can still think there is one out there, and we're just trying to get closer and closer to it.
I think that's the main point to be made.
We express these things mathematically.
And when the mathematics is very simple -- when in terms of some mathematical notation, you can write the theory in a very brief space, without a lot of complication -- that's essentially what we mean by beauty or elegance.
Here's what I was saying about the laws. They're really there.
Newton certainly believed that.
And he said, here, "It is the business of natural philosophy to find out those laws."
The basic law, let's say -- here's an assumption.
The assumption is that the basic law really takes the form of a unified theory of all the particles.
Now, some people call that a theory of everything.
That's wrong because the theory is quantum mechanical.
And I won't go into a lot of stuff about quantum mechanics and what it's like, and so on.
You've heard a lot of wrong things about it anyway. (Laughter) There are even movies about it with a lot of wrong stuff.
But the main thing here is that it predicts probabilities.
Now, sometimes those probabilities are near certainties.
And in a lot of familiar cases, they of course are.
But other times they're not, and you have only probabilities for different outcomes.
So what that means is that the history of the universe is not determined just by the fundamental law.
It's the fundamental law and this incredibly long series of accidents, or chance outcomes, that are there in addition.
And the fundamental theory doesn't include those chance outcomes; they are in addition.
So it's not a theory of everything. And in fact, a huge amount of the information in the universe around us comes from those accidents, and not just from the fundamental laws.
Now, it's often said that getting closer and closer to the fundamental laws by examining phenomena at low energies, and then higher energies, and then higher energies, or short distances, and then shorter distances, and then still shorter distances, and so on, is like peeling the skin of an onion.
And we keep doing that, and build more powerful machines, accelerators for particles.
We look deeper and deeper into the structure of particles, and in that way we get probably closer and closer to this fundamental law.
Now, what happens is that as we do that, as we peel these skins of the onion, and we get closer and closer to the underlying law, we see that each skin has something in common with the previous one, and with the next one. We write them out mathematically, and we see they use very similar mathematics.
They require very similar mathematics.
That is absolutely remarkable, and that is a central feature of what I'm trying to say today.
Newton called it -- that's Newton, by the way -- that one.
This one is Albert Einstein. Hi, Al! And anyway, he said, "nature conformable to herself" -- personifying nature as a female.
And so what happens is that the new phenomena, the new skins, the inner skins of the slightly smaller skins of the onion that we get to, resemble the slightly larger ones.
And the kind of mathematics that we had for the previous skin is almost the same as what we need for the next skin.
And that's why the equations look so simple.
Because they use mathematics we already have.
A trivial example is this: Newton found the law of gravity, which goes like one over the square of the distance between the things gravitated.
Coulomb, in France, found the same law for electric charges.
Here's an example of this similarity.
You look at gravity, you see a certain law.
Then you look at electricity. Sure enough. The same rule.
It's a very simple example.
There are lots of more sophisticated examples.
Symmetry is very important in this discussion.
You know what it means. A circle, for example, is symmetric under rotations about the center of the circle.
You rotate around the center of the circle, the circle remains unchanged.
You take a sphere, in three dimensions, you rotate around the center of the sphere, and all those rotations leave the sphere alone.
They are symmetries of the sphere.
So we say, in general, that there's a symmetry under certain operations if those operations leave the phenomenon, or its description, unchanged.
Maxwell's equations are of course symmetrical under rotations of all of space.
Doesn't matter if we turn the whole of space around by some angle, it doesn't leave the -- doesn't change the phenomenon of electricity or magnetism.
There's a new notation in the 19th century that expressed this, and if you use that notation, the equations get a lot simpler.
Then Einstein, with his special theory of relativity, looked at a whole set of symmetries of Maxwell's equations, which are called special relativity.
And those symmetries, then, make the equations even shorter, and even prettier, therefore.
Let's look. You don't have to know what these things mean, doesn't make any difference.
But you can just look at the form. (Laughter) You can look at the form.
You see above, at the top, a long list of equations with three components for the three directions of space: x, y and z.
Then, using vector analysis, you use rotational symmetry, and you get this next set.
Then you use the symmetry of special relativity and you get an even simpler set down here, showing that symmetry exhibits better and better.
The more and more symmetry you have, the better you exhibit the simplicity and elegance of the theory.
The last two, the first equation says that electric charges and currents give rise to all the electric and magnetic fields.
The next -- second -- equation says that there is no magnetism other than that.
The only magnetism comes from electric charges and currents.
Someday we may find some slight hole in that argument.
But for the moment, that's the case.
Now, here is a very exciting development that many people have not heard of.
They should have heard of it, but it's a little tricky to explain in technical detail, so I won't do it. I'll just mention it. (Laughter) But Chen Ning Yang, called by us "Frank" Yang -- (Laughter) -- and Bob Mills put forward, 50 years ago, this generalization of Maxwell's equations, with a new symmetry.
A whole new symmetry.
Mathematics very similar, but there was a whole new symmetry.
They hoped that this would contribute somehow to particle physics -- didn't. It didn't, by itself, contribute to particle physics.
But then some of us generalized it further. And then it did!
And it gave a very beautiful description of the strong force and of the weak force.
So here we say, again, what we said before: that each skin of the onion shows a similarity to the adjoining skins.
So the mathematics for the adjoining skins is very similar to what we need for the new one.
And therefore it looks beautiful because we already know how to write it in a lovely, concise way.
So here are the themes. We believe there is a unified theory underlying all the regularities.
Steps toward unification exhibit the simplicity.
Symmetry exhibits the simplicity.
And then there is self-similarity across the scales -- in other words, from one skin of the onion to another one.
Proximate self-similarity. And that accounts for this phenomenon.
That will account for why beauty is a successful criterion for selecting the right theory.
Here's what Newton himself said: "Nature is very consonant and conformable to her self."
One thing he was thinking of is something that most of us take for granted today, but in his day it wasn't taken for granted.
There's the story, which is not absolutely certain to be right, but a lot of people told it.
Four sources told it. That when they had the plague in Cambridge, and he went down to his mother's farm -- because the university was closed -- he saw an apple fall from a tree, or on his head or something.
And he realized suddenly that the force that drew the apple down to the earth could be the same as the force regulating the motions of the planets and the moon.
That was a big unification for those days, although today we take it for granted.
It's the same theory of gravity.
So he said that this principle of nature, consonance: "This principle of nature being very remote from the conceptions of philosophers, I forbore to describe it in that book, lest I should be accounted an extravagant freak ... " That's what we all have to watch out for, (Laughter) especially at this meeting.
" ... and so prejudice my readers against all those things which were the main design of the book."
Now, who today would claim that as a mere conceit of the human mind?
That the force that causes the apple to fall to the ground is the same force that causes the planets and the moon to move around, and so on? Everybody knows that. It's a property of gravitation.
It's not something in the human mind. The human mind can, of course, appreciate it and enjoy it, use it, but it's not -- it doesn't stem from the human mind.
It stems from the character of gravity.
And that's true of all the things we're talking about.
They are properties of the fundamental law.
The fundamental law is such that the different skins of the onion resemble one another, and therefore the math for one skin allows you to express beautifully and simply the phenomenon of the next skin.
I say here that Newton did a lot of things that year: gravity, the laws of motion, the calculus, white light composed of all the colors of the rainbow.
And he could have written quite an essay on "What I Did Over My Summer Vacation."
(Laughter) So we don't have to assume these principles as separate metaphysical postulates.
They follow from the fundamental theory.
They are what we call emergent properties.
You don't need -- you don't need something more to get something more.
That's what emergence means.
Life can emerge from physics and chemistry, plus a lot of accidents.
The human mind can arise from neurobiology and a lot of accidents, the way the chemical bond arises from physics and certain accidents.
It doesn't diminish the importance of these subjects to know that they follow from more fundamental things, plus accidents.
That's a general rule, and it's critically important to realize that.
You don't need something more in order to get something more.
People keep asking that when they read my book, "The Quark and the Jaguar," and they say, "Isn't there something more beyond what you have there?"
Presumably, they mean something supernatural.
Anyway, there isn't. (Laughter) You don't need something more to explain something more.
Thank you very much. (Applause)
The 2011 Arab Spring captured the attention of the world.
It also captured the attention of authoritarian governments in other countries, who were worried that revolution would spread.
To respond, they ramped up surveillance of activists, journalists and dissidents who they feared would inspire revolution in their own countries.
One prominent Bahraini activist, who was arrested and tortured by his government, has said that the interrogators showed him transcripts of his telephone calls and text messages.
Of course, it's no secret that governments are able to intercept telephone calls and text messages.
It's for that reason that many activists specifically avoid using the telephone.
Instead, they use tools like Skype, which they think are immune to interception.
They're wrong.
There have now been over the last few years an industry of companies who provide surveillance technology to governments, specifically technology that allows those governments to hack into the computers of surveillance targets.
Rather than intercepting the communications as they go over the wire, instead they now hack into your computer, enable your webcam, enable your microphone, and steal documents from your computer.
When the government of Egypt fell in 2011, activists raided the office of the secret police, and among the many documents they found was this document by the Gamma Corporation, by Gamma International.
Gamma is a German company that manufactures surveillance software and sells it only to governments.
It's important to note that most governments don't really have the in-house capabilities to develop this software.
Smaller ones don't have the resources or the expertise, and so there's this market of Western companies who are happy to supply them with the tools and techniques for a price.
Gamma is just one of these companies.
I should note also that Gamma never actually sold their software to the Egyptian government.
They'd sent them an invoice for a sale, but the Egyptians never bought it.
Instead, apparently, the Egyptian government used a free demo version of Gamma's software.
(Laughter) So this screenshot is from a sales video that Gamma produced.
Really, they're just emphasizing in a relatively slick presentation the fact that the police can sort of sit in an air-conditioned office and remotely monitor someone without them having any idea that it's going on.
You know, your webcam light won't turn on.
There's nothing to indicate that the microphone is enabled.
This is the managing director of Gamma International.
His name is Martin Muench.
There are many photos of Mr. Muench that exist.
This is perhaps my favorite.
I'm just going to zoom in a little bit onto his webcam.
You can see there's a little sticker that's placed over his camera.
He knows what kind of surveillance is possible, and so clearly he doesn't want it to be used against him.
Muench has said that he intends for his software to be used to capture terrorists and locate pedophiles.
Of course, he's also acknowledged that once the software has been sold to governments, he has no way of knowing how it can be used.
Gamma's software has been located on servers in countries around the world, many with really atrocious track records and human rights violations.
They really are selling their software around the world.
Gamma is not the only company in the business.
As I said, it's a $5 billion industry.
One of the other big guys in the industry is an Italian company called Hacking Team.
Now, Hacking Team has what is probably the slickest presentation.
The video they've produced is very sexy, and so I'm going to play you a clip just so you can get a feel both for the capabilities of the software but also how it's marketed to their government clients.
(Video) Narrator: You want to look through your target's eyes.
(Music) You have to hack your target.
["While your target is browsing the web, exchanging documents, receiving SMS, crossing the borders"] You have to hit many different platforms.
["Windows, OS X, iOS, Android, Blackberry, Symbian, Linux"] You have to overcome encryption and capture relevant data.
[Skype &amp; encrypted calls, target location, messaging, relationships, web browsing, audio &amp; video"] Being stealth and untraceable.
["Immune to any protection system Hidden collection infrastructure"] Deployed all over your country.
["Up to hundreds of thousands of targets Managed from a single spot"] Exactly what we do.
Christopher Soghoian: So, it would be funny if it wasn't true, but, in fact, Hacking Team's software is being sold to governments around the world.
Last year we learned, for example, that it's been used to target Moroccan journalists by the Moroccan government.
Many, many countries it's been found in.
So, Hacking Team has also been actively courting the U.S. law enforcement market.
In the last year or so, the company has opened a sales office in Maryland.
The company has also hired a spokesperson.
They've been attending surveillance industry conferences where law enforcement officials show up.
They've spoken at the conferences.
What I thought was most fascinating was they've actually paid for the coffee break at one of the law enforcement conferences earlier this year.
I can't tell you for sure that Hacking Team has sold their technology in the United States, but what I can tell you that if they haven't sold it, it isn't because they haven't been trying hard.
So as I said before, governments that don't really have the resources to build their own tools will buy off-the-shelf surveillance software, and so for that reason, you see that the government of, say, Tunisia, might use the same software as the government of Germany.
They're all buying off-the-shelf stuff.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States does have the budget to build their own surveillance technology, and so for several years, I've been trying to figure out if and how the FBI is hacking into the computers of surveillance targets.
My friends at an organization called the Electronic Frontier Foundation -- they're a civil society group — obtained hundreds of documents from the FBI detailing their next generation of surveillance technologies.
Most of these documents were heavily redacted, but what you can see from the slides, if I zoom in, is this term: Remote Operations Unit.
Now, when I first looked into this, I'd never heard of this unit before.
I've been studying surveillance for more than six years.
I'd never heard of it.
And so I went online and I did some research, and ultimately I hit the mother lode when I went to LinkedIn, the social networking site for job seekers.
There were lots of former U.S. government contractors who had at one point worked for the Remote Operating Unit, and were describing in surprising detail on their CVs what they had done in their former job.
(Laughter) So I took this information and I gave it to a journalist that I know and trust at the Wall Street Journal, and she was able to contact several other former law enforcement officials who spoke on background and confirmed that yes, in fact, the FBI has a dedicated team that does nothing but hack into the computers of surveillance targets.
Like Gamma and Hacking Team, the FBI also has the capability to remotely activate webcams, microphones, steal documents, get web browsing information, the works.
There's sort of a big problem with governments going into hacking, and that's that terrorists, pedophiles, drug dealers, journalists and human rights activists all use the same kinds of computers.
There's no drug dealer phone and there's no journalist laptop.
We all use the same technology, and what that means then is that for governments to have the capability to hack into the computers of the real bad guys, they also have to have the capability to hack into our devices too.
So governments around the world have been embracing this technology.
They've been embracing hacking as a law enforcement technique, but without any real debate.
In the United States, where I live, there have been no congressional hearings.
There's no law that's been passed specifically authorizing this technique, and because of its power and potential for abuse, it's vital that we have an informed public debate.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The year is 1800.
A curious little invention is being talked about.
It's called a microscope.
What it allows you to do is see tiny little lifeforms that are invisible to the naked eye.
Soon comes the medical discovery that many of these lifeforms are actually causes of terrible human diseases.
Imagine what happened to the society when they realized that an English mom in her teacup actually was drinking a monster soup, not very far from here. This is from London.
Fast forward 200 years.
We still have this monster soup around, and it's taken hold in the developing countries around the tropical belt.
Just for malaria itself, there are a million deaths a year, and more than a billion people that need to be tested because they are at risk for different species of malarial infections.
Now it's actually very simple to put a face to many of these monsters.
You take a stain, like acridine orange or a fluorescent stain or Giemsa, and a microscope, and you look at them.
They all have faces.
Why is that so, that Alex in Kenya, Fatima in Bangladesh, Navjoot in Mumbai, and Julie and Mary in Uganda still wait months to be able to diagnose why they are sick?
And that's primarily because scalability of the diagnostics is completely out of reach.
And remember that number: one billion.
The problem lies with the microscope itself.
Even though the pinnacle of modern science, research microscopes are not designed for field testing.
Neither were they first designed for diagnostics at all.
They are heavy, bulky, really hard to maintain, and cost a lot of money.
This picture is Mahatma Gandhi in the '40s using the exact same setup that we actually use today for diagnosing T.B. in his ashram in Sevagram in India.
Two of my students, Jim and James, traveled around India and Thailand, starting to think about this problem a lot.
We saw all kinds of donated equipment.
We saw fungus growing on microscope lenses.
And we saw people who had a functional microscope but just didn't know how to even turn it on.
What grew out of that work and that trip was actually the idea of what we call Foldscopes.
So what is a Foldscope?
A Foldscope is a completely functional microscope, a platform for fluorescence, bright-field, polarization, projection, all kinds of advanced microscopy built purely by folding paper.
So, now you think, how is that possible?
I'm going to show you some examples here, and we will run through some of them.
It starts with a single sheet of paper.
What you see here is all the possible components to build a functional bright-field and fluorescence microscope.
So, there are three stages: There is the optical stage, the illumination stage and the mask-holding stage.
And there are micro optics at the bottom that's actually embedded in the paper itself.
What you do is, you take it on, and just like you are playing like a toy, which it is, I tab it off, and I break it off.
This paper has no instructions and no languages.
There is a code, a color code embedded, that tells you exactly how to fold that specific microscope.
When it's done, it looks something like this, has all the functionalities of a standard microscope, just like an XY stage, a place where a sample slide could go, for example right here.
We didn't want to change this, because this is the standard that's been optimized for over the years, and many health workers are actually used to this.
So this is what changes, but the standard stains all remain the same for many different diseases.
You pop this in.
There is an XY stage, and then there is a focusing stage, which is a flexure mechanism that's built in paper itself that allows us to move and focus the lenses by micron steps.
So what's really interesting about this object, and my students hate when I do this, but I'm going to do this anyway, is these are rugged devices.
I can turn it on and throw it on the floor and really try to stomp on it.
And they last, even though they're designed from a very flexible material, like paper.
Another fun fact is, this is what we actually send out there as a standard diagnostic tool, but here in this envelope I have 30 different foldscopes of different configurations all in a single folder.
And I'm going to pick one randomly.
This one, it turns out, is actually designed specifically for malaria, because it has the fluorescent filters built specifically for diagnosing malaria.
So the idea of very specific diagnostic microscopes comes out of this.
So up till now, you didn't actually see what I would see from one of these setups.
So what I would like to do is, if we could dim the lights, please, it turns out foldscopes are also projection microscopes.
I have these two microscopes that I'm going to turn -- go to the back of the wall -- and just project, and this way you will see exactly what I would see.
What you're looking at -- (Applause) — This is a cross-section of a compound eye, and when I'm going to zoom in closer, right there, I am going through the z-axis.
You actually see how the lenses are cut together in the cross-section pattern.
Another example, one of my favorite insects, I love to hate this one, is a mosquito, and you're seeing the antenna of a culex pipiens.
Right there.
All from the simple setup that I actually described.
So my wife has been field testing some of our microscopes by washing my clothes whenever I forget them in the dryer.
So it turns out they're waterproof, and -- (Laughter) — right here is just fluorescent water, and I don't know if you can actually see this.
This also shows you how the projection scope works.
You get to see the beam the way it's projected and bent.
Can we get the lights back on again?
So I'm quickly going to show you, since I'm running out of time, in terms of how much it costs for us to manufacture, the biggest idea was roll-to-roll manufacturing, so we built this out of 50 cents of parts and costs.
(Applause) And what this allows us to do is to think about a new paradigm in microscopy, which we call use-and-throw microscopy.
I'm going to give you a quick snapshot of some of the parts that go in.
Here is a sheet of paper.
This is when we were thinking about the idea.
This is an A4 sheet of paper.
These are the three stages that you actually see.
And the optical components, if you look at the inset up on the right, we had to figure out a way to manufacture lenses in paper itself at really high throughputs, so it uses a process of self-assembly and surface tension to build achromatic lenses in the paper itself.
So that's where the lenses go.
There are some light sources.
And essentially, in the end, all the parts line up because of origami, because of the fact that origami allows us micron-scale precision of optical alignment.
So even though this looks like a simple toy, the aspects of engineering that go in something like this are fairly sophisticated.
So here is another obvious thing that we would do, typically, if I was going to show that these microscopes are robust, is go to the third floor and drop it from the floor itself.
There it is, and it survives.
So for us, the next step actually is really finishing our field trials.
We are starting at the end of the summer.
We are at a stage where we'll be making thousands of microscopes.
That would be the first time where we would be doing field trials with the highest density of microscopes ever at a given place.
We've started collecting data for malaria, Chagas disease and giardia from patients themselves.
And I want to leave you with this picture.
I had not anticipated this before, but a really interesting link between hands-on science education and global health.
What are the tools that we're actually providing the kids who are going to fight this monster soup for tomorrow?
I would love for them to be able to just print out a Foldscope and carry them around in their pockets.
Thank you.
(Applause)
[This talk contains graphic images Viewer discretion is advised] I collect objects.
I collect branding irons that were used to mark slaves as property.
I collect shackles for adults and restraints for adults as well as children.
I collect lynching postcards.
Yes, they depict lynchings.
They also depict the massive crowds that attended these lynchings, and they are postcards that were also used for correspondence.
I collect proslavery books that portray black people as criminals or as animals without souls.
I brought you something today.
This is a ship's branding iron.
It was used to mark slaves.
Well, they actually were not slaves when they were marked.
They were in Africa.
But they were marked with an "S" to designate that they were going to be slaves when they were brought to the US and when they were brought to Europe.
Another object or image that captured my imagination when I was younger was a Klan robe.
Growing up in South Carolina, I would see Ku Klux Klan rallies occasionally, actually more than occasionally, and the memories of those events never really left my mind.
And I didn't really do anything with that imagery until 25 years later.
A few years ago, I started researching the Klan, the three distinct waves of the Klan, the second one in particular.
The second wave of the Klan had more than five million active members, which was five percent of the population at the time, which was also the population of New York City at the time.
The Klan robe factory in the Buckhead neighborhood of Georgia was so busy it became a 24-hour factory to keep up with orders.
They kept 20,000 robes on hand at all time to keep up with the demand.
As a collector of artifacts and as an artist, I really wanted a Klan robe to be part of my collection, because artifacts and objects tell stories, but I really couldn't find one that was really good quality.
What is a black man to do in America when he can't find the quality Klan robe that he's looking for?
(Laughter) So I had no other choice.
I decided I was going to make the best quality Klan robes in America.
These are not your traditional Klan robes you would see at any KKK rally.
I used kente cloth, I used camouflage, spandex, burlap, silks, satins and different patterns.
I make them for different age groups; I make them for young kids as well as toddlers.
I even made one for an infant.
After making so many robes, I realized that the policies the Klan had in place or wanted to have in place a hundred years ago are in place today.
We have segregated schools, neighborhoods, workplaces, and it's not the people wearing hoods that are keeping these policies in place.
My work is about the long-term impact of slavery.
We're not just dealing with the residue of systemic racism.
It's the basis of every single thing we do.
Again we have intentionally segregated neighborhoods, workplaces and schools.
We have voter suppression.
We have disproportionate representation of minorities incarcerated.
We have environmental racism. We have police brutality.
I brought you a few things today.
The stealth aspect of racism is part of its power.
When you're discriminated against, you can't always prove you're being discriminated against.
Racism has the power to hide, and when it hides, it's kept safe because it blends in.
I created this robe to illustrate that.
The basis of capitalism in America is slavery.
Slaves were the capital in capitalism.
The first Grand Wizard in 1868, Nathan Bedford Forrest, was a Confederate soldier and a millionaire slave trader.
The wealth that was created from chattel slavery -- that's slaves as property -- would boggle the mind.
Cotton sales alone in 1860 equalled 200 million dollars.
That would equal five billion dollars today.
A lot of that wealth can be seen today through generational wealth.
Oh, I forgot the other crops as well.
You have indigo, rice and tobacco.
In 2015, I made one robe a week for the entire year.
After making 75 robes, I had an epiphany.
I have a realization that white supremacy is there, but the biggest force of white supremacy is not the KKK, it's the normalization of systemic racism.
There was something else I realized.
The robes had no more power over me at all.
But if we as a people collectively look at these objects -- branding irons, shackles, robes -- and realize that they are part of our history, we can find a way to where they have no more power over us.
If we look at systemic racism and acknowledge that it's sown into the very fabric of who we are as a country, then we can actually do something about the intentional segregation in our schools, neighborhoods and workplaces.
But then and only then can we actually address and confront this legacy of slavery and dismantle this ugly legacy of slavery.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
This is a vending machine in Los Angeles.
It's in a shopping mall, and it sells fish eggs.
It's a caviar-vending machine.
This is the Art-o-mat, an art-vending machine that sells small artistic creations by different artists, usually on small wood blocks or matchboxes, in limited edition.
This is Oliver Medvedik.
He is not a vending machine, but he is one of the founders of Genspace, a community biolab in Brooklyn, New York, where anybody can go and take classes and learn how to do things like grow E. coli that glows in the dark or learn how to take strawberry DNA.
In fact, I saw Oliver do one of these strawberry DNA extractions about a year ago, and this is what led me into this bizarre path that I'm going to talk to you right now.
I'd never thought about DNA being a beautiful thing before, before I saw it in this form.
A lot of people, especially in the art community, don't necessarily engage in science in this way.
I instantly joined Genspace after this, and asked Oliver, "If we can do this with strawberries, can we do this with people?"
About 10 minutes later, we were both spitting in vials, coming up with a protocol for human DNA extraction.
I started doing this on my own.
And I was at a dinner party with some artist friends, and I was telling them about this project, and they couldn't believe that you could actually see DNA.
So I said, all right, let's get out some supplies right now.
And I started having these bizarre dinner parties on Friday nights, where people would come over and we'd do DNA extractions, and I would capture them on video, because it created this kind of funny portrait as well.
(Laughter) These are people who don't necessarily regularly engage with science.
You can kind of tell from their reactions.
(Laughter) But they became fascinated by it, and it was really exciting for me to see them get excited about science.
And so I started doing this regularly.
(Laughter) It's an odd thing to do with your Friday nights, but this is what I started doing.
I started collecting a whole group of my friends' DNA in small vials and categorizing them.
This is what that looked like.
And it started to make me think about a couple of things.
First, this looked a lot like my Facebook wall.
So in a way, I created sort of a genetic social network.
And the second thing was, one time a friend came over and looked at this on my table and was like, "Uh ... why are they numbered?
And I hadn't even thought about that.
They were just numbered because that was the order that I extracted the DNA in.
But that made me think about collecting toys, and what's going on right now in the toy world with blind box toys, and being able to collect these rare toys.
You buy these boxes, but aren't sure what's going to be inside.
But when you open them, you have different rarities of the toys.
I thought that was interesting; I thought about this and the caviar vending machine and the Art-o-mat all together.
And for some reason, I was one night drawing a vending machine, thinking of doing paintings of a vending machine.
The vial of my DNA was sitting there, and I saw a beautiful collaboration between the strands of DNA and the coils of a vending machine.
So I decided to create an art installation called the DNA Vending Machine.
Here it is.
(Music) [DNA Vending Machine is an art installation about our increasing access to biotechnology.] (Music) [For a reasonable cost, you can purchase a sample of human DNA from a traditional vending machine.] (Music) [Each sample comes packaged with a collectible limited edition portrait of the human specimen.] (Music) [DNA Vending Machine treats DNA as a collectible material and brings to light legal issues over the ownership of DNA.] (Music ends) Gabriel Barcia-Colombo: The DNA Vending Machine is currently in a couple of galleries in New York, and it's selling out pretty well.
We're in the first edition of 100 pieces, hoping to do another edition pretty soon.
I'd like to get it into more of a metro hub, like Grand Central or Penn Station, next to some of the other vending machines in that location.
But really, with this and a lot of my art projects, I want to ask the audience a question: When biotechnology and DNA sequencing becomes as cheap as, say, laser cutting or 3D printing or buying caviar from a vending machine, will you submit your sample of DNA to be part of the vending machine?
How much will these samples be worth?
Will you buy someone else's sample?
And what will you be able to do with that sample?
Thank you.
(Applause)
So my moment of truth did not come all at once.
In 2010, I had the chance to be considered for promotion from my job as director of policy planning at the U.S. State Department.
This was my moment to lean in, to push myself forward for what are really only a handful of the very top foreign policy jobs, and I had just finished a big, 18-month project for Secretary Clinton, successfully, and I knew I could handle a bigger job.
The woman I thought I was would have said yes.
But I had been commuting for two years between Washington and Princeton, New Jersey, where my husband and my two teenage sons lived, and it was not going well.
I tried on the idea of eking out another two years in Washington, or maybe uprooting my sons from their school and my husband from his work and asking them to join me.
But deep down, I knew that the right decision was to go home, even if I didn't fully recognize the woman who was making that choice.
That was a decision based on love and responsibility.
I couldn't keep watching my oldest son make bad choices without being able to be there for him when and if he needed me.
But the real change came more gradually.
Over the next year, while my family was righting itself, I started to realize that even if I could go back into government, I didn't want to.
I didn't want to miss the last five years that my sons were at home.
I finally allowed myself to accept what was really most important to me, not what I was conditioned to want or maybe what I conditioned myself to want, and that decision led to a reassessment of the feminist narrative that I grew up with and have always championed.
I am still completely committed to the cause of male-female equality, but let's think about what that equality really means, and how best to achieve it.
I always accepted the idea that the most respected and powerful people in our society are men at the top of their careers, so that the measure of male-female equality ought to be how many women are in those positions: prime ministers, presidents, CEOs, directors, managers, Nobel laureates, leaders.
I still think we should do everything we possibly can to achieve that goal.
But that's only half of real equality, and I now think we're never going to get there unless we recognize the other half.
I suggest that real equality, full equality, does not just mean valuing women on male terms.
It means creating a much wider range of equally respected choices for women and for men.
And to get there, we have to change our workplaces, our policies and our culture.
In the workplace, real equality means valuing family just as much as work, and understanding that the two reinforce each other.
As a leader and as a manager, I have always acted on the mantra, if family comes first, work does not come second -- life comes together.
If you work for me, and you have a family issue, I expect you to attend to it, and I am confident, and my confidence has always been borne out, that the work will get done, and done better.
Workers who have a reason to get home to care for their children or their family members are more focused, more efficient, more results-focused.
And breadwinners who are also caregivers have a much wider range of experiences and contacts.
Think about a lawyer who spends part of his time at school events for his kids talking to other parents.
He's much more likely to bring in new clients for his firm than a lawyer who never leaves his office.
And caregiving itself develops patience -- a lot of patience -- and empathy, creativity, resilience, adaptability.
Those are all attributes that are ever more important in a high-speed, horizontal, networked global economy.
The best companies actually know this.
The companies that win awards for workplace flexibility in the United States include some of our most successful corporations, and a 2008 national study on the changing workforce showed that employees in flexible and effective workplaces are more engaged with their work, they're more satisfied and more loyal, they have lower levels of stress and higher levels of mental health.
And a 2012 study of employers showed that deep, flexible practices actually lowered operating costs and increased adaptability in a global service economy.
So you may think that the privileging of work over family is only an American problem.
Sadly, though, the obsession with work is no longer a uniquely American disease.
Twenty years ago, when my family first started going to Italy, we used to luxuriate in the culture of siesta.
Siesta is not just about avoiding the heat of the day.
It's actually just as much about embracing the warmth of a family lunch.
Now, when we go, fewer and fewer businesses close for siesta, reflecting the advance of global corporations and 24-hour competition.
So making a place for those we love is actually a global imperative.
In policy terms, real equality means recognizing that the work that women have traditionally done is just as important as the work that men have traditionally done, no matter who does it.
Think about it: Breadwinning and caregiving are equally necessary for human survival.
At least if we get beyond a barter economy, somebody has to earn an income and someone else has to convert that income to care and sustenance for loved ones.
Now most of you, when you hear me talk about breadwinning and caregiving, instinctively translate those categories into men's work and women's work.
And we don't typically challenge why men's work is advantaged.
But consider a same-sex couple like my friends Sarah and Emily.
They're psychiatrists.
They got married five years ago, and now they have two-year-old twins.
They love being mothers, but they also love their work, and they're really good at what they do.
So how are they going to divide up breadwinning and caregiving responsibilities?
Should one of them stop working or reduce hours to be home?
Or should they both change their practices so they can have much more flexible schedules?
And what criteria should they use to make that decision?
Is it who makes the most money or who is most committed to her career?
Or who has the most flexible boss?
The same-sex perspective helps us see that juggling work and family are not women's problems, they're family problems.
And Sarah and Emily are the lucky ones, because they have a choice about how much they want to work.
Millions of men and women have to be both breadwinners and caregivers just to earn the income they need, and many of those workers are scrambling.
They're patching together care arrangements that are inadequate and often actually unsafe.
If breadwinning and caregiving are really equal, then why shouldn't a government invest as much in an infrastructure of care as the foundation of a healthy society as it invests in physical infrastructure as the backbone of a successful economy?
The governments that get it -- no surprises here -- the governments that get it, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, provide universal child care, support for caregivers at home, school and early childhood education, protections for pregnant women, and care for the elderly and the disabled.
Those governments invest in that infrastructure the same way they invest in roads and bridges and tunnels and trains.
Those societies also show you that breadwinning and caregiving reinforce each other.
They routinely rank among the top 15 countries of the most globally competitive economies, but at the same time, they rank very high on the OECD Better Life Index.
In fact, they rank higher than other governments, like my own, the U.S., or Switzerland, that have higher average levels of income but lower rankings on work-life balance.
So changing our workplaces and building infrastructures of care would make a big difference, but we're not going to get equally valued choices unless we change our culture, and the kind of cultural change required means re-socializing men.
(Applause) Increasingly in developed countries, women are socialized to believe that our place is no longer only in the home, but men are actually still where they always were.
Men are still socialized to believe that they have to be breadwinners, that to derive their self-worth from how high they can climb over other men on a career ladder.
The feminist revolution still has a long way to go.
It's certainly not complete.
But 60 years after "The Feminine Mystique" was published, many women actually have more choices than men do.
We can decide to be a breadwinner, a caregiver, or any combination of the two.
When a man, on the other hand, decides to be a caregiver, he puts his manhood on the line.
His friends may praise his decision, but underneath, they're scratching their heads.
Isn't the measure of a man his willingness to compete with other men for power and prestige?
And as many women hold that view as men do.
We know that lots of women still judge the attractiveness of a man based in large part on how successful he is in his career.
A woman can drop out of the work force and still be an attractive partner.
For a man, that's a risky proposition.
So as parents and partners, we should be socializing our sons and our husbands to be whatever they want to be, either caregivers or breadwinners.
We should be socializing them to make caregiving cool for guys.
(Applause) I can almost hear lots of you thinking, "No way."
But in fact, the change is actually already happening.
At least in the United States, lots of men take pride in cooking, and frankly obsess over stoves.
They are in the birthing rooms.
They take paternity leave when they can.
They can walk a baby or soothe a toddler just as well as their wives can, and they are increasingly doing much more of the housework.
Indeed, there are male college students now who are starting to say, "I want to be a stay-at-home dad."
That was completely unthinkable 50 or even 30 years ago.
And in Norway, where men have an automatic three month's paternity leave, but they lose it if they decide not to take it, a high government official told me that companies are starting to look at prospective male employees and raise an eyebrow if they didn't in fact take their leave when they had kids.
That means that it's starting to seem like a character defect not to want to be a fully engaged father.
So I was raised to believe that championing women's rights meant doing everything we could to get women to the top.
And I still hope that I live long enough to see men and women equally represented at all levels of the work force.
But I've come to believe that we have to value family every bit as much as we value work, and that we should entertain the idea that doing right by those we love will make all of us better at everything we do.
Thirty years ago, Carol Gilligan, a wonderful psychologist, studied adolescent girls and identified an ethic of care, an element of human nature every bit as important as the ethic of justice.
It turns out that "you don't care" is just as much a part of who we are as "that's not fair."
Bill Gates agrees.
He argues that the two great forces of human nature are self-interest and caring for others.
Let's bring them both together.
Let's make the feminist revolution a humanist revolution.
As whole human beings, we will be better caregivers and breadwinners.
You may think that can't happen, but I grew up in a society where my mother put out small vases of cigarettes for dinner parties, where blacks and whites used separate bathrooms, and where everybody claimed to be heterosexual.
Today, not so much.
The revolution for human equality can happen.
It is happening.
It will happen.
How far and how fast is up to us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Let me start by asking you a question, just with a show of hands: Who has an iPhone?
Who has an Android phone?
Who has a Blackberry?
Who will admit in public to having a Blackberry?
(Laughter) And let me guess, how many of you, when you arrived here, like me, went and bought a pay-as-you-go SIM card? Yeah?
I'll bet you didn't even know you're using African technology.
Pay-as-you-go was a technology, or an idea, pioneered in Africa by a company called Vodacom a good 15 years ago, and now, like franchising, pay-as-you-go is one of the most dominant forces of economic activity in the world.
So I'm going to talk about innovation in Africa, which I think is the purest form, innovation out of necessity.
But first, I'm going to ask you some other questions.
You don't have to put your hands up.
These are rhetorical.
Why did Nikola Tesla have to invent the alternating current that powers the lights in this building or the city that we're in?
Why did Henry Ford have to invent the production line to produce these Fords that came in anything as long as they were black?
And why did Eric Merrifield have to invent the dolos?
Blank stares. That is what a dolos looks like, and in the background, you can see Robben Island.
This is a small dolos, and Eric Merrifield is the most famous inventor you've never heard of.
In 1963, a storm ripped up the harbor in a small South African town called East London, and while he was watching his kids playing with toys made from oxen bones called dolosse, he had the idea for this.
It's a bit like a huge jumping jack, and they have used this in every harbor in the world as a breakwater.
The global shipping economy would not be possible without African technology like this.
So whenever you talk about Africa, you have to put up this picture of the world from space, and people go, "Look, it's the Dark Continent."
Actually, it isn't.
What it is is a map of innovation.
And it's really easy to see where innovation's going on.
All the places with lots of electricity, it isn't.
(Laughter) (Applause) And the reason it isn't is because everybody's watching television or playing Angry Birds.
(Laughter) (Applause) So where it's happening is in Africa.
Now, this is real innovation, not the way people have expropriated the word to talk about launching new products.
This is real innovation, and I define it as problem-solving.
People are solving real problems in Africa.
Why? Because we have to.
Because we have real problems.
And when we solve real problems for people, we solve them for the rest of the world at the same time.
So in California, everybody's really excited about a little square of plastic that you plug into a phone and you can swipe your credit card, and people say, "We've liberated the credit card from the point of sale terminal."
Fantastic. Why do you even need a credit card?
In Africa, we've been doing that for years, and we've been doing it on phones like this.
This is a picture I took at a place called Kitengela, about an hour south of Nairobi, and the thing that's so remarkable about the payment system that's been pioneered in Africa called M-Pesa is that it works on phones like this.
It works on every single phone possible, because it uses SMS.
You can pay bills with it, you can buy your groceries, you can pay your kids' school fees, and I'm told you can even bribe customs officials.
(Laughter) Something like 25 million dollars a day is transacted through M-Pesa.
Forty percent of Kenya's GDP moves through M-Pesa using phones like this.
And you think this is just a feature phone.
Actually it's the smartphone of Africa.
It's also a radio, and it's also a torch, and more than anything else, it has really superb battery life.
Why? Because that's what we need.
We have really severe energy problems in Africa.
By the way, you can update Facebook and send Gmail from a phone like this.
So we have found a way to use the available technology to send money via M-Pesa, which is a bit like a check system for the mobile age.
I come from Johannesburg, which is a mining town.
It's built on gold.
This is a picture I Instagrammed earlier.
And the difference today is that the gold of today is mobile.
If you think about the railroad system in North America and how that worked, first came the infrastructure, then came the industry around it, the brothels -- it's a bit like the Internet today, right? — and everything else that worked with it: bars, saloons, etc.
The gold of today is mobile, and mobile is the enabler that makes all of this possible.
So what are some of the things that you can do with it?
Well, this is by a guy called Bright Simons from Ghana, and what you do is you take medication, something that some people might spend their entire month's salary on, and you scratch off the code, and you send that to an SMS number, and it tells you if that is legitimate or if it's expired.
Really simple, really effective, really life-saving.
In Kenya, there's a service called iCow, which just sends you really important information about how to look after your dairy.
The dairy business in Kenya is a $463 million business, and the difference between a subsistence farmer and an abundance farmer is only a couple of liters of milk a day.
And if you can do that, you can rise out of poverty.
Really simple, using a basic phone.
If you don't have electricity, no problem!
We'll just make it out of old bicycle parts using a windmill, as William Kamkwamba did.
There's another great African that you've heard that's busy disrupting the automobile industry in the world.
He's also finding a way to reinvent solar power and the electricity industry in North America, and if he's lucky, he'll get us to Mars, hopefully in my lifetime.
He comes from Pretoria, the capital of [South Africa], about 50 kilometers from where I live.
So back to Joburg, which is sometimes called Egoli, which means City of Gold.
And not only is mobile the gold of today, I don't believe that the gold is under the ground.
I believe we are the gold.
Like you've heard the other economists say, we are at the point where China was when its boom years began, and that's where we're going.
So, you hear the West talk about innovation at the edge.
Well, of course it's happening at the edge, because in the middle, everybody's updating Facebook, or worse still, they're trying to understand Facebook's privacy settings.
(Laughter) This is not that catchy catchphrase.
This is innovation over the edge.
So, people like to call Africa a mobile-first continent, but actually it's mobile-only, so while everybody else is doing all of those things, we're solving the world's problems.
So there's only one thing left to say.
["You're welcome"] (Laughter) (Applause)
Anyone in the room thought about sex today?
(Laughter) Yeah, you did.
Thank you for putting your hand up over there.
Well, I'm here to provide you with some biological validation for your sordid daydreams.
I'm here to tell you a few things that you might not have known about wild sex.
Now, when humans think about sex, male and female forms are generally what come to mind, but for many millions of years, such specific categories didn't even exist.
Sex was a mere fusion of bodies or a trickle of DNA shared between two or more beings.
It wasn't until about 500 million years ago that we start to see structures akin to a penis or a thing that gives DNA out, and a vagina, something that receives it.
Now invariably, you're probably thinking about what belongs to our own species, these very familiar structures, but the diversity that we see in sexual structures in the animal kingdom that has evolved in response to the multitude of factors surrounding reproduction is pretty mind-blowing.
Penile diversity is especially profuse.
So this is a paper nautilus.
It's a close relative of squid and octopus, and males have a hectocotylus.
Just what is a hectocotylus?
A detachable, swimming penis.
It leaves the [body of the male], finds the female through pheromonal cues in the water, attaches itself to her body and deposits the sperm.
For many decades, biologists actually felt that the hectocotylus was a separate organism altogether.
Now, the tapir is a mammal from South America.
And the tapir has a prehensile penis.
It actually has a level of dexterity in its penis much akin to what we have with our hands.
And it uses this dexterity to bypass the vagina altogether and deposit sperm directly into the female's uterus, not to mention it's a pretty good size.
The biggest penis in the animal kingdom, however, is not that of the tapir.
The biggest penis-to-body-size ratio in the animal kingdom actually belongs to the meager beach barnacle, and this video is actually showing you what the human penis would look like if it were the same size as that of a barnacle.
(Laughter) Mm-hm. (Laughter) So with all of this diversity in structure, one might think, then, that penises are fitting neatly into vaginas all over the place for the purposes of successful reproduction.
Simply insert part A into slot B, and we should all be good to go.
But of course, that doesn't exactly happen, and that's because we can't just take form into account.
We have to think about function as well, and when it comes to sex, function relates to the contributions made by the gametes, or the sperm and the eggs.
And these contributions are far from equal.
Eggs are very expensive to make, so it makes sense for females to be very choosy about who she shares them with.
Sperm, on the other hand, is abundant and cheap, so it makes more sense for males to have a more-sex-is-better strategy when it comes to siring members of future generations.
So how do animals cope with these very incongruent needs between the sexes?
I mean, if a female doesn't choose a particular male, or if she has the ability to store sperm and she simply has enough, then it makes more sense for her to spend her time doing other biologically relevant things: avoiding predators, taking care of offspring, gathering and ingesting food.
This is, of course, bad news for any male who has yet to make a deposit in her sperm bank, and this sets the scene for some pretty drastic strategies for successful fertilization.
This is bedbug sex, and it's aptly termed traumatic insemination.
Males have a spiked, barbed penis that they literally stab into the female, and they don't stab it anywhere near her vagina.
They stab it anywhere in her body, and the sperm simply migrates through her hemolymph to her ovaries.
If a female gets too many stab wounds, or if a stab wound happens to become infected, she can actually die from it.
Now if you've ever been out for a nice, peaceful walk by the lake and happened to see some ducks having sex, you've undoubtedly been alarmed, because it looks like gang rape.
And quite frankly, that's exactly what it is.
A group of males will grab a female, hold her down, and ballistically ejaculate their spiral-shaped penis into her corkscrew-shaped vagina over and over and over again.
From flaccid to ejaculation in less than a second.
Now the female actually gets the last laugh, though, because she can actually manipulate her posture so as to allow the sperm of certain suitors better access to her ovaries.
Now, I like to share stories like this with my audiences because, yeah, we humans, we tend to think sex, sex is fun, sex is good, there's romance, and there's orgasm.
But orgasm didn't actually evolve until about 65 million years ago with the advent of mammals.
But some animals had it going on quite a bit before that.
There are some more primitive ways of pleasing one's partner.
Earwig males have either really large penile appendages or really small ones.
It's a very simple genetically inherited trait and the males are not otherwise any different.
Those that have long penile appendages are not bigger or stronger or otherwise any different at all.
So going back to our biological minds, then, we might think that females should choose to have sex with the guys that have the shorter appendages, because she can use her time for other things: avoiding predators, taking care of young, finding and ingesting food.
But biologists have repeatedly observed that females choose to have sex with the males that have the long appendages.
Why do they do this?
Well, according to the biological literature, "During copulation, the genitalia of certain males may elicit more favorable female responses through superior mechanical or stimulatory interaction with the female reproductive tract."
Mm-hm.
These are Mexican guppies, and what you see on their upper maxilla is an outgrowth of epidermal filaments, and these filaments basically form a fish mustache, if you will.
Now males have been observed to prod the female's genital opening prior to copulating with her, and in what I have lovingly termed the Magnum, P.I. hypothesis, females are overwhelmingly more likely to be found with males that have these fish mustaches.
A little guppy porn for you right there.
So we've seen very different strategies that males are using when it comes to winning a female partner.
We've seen a coercion strategy in which sexual structures are used in a forceful way to basically make a female have sex.
We've also seen a titillation strategy where males are actually pleasing their female partners into choosing them as a sex partner.
Now unfortunately, in the animal kingdom, it's the coercion strategy that we see time and time again.
It's very common in many phyla, from invertebrates to avian species, mammals, and, of course, even in primates.
Now interestingly, there are a few mammalian species in which females have evolved specialized genitalia that doesn't allow for sexual coercion to take place.
Female elephants and female hyenas have a penile clitoris, or an enlarged clitoral tissue that hangs externally, much like a penis, and in fact it's very difficult to sex these animals by merely looking at their external morphology.
So before a male can insert his penis into a female's vagina, she has to take this penile clitoris and basically inside-out it in her own body.
I mean, imagine putting a penis into another penis.
It's simply not going to happen unless the female is on board with the action.
Now, even more interesting is the fact that elephant and hyena societies are entirely matriarchal: they're run by females, groups of females, sisters, aunts and offspring, and when young males attain sexual maturity, they're turfed out of the group.
In hyena societies, adult males are actually the lowest on the social scale.
They can take part in a kill only after everybody else, including the offspring.
So it seems that when you take the penis power away from a male, you take away all the social power he has.
So what are my take-home messages from my talk today?
Well, sex is just so much more than insert part A into slot B and hope that the offspring run around everywhere.
The sexual strategies and reproductive structures that we see in the animal kingdom basically dictate how males and females will react to each other, which then dictates how populations and societies form and evolve.
So it may not be surprising to any of you that animals, including ourselves, spend a good amount of time thinking about sex, but what might surprise you is the extent to which so many other aspects of their lives and our lives are influenced by it.
So thank you, and happy daydreaming.
(Applause)
I'd like to talk today about how we can change our brains and our society.
Meet Joe.
Joe's 32 years old and a murderer.
I met Joe 13 years ago on the lifer wing at Wormwood Scrubs high-security prison in London.
I'd like you to imagine this place.
It looks and feels like it sounds: Wormwood Scrubs.
Built at the end of the Victorian Era by the inmates themselves, it is where England's most dangerous prisoners are kept.
These individuals have committed acts of unspeakable evil.
And I was there to study their brains.
I was part of a team of researchers from University College London, on a grant from the U.K. department of health.
My task was to study a group of inmates who had been clinically diagnosed as psychopaths.
That meant they were the most callous and the most aggressive of the entire prison population.
What lay at the root of their behavior?
Was there a neurological cause for their condition?
And if there was a neurological cause, could we find a cure?
So I'd like to speak about change, and especially about emotional change.
Growing up, I was always intrigued by how people change.
My mother, a clinical psychotherapist, would occasionally see patients at home in the evening.
She would shut the door to the living room, and I imagined magical things happened in that room.
At the age of five or six I would creep up in my pajamas and sit outside with my ear glued to the door.
On more than one occasion, I fell asleep and they had to push me out of the way at the end of the session.
And I suppose that's how I found myself walking into the secure interview room on my first day at Wormwood Scrubs.
Joe sat across a steel table and greeted me with this blank expression.
The prison warden, looking equally indifferent, said, "Any trouble, just press the red buzzer, and we'll be around as soon as we can."
(Laughter) I sat down.
The heavy metal door slammed shut behind me.
I looked up at the red buzzer far behind Joe on the opposite wall.
(Laughter) I looked at Joe.
Perhaps detecting my concern, he leaned forward, and said, as reassuringly as he could, "Ah, don't worry about the buzzer, it doesn't work anyway."
(Laughter) Over the subsequent months, we tested Joe and his fellow inmates, looking specifically at their ability to categorize different images of emotion.
And we looked at their physical response to those emotions.
So, for example, when most of us look at a picture like this of somebody looking sad, we instantly have a slight, measurable physical response: increased heart rate, sweating of the skin.
Whilst the psychopaths in our study were able to describe the pictures accurately, they failed to show the emotions required.
They failed to show a physical response.
It was as though they knew the words but not the music of empathy.
So we wanted to look closer at this to use MRI to image their brains.
That turned out to be not such an easy task.
Imagine transporting a collection of clinical psychopaths across central London in shackles and handcuffs in rush hour, and in order to place each of them in an MRI scanner, you have to remove all metal objects, including shackles and handcuffs, and, as I learned, all body piercings.
After some time, however, we had a tentative answer.
These individuals were not just the victims of a troubled childhood.
There was something else.
People like Joe have a deficit in a brain area called the amygdala.
The amygdala is an almond-shaped organ deep within each of the hemispheres of the brain.
It is thought to be key to the experience of empathy.
Normally, the more empathic a person is, the larger and more active their amygdala is.
Our population of inmates had a deficient amygdala, which likely led to their lack of empathy and to their immoral behavior.
So let's take a step back.
Normally, acquiring moral behavior is simply part of growing up, like learning to speak.
At the age of six months, virtually every one of us is able to differentiate between animate and inanimate objects.
At the age of 12 months, most children are able to imitate the purposeful actions of others.
So for example, your mother raises her hands to stretch, and you imitate her behavior.
At first, this isn't perfect.
I remember my cousin Sasha, two years old at the time, looking through a picture book and licking one finger and flicking the page with the other hand, licking one finger and flicking the page with the other hand.
(Laughter) Bit by bit, we build the foundations of the social brain so that by the time we're three, four years old, most children, not all, have acquired the ability to understand the intentions of others, another prerequisite for empathy.
The fact that this developmental progression is universal, irrespective of where you live in the world or which culture you inhabit, strongly suggests that the foundations of moral behavior are inborn.
If you doubt this, try, as I've done, to renege on a promise you've made to a four-year-old.
You will find that the mind of a four-year old is not naïve in the slightest.
It is more akin to a Swiss army knife with fixed mental modules finely honed during development and a sharp sense of fairness.
The early years are crucial.
There seems to be a window of opportunity, after which mastering moral questions becomes more difficult, like adults learning a foreign language.
That's not to say it's impossible.
A recent, wonderful study from Stanford University showed that people who have played a virtual reality game in which they took on the role of a good and helpful superhero actually became more caring and helpful towards others afterwards.
Now I'm not suggesting we endow criminals with superpowers, but I am suggesting that we need to find ways to get Joe and people like him to change their brains and their behavior, for their benefit and for the benefit of the rest of us.
So can brains change?
For over 100 years, neuroanatomists and later neuroscientists held the view that after initial development in childhood, no new brain cells could grow in the adult human brain.
The brain could only change within certain set limits.
That was the dogma.
But then, in the 1990s, studies starting showing, following the lead of Elizabeth Gould at Princeton and others, studies started showing the evidence of neurogenesis, the birth of new brain cells in the adult mammalian brain, first in the olfactory bulb, which is responsible for our sense of smell, then in the hippocampus involving short-term memory, and finally in the amygdala itself.
In order to understand how this process works, I left the psychopaths and joined a lab in Oxford specializing in learning and development.
Instead of psychopaths, I studied mice, because the same pattern of brain responses appears across many different species of social animals.
So if you rear a mouse in a standard cage, a shoebox, essentially, with cotton wool, alone and without much stimulation, not only does it not thrive, but it will often develop strange, repetitive behaviors.
This naturally sociable animal will lose its ability to bond with other mice, even becoming aggressive when introduced to them.
However, mice reared in what we called an enriched environment, a large habitation with other mice with wheels and ladders and areas to explore, demonstrate neurogenesis, the birth of new brain cells, and as we showed, they also perform better on a range of learning and memory tasks.
Now, they don't develop morality to the point of carrying the shopping bags of little old mice across the street, but their improved environment results in healthy, sociable behavior.
Mice reared in a standard cage, by contrast, not dissimilar, you might say, from a prison cell, have dramatically lower levels of new neurons in the brain.
It is now clear that the amygdala of mammals, including primates like us, can show neurogenesis.
In some areas of the brain, more than 20 percent of cells are newly formed.
We're just beginning to understand what exact function these cells have, but what it implies is that the brain is capable of extraordinary change way into adulthood.
However, our brains are also exquisitely sensitive to stress in our environment.
Stress hormones, glucocorticoids, released by the brain, suppress the growth of these new cells.
The more stress, the less brain development, which in turn causes less adaptability and causes higher stress levels.
This is the interplay between nature and nurture in real time in front of our eyes.
When you think about it, it is ironic that our current solution for people with stressed amygdalae is to place them in an environment that actually inhibits any chance of further growth.
Of course, imprisonment is a necessary part of the criminal justice system and of protecting society.
Our research does not suggest that criminals should submit their MRI scans as evidence in court and get off the hook because they've got a faulty amygdala.
The evidence is actually the other way.
Because our brains are capable of change, we need to take responsibility for our actions, and they need to take responsibility for their rehabilitation.
One way such rehabilitation might work is through restorative justice programs.
Here victims, if they choose to participate, and perpetrators meet face to face in safe, structured encounters, and the perpetrator is encouraged to take responsibility for their actions, and the victim plays an active role in the process.
In such a setting, the perpetrator can see, perhaps for the first time, the victim as a real person with thoughts and feelings and a genuine emotional response.
This stimulates the amygdala and may be a more effective rehabilitative practice than simple incarceration.
Such programs won't work for everyone, but for many, it could be a way to break the frozen sea within.
So what can we do now?
How can we apply this knowledge?
I'd like to leave you with three lessons that I learned.
The first thing that I learned was that we need to change our mindset.
Since Wormwood Scrubs was built 130 years ago, society has advanced in virtually every aspect, in the way we run our schools, our hospitals.
Yet the moment we speak about prisons, it's as though we're back in Dickensian times, if not medieval times.
For too long, I believe, we've allowed ourselves to be persuaded of the false notion that human nature cannot change, and as a society, it's costing us dearly.
We know that the brain is capable of extraordinary change, and the best way to achieve that, even in adults, is to change and modulate our environment.
The second thing I have learned is that we need to create an alliance of people who believe that science is integral to bringing about social change.
It's easy enough for a neuroscientist to place a high-security inmate in an MRI scanner.
Well actually, that turns out not to be so easy, but ultimately what we want to show is whether we're able to reduce the reoffending rates.
In order to answer complex questions like that, we need people of different backgrounds -- lab-based scientists and clinicians, social workers and policy makers, philanthropists and human rights activists — to work together.
Finally, I believe we need to change our own amygdalae, because this issue goes to the heart not just of who Joe is, but who we are.
We need to change our view of Joe as someone wholly irredeemable, because if we see Joe as wholly irredeemable, how is he going to see himself as any different?
In another decade, Joe will be released from Wormwood Scrubs.
Will he be among the 70 percent of inmates who end up reoffending and returning to the prison system?
Wouldn't it be better if, while serving his sentence, Joe was able to train his amygdala, which would stimulate the growth of new brain cells and connections, so that he will be able to face the world once he gets released?
Surely, that would be in the interest of all of us.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
Once every 12 months, the world's largest human migration happens in China.
Over the 40-day travel period of Chinese New Year, three billion trips are taken, as families reunite and celebrate.
Now, the most strenuous of these trips are taken by the country's 290 million migrant workers, for many of whom this is the one chance a year to go home and see parents and their left-behind children.
But the travel options are very limited; plane tickets cost nearly half of their monthly salary.
So most of them, they choose the train.
Their average journey is 700 kilometers.
The average travel time is 15 and a half hours.
And the country's tracks now have to handle 390 million travelers every Spring Festival.
Until recently, migrant workers would have to queue for long hours -- sometimes days -- just to buy tickets, often only to be fleeced by scalpers.
And they still had to deal with near-stampede conditions when travel day finally arrived.
But technology has started to ease this experience.
Mobile and digital tickets now account for 70 percent of sales, greatly reducing the lines at train stations.
Digital ID scanners have replaced manual checks, expediting the boarding process, and artificial intelligence is deployed across the network to optimize travel routes.
New solutions have been invented.
China's largest taxi-hailing platform, called Didi Chuxing, launched a new service called Hitch, which matches car owners who are driving home with passengers looking for long-distance routes.
In just its third year, Hitch served 30 million trips in this past holiday season, the longest of which was further than 1,500 miles.
That's about the distance from Miami to Boston.
This enormous need of migrant workers has powered fast upgrade and innovation across the country's transport systems.
Now, the Chinese internet has developed in both familiar and unfamiliar ways.
Just like in Silicon Valley, some of the seismic shifts in technology and consumer behavior have been driven by academic research, have been driven by enterprise desires, with the whims of privilege and youth sprinkled in every once in a while.
I am a product of the American tech industry, both as a consumer and a corporate leader.
So I am well acquainted with this type of fuel.
But about a year and a half ago, I moved from my home in New York City to Hong Kong to become the CEO of the South China Morning Post.
And from this new vantage point, I've observed something that is far less familiar to me, propelling so much of China's innovation and many of its entrepreneurs.
It is an overwhelming need economy that is serving an underprivileged populous, which has been separated for 30 years from China's economic boom.
The stark gaps that exist between the rich and the poor, between urban and rural or the academic and the unschooled -- these gaps, they form a soil that's ready for some incredible empowerment.
So when capital and investment become focused on the needs of people who are hanging to the bottom rungs of an economic ladder, that's when we start to see the internet truly become a job creator, an education enabler and in many other ways, a path forward.
Of course, China is not the only place where this alternative fuel exists, nor the only place where it is possible.
But because of the country's sheer scale and status as a rising superpower, the needs of its population have created an opportunity for truly compelling impact.
When explaining the rapid growth of the Chinese tech industry, many observers will cite two reasons.
The first is the 1.4 billion people that call China home.
The second is the government's active participation -- or pervasive intervention, depending on how you view it.
Now, the central authorities have spent heavily on network infrastructure over the years, creating an attractive environment for investment.
At the same time, they've insisted on standards and regulation, which has led to fast consensus and therefore, fast adoption.
The world's largest pool of tech talent exists because of the abundance of educational incentives.
And local, domestic companies, in the past, have been protected from international competition by market controls.
Of course, you cannot observe the Chinese internet without finding widespread censorship and very serious concerns about dystopian monitoring.
As an example: China is in the process of rolling out a social credit rating that will cover its entire population, rewarding and restricting citizens, based on highly qualitative characteristics like honesty and integrity.
At the same time, China is deploying facial recognition across many of its 170 million closed-circuit cameras.
Artificial intelligence is being used to predict crime and terrorism in Xinjiang province, where the Muslim minority is already under constant surveillance.
Yet, the internet has continued to grow, and it is so big -- much bigger than I think most of us realize.
By the end of 2017, the Chinese internet population had reached 772 million users.
That's larger than the populations of the United States, Russia, of Germany, of the United Kingdom, of France and Canada combined.
Ninety-eight percent of them are active on mobile.
Ninety-two percent of them use messaging apps.
There are now 650 million digital news consumers, 580 million digital video consumers, and the country's largest e-commerce platform, Taobao, now boasts 580 million monthly active users.
It's about 80 percent larger than Amazon.
On-demand travel, between bikes and cars, now accounts for 10 billion trips a year in China.
That's two-thirds of all trips taken around the world.
So it's a very mixed bag.
The internet exists in a restricted, arguably manipulated form within China, yet it is massive and has vastly improved the lives of its citizens.
So even in its imperfection, the growth of the Chinese internet should not be dismissed, and it's worthy of our closer examination.
Let me tell you two other stories today.
Luo Zhaoliu is a 34-year-old engineer from Jiangxi province.
Now, his home region used to be extremely important to the Communist party because this was the birthplace of the Red Army.
But over the decades, because of its separation from the economic and manufacturing centers of the country, it has slid into irrelevance.
Luo, like so many in his generation, left home at a young age to look for work in a major city.
He ended up in Shenzhen, which is one of China's tech hubs.
As the young migrate, these rural villages are left with only elderly, who are really struggling to elevate themselves above abject poverty.
After nine years, Luo decided to return to Jiangxi in 2017, because he believed that the booming e-commerce marketplace in China could help him revive his village.
Like many rural communities, Luo's home specialized in a very specific provincial craft -- making fermented bean curd, in this case.
So he started a small factory and started selling his locally made goods online.
There have been many years of consumption growth across China's major cities.
But recently, technology has been driving an explosion in craft goods sales among China's middle and upper classes.
WeChat and other e-commerce platforms allow rural producers to market and sell their goods far beyond their original distribution areas.
Research companies actually track this impact by counting what is called "Taobao villages."
This is any rural village where at least 10 percent of its households are selling goods online and making a certain amount of revenue.
And the growth has been significant in the last few years.
There were just 20 Taobao villages in 2013, 212 in 2014, 780 in 2015, 1,300 in 2016 and over 2,100 at the end of 2017.
They now account for nearly half a million active online stores, 19 billion dollars in annual sales and 1.3 million new jobs created.
In Luo's first year back home, he was able to employ 15 villagers.
And he sold about 60,000 units of fermented bean curd.
He expects to hire 30 more people in the next year, as his demand rapidly rises.
There are 60 million left-behind children scattered across China's rural landscape.
And they grow up with at least one parent far away from home, as a migrant worker.
Alongside all the general hardships of rural life, they often have to travel vast and dangerous distances just to get to school.
They account for 30 percent of the country's primary and high school students.
Ten-year-old Chang Wenxuan is one of these students.
He walks an hour each way every single day to school, across these deep ravines, in an isolated landscape.
But when he arrives at the small farming village in Gansu province, he will find just two other students in this entire school.
Now, Chang's school is one of 1,000 in Gansu alone that has less than five registered students.
So with limited student interaction, with underqualified teachers and schoolhouses that are barely furnished and not insulated, rural students have long been disadvantaged, with almost no path to higher education.
But Chang's future has been dramatically shifted with the installation of a “Sunshine Classroom.” He's now part of a digital classroom of 100 students across 28 different schools, taught by qualified and certified teachers live-streaming from hundreds of miles away.
He has access to new subjects like music and art, to new friends and to experiences that extend far beyond his home.
Recently, Chang even got to visit the Frederiksborg Castle museum in Denmark -- virtually, of course.
Now, online education has existed for many years outside of China.
But it has never reached truly transformative scale, likely because traditional education systems in other tech centers of the world are far more advanced and far more stable.
But China's extreme terrain and size have created an enormous and immediate need for innovation.
There's a tech start-up in Shenzhen that grew to 300,000 students in just one year.
And by our best estimation at the Post, there are now 55 million rural students across China that are addressable and accessible by live-streaming classes.
This market of need is larger than the entire US student population between kindergarten and grade 12.
So I'm extremely encouraged to find out that private investment in ed-tech in China now exceeds one billion dollars a year, with another 30 billion dollars in public funding that is committed between now and 2020.
As the Chinese internet continues to grow, even in its imperfection and restrictions and controls, the lives of its once-forgotten populations have been irrevocably elevated.
There is a focus on populations of need, not of want, that has driven a lot of the curiosity, the creativity and the development that we see.
And there's still more to come.
In America, internet population, or penetration, has now reached 88 percent.
In China, the internet has still only reached 56 percent of the populous.
That means there are over 600 million people who are still offline and disconnected.
That's nearly twice the US population.
An enormous opportunity.
Wherever this alternative fuel exists, be it in China or Africa, Southeast Asia or the American heartland, we should endeavor to follow it with capital and with effort, driving both economic and societal impact all over the world.
Just imagine for a minute what more could be possible if the global needs of the underserved become the primary focus of our inventions.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you all to think about the third word that was ever said about you -- or, if you were delivering, about the person you were delivering.
And you can all mouth it if you want or say it out loud.
It was -- the first two were, "It's a ..."
(Laughter) Well, it shows you that -- I also deal with issues where there's not certainty of whether it's a girl or a boy, so the mixed answer was very appropriate.
Of course, now the answer often comes not at birth but at the ultrasound, unless the prospective parents choose to be surprised, like we all were.
But I want you to think about what it is that leads to that statement on the third word, because the third word is a description of your sex.
And by that I mean, made by a description of your genitals.
Now, as a pediatric endocrinologist, I used to be very, very involved and still somewhat am, in cases in which there are mismatches in the externals or between the externals and the internals, and we literally have to figure out what is the description of your sex.
But there is nothing that is definable at the time of birth that would define you.
And when I talk about definition, I'm talking about your sexual orientation.
We don't say, "It's a ... gay boy!"
"A lesbian girl!"
Those situations don't really define themselves more until the second decade of life.
Nor do they define your gender, which, as different from your anatomic sex, describes your self-concept: Do you see yourself as a male or female, or somewhere in the spectrum in between?
That sometimes shows up in the first decade of life, but it can be very confusing for parents, because it is quite normative for children to act in a cross-gender play and way, and, in fact, there are studies that show that even 80 percent of children who act in that fashion will not persist in wanting to be the opposite gender at the time when puberty begins.
But, at the time that puberty begins -- that means between about age 10 to 12 in girls, 12 to 14 in boys -- with breast budding, or two to three times' increase in the gonads in the case of genetic males, by that particular point, the child who says they are in the absolute wrong body is almost certain to be transgender and is extremely unlikely to change those feelings, no matter how anybody tries reparative therapy or any other noxious things.
Now, this is relatively rare, so I had relatively little personal experience with this.
And my experience was more typical, only because I had an adolescent practice.
And I saw someone age 24, genetically female, went through Harvard with three male roommates who knew the whole story, a registrar who always listed his name on course lists as a male name, and came to me after graduating, saying, "Help me. I know you know a lot of endocrinology."
And indeed, I've treated a lot of people who were born without gonads.
This wasn't rocket science.
But I made a deal with him: "I'll treat you if you teach me."
And so he did.
And what an education I got from taking care of all the members of his support group.
And then I got really confused, because I thought it was relatively easy at that age to just give people the hormones of the gender in which they were affirming.
But then my patient married, and he married a woman who had been born as a male, had married as a male, had two children, then went through a transition into female.
And now this delightful female was attached to my male patient -- in fact, got legally married, because they showed up as a man and a woman, and who knew, right?
(Laughter) And I was confused -- "Does this make so-and-so gay?
Does this make so-and-so straight?"
I was getting sexual orientation confused with gender identity.
And my patient said to me, "Look, look, look.
If you just think of the following, you'll get it right: Sexual orientation is who you go to bed with.
Gender identity is who you go to bed as."
(Laughter) And I subsequently learned from the many adults -- I took care of about 200 adults -- I learned from them that if I didn't peek as to who their partner was in the waiting room, I would never be able to guess better than chance, whether they were gay, straight, bi or asexual in their affirmed gender.
In other words, one thing has absolutely nothing to do with the other.
And the data show it.
Now, as I took care of the 200 adults, I found it extremely painful.
These people -- many of them -- had to give up so much of their lives.
Sometimes their parents would reject them, siblings, their own children, and then their divorcing spouse would forbid them from seeing their children.
It was so awful, but why did they do it at 40 and 50?
Because they felt they had to affirm themselves before they would kill themselves.
And indeed, the rate of suicide among untreated transgendered people is among the highest in the world.
So, what to do?
I was intrigued, in going to a conference in Holland, where they are experts in this, and saw the most remarkable thing.
They were treating young adolescents after giving them the most intense psychometric testing of gender, and they were treating them by blocking the puberty that they didn't want.
Because basically, kids look about the same, each sex, until they go through puberty, at which point, if you feel you're in the wrong sex, you feel like Pinocchio becoming a donkey.
The fantasy that you had that your body will change to be who you want it to be, with puberty, actually is nullified by the puberty you get.
And they fall apart.
So that's why putting the puberty on hold -- why on hold?
You can't just give them the opposite hormones that young.
They'll end up stunted in growth, and you think you can have a meaningful conversation about the fertility effects of such treatment with a 10-year-old girl, a 12-year-old boy?
So this buys time in the diagnostic process for four or five years, so that they can work it out.
They can have more and more testing, they can live without feeling their bodies are running away from them.
And then, in a program they call 12-16-18, around age 12 is when they give the blocking hormones, and then at age 16, with retesting, they re-qualify to receive -- now remember, the blocking hormones are reversible, but when you give the hormones of the opposite sex, you now start spouting breasts and facial hair and voice change, depending on what you're using, and those effects are permanent, or require surgery to remove, or electrolysis, and you can never really affect the voice.
So this is serious, and this is 15-, 16-year-old stuff.
And then at 18, they're eligible for surgery.
And while there's no good surgery for females to males genitally, the male-to-female surgery has fooled gynecologists.
That's how good it can be.
So I looked at how the patients were doing, and I looked at patients who just looked like everybody else, except they were pubertally delayed.
But once they gave them the hormones consistent with the gender they affirm, they look beautiful.
They look normal.
You would never be able to pick them out in a crowd.
So at that point, I decided I'm going to do this.
This is really where the pediatric endocrine realm comes in, because, in fact, if you're going to deal with it in kids aged 10 to 14, that's pediatric endocrinology.
So I brought some kids in, and this now became the standard of care, and the [Boston] Children's Hospital was behind it.
By my showing them the kids before and after, people who never got treated and people who wished to be treated, and pictures of the Dutch -- they came to me and said, "You've got to do something for these kids."
Well, where were these kids before?
They were out there suffering, is where they were.
So we started a program in 2007.
It became the first program of its kind -- but it's really of the Dutch kind -- in North America.
And since then, we have 160 patients.
Did they come from Afghanistan? No.
75 percent of them came from within 150 miles of Boston.
And some came from England.
Jackie had been abused in the Midlands, in England.
She's 12 years old there, she was living as a girl, but she was being beaten up.
It was a horror show, they had to homeschool her.
And the reason the British were coming was because they would not treat anybody with anything under age 16, which means they were consigning them to an adult body no matter what happened, even if they tested them well.
Jackie, on top of it, was, by virtue of skeletal markings, destined to be six feet five.
And yet, she had just begun a male puberty.
Well, I did something a little bit innovative, because I do know hormones, and that estrogen is much more potent in closing epiphyses, the growth plates, and stopping growth, than testosterone is.
So we blocked her testosterone with a blocking hormone, but we added estrogen, not at 16, but at 13.
And so here she is at 16, on the left.
And on her 16th birthday, she went to Thailand, where they would do a genital plastic surgery.
They will do it at 18 now.
And she ended up 5'11".
But more than that, she has normal breast size, because by blocking testosterone, every one of our patients has normal breast size if they get to us at the appropriate age, not too late.
And on the far right, there she is.
She went public -- semifinalist in the Miss England competition.
The judges debated as to, can they do this?
And one of them quipped, I'm told, "But she has more natural self than half the other contestants."
(Laughter) And some of them have been rearranged a little bit, but it's all her DNA.
And she's become a remarkable spokeswoman.
And she was offered contracts as a model, at which point she teased me, when she said, "You know, I might have had a better chance as a model if you'd made me six feet one."
(Laughter) Go figure.
So this picture, I think, says it all.
It really says it all.
These are Nicole and brother Jonas, identical twin boys, and proven to be identical.
Nicole had affirmed herself as a girl as early as age three.
At age seven, they changed her name, and came to me at the very beginnings of a male puberty.
Now you can imagine looking at Jonas at only 14, that male puberty is early in this family, because he looks more like a 16-year-old.
But it makes the point all the more, of why you have to be conscious of where the patient is.
Nicole is on pubertal blockade in here, and Jonas is just going -- biologic control.
This is what Nicole would look like if we weren't doing what we were doing.
He's got a prominent Adam's apple.
He's got angular bones to the face, a mustache, and you can see there's a height difference, because he's gone through a growth spurt that she won't get.
Now Nicole is on estrogen.
She has a bit of a form to her.
This family went to the White House last spring, because of their work in overturning an anti-discrimination -- there was a bill that would block the right of transgender people in Maine to use public bathrooms, and it looked like the bill was going to pass, and that would have been a problem, but Nicole went personally to every legislator in Maine and said, "I can do this.
If they see me, they'll understand why I'm no threat in the ladies' room, but I can be threatened in the men's room."
And then they finally got it.
So where do we go from here?
Well, we still have a ways to go in terms of anti-discrimination.
There are only 17 states that have an anti-discrimination law against discrimination in housing, employment, public accommodation -- only 17 states, and five of them are in New England.
We need less expensive drugs.
They cost a fortune.
And we need to get this condition out of the DSM.
It is as much a psychiatric disease as being gay and lesbian, and that went out the window in 1973, and the whole world changed.
And this isn't going to break anybody's budget.
This is not that common.
But the risks of not doing anything for them not only puts all of them at risk of losing their lives to suicide, but it also says something about whether we are a truly inclusive society.
Thank you.
(Applause)
["Rebecca Newberger Goldstein"] ["Steven Pinker"] ["The Long Reach of Reason"] Cabbie: Twenty-two dollars. Steven Pinker: Okay.
Rebecca Newberger Goldstein: Reason appears to have fallen on hard times: Popular culture plumbs new depths of dumbth and political discourse has become a race to the bottom.
We're living in an era of scientific creationism, 9/11 conspiracy theories, psychic hotlines, and a resurgence of religious fundamentalism.
People who think too well are often accused of elitism, and even in the academy, there are attacks on logocentrism, the crime of letting logic dominate our thinking.
SP: But is this necessarily a bad thing?
Perhaps reason is overrated.
Many pundits have argued that a good heart and steadfast moral clarity are superior to triangulations of overeducated policy wonks, like the best and brightest and that dragged us into the quagmire of Vietnam.
And wasn't it reason that gave us the means to despoil the planet and threaten our species with weapons of mass destruction?
In this way of thinking, it's character and conscience, not cold-hearted calculation, that will save us.
Besides, a human being is not a brain on a stick.
My fellow psychologists have shown that we're led by our bodies and our emotions and use our puny powers of reason merely to rationalize our gut feelings after the fact.
RNG: How could a reasoned argument logically entail the ineffectiveness of reasoned arguments?
Look, you're trying to persuade us of reason's impotence.
You're not threatening us or bribing us, suggesting that we resolve the issue with a show of hands or a beauty contest.
By the very act of trying to reason us into your position, you're conceding reason's potency.
Reason isn't up for grabs here. It can't be.
You show up for that debate and you've already lost it.
SP: But can reason lead us in directions that are good or decent or moral?
After all, you pointed out that reason is just a means to an end, and the end depends on the reasoner's passions.
Reason can lay out a road map to peace and harmony if the reasoner wants peace and harmony, but it can also lay out a road map to conflict and strife if the reasoner delights in conflict and strife.
Can reason force the reasoner to want less cruelty and waste?
RNG: All on its own, the answer is no, but it doesn't take much to switch it to yes.
You need two conditions: The first is that reasoners all care about their own well-being.
That's one of the passions that has to be present in order for reason to go to work, and it's obviously present in all of us.
We all care passionately about our own well-being.
The second condition is that reasoners are members of a community of reasoners who can affect one another's well-being, can exchange messages, and comprehend each other's reasoning.
And that's certainly true of our gregarious and loquatious species, well endowed with the instinct for language.
SP: Well, that sounds good in theory, but has it worked that way in practice?
In particular, can it explain a momentous historical development that I spoke about five years ago here at TED?
Namely, we seem to be getting more humane.
Centuries ago, our ancestors would burn cats alive as a form of popular entertainment.
Knights waged constant war on each other by trying to kill as many of each other's peasants as possible.
Governments executed people for frivolous reasons, like stealing a cabbage or criticizing the royal garden.
The executions were designed to be as prolonged and as painful as possible, like crucifixion, disembowelment, breaking on the wheel.
Respectable people kept slaves.
For all our flaws, we have abandoned these barbaric practices.
RNG: So, do you think it's human nature that's changed?
SP: Not exactly. I think we still harbor instincts that can erupt in violence, like greed, tribalism, revenge, dominance, sadism.
But we also have instincts that can steer us away, like self-control, empathy, a sense of fairness, what Abraham Lincoln called the better angels of our nature.
RNG: So if human nature didn't change, what invigorated those better angels?
SP: Well, among other things, our circle of empathy expanded.
Years ago, our ancestors would feel the pain only of their family and people in their village.
But with the expansion of literacy and travel, people started to sympathize with wider and wider circles, the clan, the tribe, the nation, the race, and perhaps eventually, all of humanity.
RNG: Can hard-headed scientists really give so much credit to soft-hearted empathy?
SP: They can and do.
Neurophysiologists have found neurons in the brain that respond to other people's actions the same way they respond to our own.
Empathy emerges early in life, perhaps before the age of one.
Books on empathy have become bestsellers, like "The Empathic Civilization" and "The Age of Empathy."
RNG: I'm all for empathy. I mean, who isn't?
But all on its own, it's a feeble instrument for making moral progress.
For one thing, it's innately biased toward blood relations, babies and warm, fuzzy animals.
As far as empathy is concerned, ugly outsiders can go to hell.
And even our best attempts to work up sympathy for those who are unconnected with us fall miserably short, a sad truth about human nature that was pointed out by Adam Smith.
Adam Smith: Let us suppose that the great empire of China was suddenly swallowed up by an earthquake, and let us consider how a man of humanity in Europe would react on receiving intelligence of this dreadful calamity.
He would, I imagine, first of all express very strongly his sorrow for the misfortune of that unhappy people.
He would make many melancholy reflections upon the precariousness of human life, and when all these humane sentiments had been once fairly expressed, he would pursue his business or his pleasure with the same ease and tranquility as if no such accident had happened.
If he was to lose his little finger tomorrow, he would not sleep tonight, but provided he never saw them, he would snore with the most profound security over the ruin of a hundred million of his brethren.
SP: But if empathy wasn't enough to make us more humane, what else was there?
RNG: Well, you didn't mention what might be one of our most effective better angels: reason.
Reason has muscle.
It's reason that provides the push to widen that circle of empathy.
Every one of the humanitarian developments that you mentioned originated with thinkers who gave reasons for why some practice was indefensible.
They demonstrated that the way people treated some particular group of others was logically inconsistent with the way they insisted on being treated themselves.
SP: Are you saying that reason can actually change people's minds?
Don't people just stick with whatever conviction serves their interests or conforms to the culture that they grew up in?
RNG: Here's a fascinating fact about us: Contradictions bother us, at least when we're forced to confront them, which is just another way of saying that we are susceptible to reason.
And if you look at the history of moral progress, you can trace a direct pathway from reasoned arguments to changes in the way that we actually feel.
Time and again, a thinker would lay out an argument as to why some practice was indefensible, irrational, inconsistent with values already held.
Their essay would go viral, get translated into many languages, get debated at pubs and coffee houses and salons, and at dinner parties, and influence leaders, legislators, popular opinion.
Eventually their conclusions get absorbed into the common sense of decency, erasing the tracks of the original argument that had gotten us there.
Few of us today feel any need to put forth a rigorous philosophical argument as to why slavery is wrong or public hangings or beating children.
By now, these things just feel wrong.
But just those arguments had to be made, and they were, in centuries past.
SP: Are you saying that people needed a step-by-step argument to grasp why something might be a wee bit wrong with burning heretics at the stake?
RNG: Oh, they did. Here's the French theologian Sebastian Castellio making the case.
Sebastian Castellio: Calvin says that he's certain, and other sects say that they are.
Who shall be judge?
If the matter is certain, to whom is it so? To Calvin?
But then, why does he write so many books about manifest truth?
In view of the uncertainty, we must define heretics simply as one with whom we disagree.
And if then we are going to kill heretics, the logical outcome will be a war of extermination, since each is sure of himself.
SP: Or with hideous punishments like breaking on the wheel?
RNG: The prohibition in our constitution of cruel and unusual punishments was a response to a pamphlet circulated in 1764 by the Italian jurist Cesare Beccaria.
Cesare Beccaria: As punishments become more cruel, the minds of men, which like fluids always adjust to the level of the objects that surround them, become hardened, and after a hundred years of cruel punishments, breaking on the wheel causes no more fear than imprisonment previously did.
For a punishment to achieve its objective, it is only necessary that the harm that it inflicts outweighs the benefit that derives from the crime, and into this calculation ought to be factored the certainty of punishment and the loss of the good that the commission of the crime will produce.
Everything beyond this is superfluous, and therefore tyrannical.
SP: But surely antiwar movements depended on mass demonstrations and catchy tunes by folk singers and wrenching photographs of the human costs of war.
RNG: No doubt, but modern anti-war movements reach back to a long chain of thinkers who had argued as to why we ought to mobilize our emotions against war, such as the father of modernity, Erasmus.
Erasmus: The advantages derived from peace diffuse themselves far and wide, and reach great numbers, while in war, if anything turns out happily, the advantage redounds only to a few, and those unworthy of reaping it.
One man's safety is owing to the destruction of another.
One man's prize is derived from the plunder of another.
The cause of rejoicings made by one side is to the other a cause of mourning.
Whatever is unfortunate in war, is severely so indeed, and whatever, on the contrary, is called good fortune, is a savage and a cruel good fortune, an ungenerous happiness deriving its existence from another's woe.
SP: But everyone knows that the movement to abolish slavery depended on faith and emotion.
It was a movement spearheaded by the Quakers, and it only became popular when Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel "Uncle Tom's Cabin" became a bestseller.
RNG: But the ball got rolling a century before.
John Locke bucked the tide of millennia that had regarded the practice as perfectly natural.
He argued that it was inconsistent with the principles of rational government.
John Locke: Freedom of men under government is to have a standing rule to live by common to everyone of that society and made by the legislative power erected in it, a liberty to follow my own will in all things where that rule prescribes not, not to be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, arbitrary will of another man, as freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of nature.
SP: Those words sound familiar.
Where have I read them before? Ah, yes.
Mary Astell: If absolute sovereignty be not necessary in a state, how comes it to be so in a family?
Or if in a family, why not in a state?
Since no reason can be alleged for the one that will not hold more strongly for the other, if all men are born free, how is it that all women are born slaves, as they must be if being subjected to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, arbitrary will of men be the perfect condition of slavery?
RNG: That sort of co-option is all in the job description of reason.
One movement for the expansion of rights inspires another because the logic is the same, and once that's hammered home, it becomes increasingly uncomfortable to ignore the inconsistency.
In the 1960s, the Civil Rights Movement inspired the movements for women's rights, children's rights, gay rights and even animal rights.
But fully two centuries before, the Enlightenment thinker Jeremy Bentham had exposed the indefensibility of customary practices such as the cruelty to animals.
Jeremy Bentham: The question is not, can they reason, nor can they talk, but can they suffer?
RNG: And the persecution of homosexuals.
JB: As to any primary mischief, it's evident that it produces no pain in anyone.
On the contrary, it produces pleasure.
The partners are both willing.
If either of them be unwilling, the act is an offense, totally different in its nature of effects.
It's a personal injury. It's a kind of rape.
As to the any danger exclusive of pain, the danger, if any, much consist in the tendency of the example.
But what is the tendency of this example?
To dispose others to engage in the same practices.
But this practice produces not pain of any kind to anyone.
SP: Still, in every case, it took at least a century for the arguments of these great thinkers to trickle down and infiltrate the population as a whole.
It kind of makes you wonder about our own time.
Are there practices that we engage in where the arguments against them are there for all to see but nonetheless we persist in them?
RNG: When our great grandchildren look back at us, will they be as appalled by some of our practices as we are by our slave-owning, heretic-burning, wife-beating, gay-bashing ancestors?
SP: I'm sure everyone here could think of an example.
RNG: I opt for the mistreatment of animals in factory farms.
SP: The imprisonment of nonviolent drug offenders and the toleration of rape in our nation's prisons.
RNG: Scrimping on donations to life-saving charities in the developing world.
SP: The possession of nuclear weapons.
RNG: The appeal to religion to justify the otherwise unjustifiable, such as the ban on contraception.
SP: What about religious faith in general?
RNG: Eh, I'm not holding my breath.
SP: Still, I have become convinced that reason is a better angel that deserves the greatest credit for the moral progress our species has enjoyed and that holds out the greatest hope for continuing moral progress in the future.
RNG: And if, our friends, you detect a flaw in this argument, just remember you'll be depending on reason to point it out.
Thank you. SP: Thank you.
(Applause)
I've come here today to talk to you about a problem.
It's a very simple yet devastating problem, one that spans the globe and is affecting all of us.
The problem is anonymous companies.
It sounds like a really dry and technical thing, doesn't it?
But anonymous companies are making it difficult and sometimes impossible to find out the actual human beings responsible sometimes for really terrible crimes.
So, why am I here talking to all of you?
Well, I guess I am a lifelong troublemaker and when my parents taught my twin brother and I to question authority, I don't think they knew where it might lead.
(Laughter) And, they probably really regretted it during my stroppy teenage years when, predictably, I questioned their authority a lot.
And a lot of my school teachers didn't appreciate it much either.
You see, since the age of about five I've always asked the question, but why?
But why does the Earth go around the sun?
But why is blood red?
But why do I have to go to school?
But why do I have to respect the teachers and authority?
And little did I realize that this question would become the basis of everything I would do.
And so it was in my twenties, a long time ago, that one rainy Sunday afternoon in North London I was sitting with Simon Taylor and Patrick Alley and we were busy stuffing envelopes for a mail out in the office of the campaign group where we worked at the time.
And as usual, we were talking about the world's problems.
And in particular, we were talking about the civil war in Cambodia.
And we had talked about that many, many times before.
But then suddenly we stopped and looked at each other and said, but why don't we try and change this?
And from that slightly crazy question, over two decades and many campaigns later, including alerting the world to the problem of blood diamonds funding war, from that crazy question, Global Witness is now an 80-strong team of campaigners, investigators, journalists and lawyers.
And we're all driven by the same belief, that change really is possible.
So, what exactly does Global Witness do?
We investigate, we report, to uncover the people really responsible for funding conflict -- for stealing millions from citizens around the world, also known as state looting, and for destroying the environment.
And then we campaign hard to change the system itself.
And we're doing this because so many of the countries rich in natural resources like oil or diamonds or timber are home to some of the poorest and most dispossessed people on the planet.
And much of this injustice is made possible by currently accepted business practices.
And one of these is anonymous companies.
Now we've come up against anonymous companies in lots of our investigations, like in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where we exposed how secretive deals involving anonymous companies had deprived the citizens of one of the poorest countries on the planet of well over a billion dollars.
That's twice the country's health and education budget combined.
Or in Liberia, where an international predatory logging company used front companies as it attempted to grab a really huge chunk of Liberia's unique forests.
Or political corruption in Sarawak, Malaysia, which has led to the destruction of much of its forests.
Well, that uses anonymous companies too.
We secretly filmed some of the family of the former chief minister and a lawyer as they told our undercover investigator exactly how these dubious deals are done using such companies.
And the awful thing is, there are so many other examples out there from all walks of life.
This truly is a scandal of epic proportions hidden in plain sight.
Whether it's the ruthless Mexican drugs cartel, the Zetas, who use anonymous companies to launder profits while their drugs-related violence is tearing communities apart across the Americas.
Or the anonymous company, which bought up Americans' tax debts, piled on the legal fees and then gave homeowners a choice: Pay up or lose your home.
Imagine being threatened with losing your home sometimes over a debt of just a few hundred dollars, and not being able to find out who you were really up against.
Now anonymous companies are great for sanctions busting too.
As the Iranian government found out when, through a series of front companies, it owned a building in the very heart of Manhattan, on Fifth Avenue, despite American sanctions.
And Juicy Couture, home of of the velvet track suit, and other companies were the unwitting, unknowing tenants there.
There are just so many examples, the horesemeat scandal in Europe, the Italian mafia, they've used these companies for decades.
The $100 million American Medicare fraud, the supply of weapons to wars around the world including those in Eastern Europe in the early '90s.
Anonymous companies have even come to light in the recent revolution in the Ukraine.
But, for every case that we and others expose there are so many more that will remain hidden away because of the current system.
And it's just a simple truth that some of the people responsible for outrageous crimes, for stealing from you and me and millions of others, they are remaining faceless and they are escaping accountability and they're doing this with ease, and they're doing it using legal structures.
And really, that is unfair.
Well, you might well ask, what exactly is an anonymous company, and can I really set one up, and use it, without anyone knowing who I am?
Well, the answer is, yes you can.
But if you're anything like me, you'll want to see some of that for yourself, so let me show you.
Well first you need to work out where you want to set it up.
Now, at this point you might be imagining one of those lovely tropical island tax havens but here's the thing, shockingly, my own hometown, London, and indeed the U.K., is one of the best places in the world to set up an anonymous company.
And the other, even better, I'm afraid that's America.
Do you know, in some states across America you need less identification to open up a company than you do to get a library card, like Delaware, which is one of the easiest places in the world to set up an anonymous company.
Okay, so let's say it's America, and let's say it's Delaware, and now you can simply go online and find yourself a company service provider.
These are the companies that can set your one up for you, and remember, it's all legal, routine business practice.
So, here's one, but there are plenty of others to choose from.
And having made your choice, you then pick what type of company you want and then fill in a contact, name and address.
But don't worry, it doesn't have to be your name.
It can be your lawyer's or your service provider's, and it's not for the public record anyway.
And then you add the owner of the company.
Now this is the key part, and again it doesn't have to be you, because you can get creative, because there is a whole universe out there of nominees to choose from.
And nominees are the people that you can legally pay to be your company's owner.
And if you don't want to involve anyone else, it doesn't even have to be an actual human being.
It could be another company.
And then finally, give your company a name add a few more details and make your payment.
And then the service provider will take a few hours or more to process it.
But there you are, in 10 minutes of online shopping you can create yourself an anonymous company.
And not only is it easy, really, really easy and cheap, it's totally legal too.
But the fun doesn't have to end there, maybe you want to be even more anonymous.
Well, that's no problem either.
You can simply keep adding layers, companies owned by companies.
You can have hundreds of layers with hundreds of companies spread across lots of different countries, like a giant web, each layer adds anonymity.
Each layer makes it more difficult for law enforcement and others to find out who the real owner is.
But whose interests is this all serving?
It might be in the interests of the company or a particular individual, but what about all of us, the public?
There hasn't even been a global conversation yet about whether it's okay to misuse companies in this way.
And what does it all mean for us?
Well, an example that really haunts me is one I came across recently.
And it's that of a horrific fire in a nightclub in Buenos Aires about a decade ago.
It was the night before New Year's Eve.
Three thousand very happy revelers, many of them teenagers, were crammed into a space meant for 1,000.
And then tragedy struck, a fire broke out plastic decorations were melting from the ceiling and toxic smoke filled the club.
So people tried to escape only to find that some of the fire doors had been chained shut.
Over 200 people died.
Seven hundred were injured trying to get out.
And as the victims' families and the city and the country reeled in shock, investigators tried to find out who was responsible.
And as they looked for the owners of the club, they found instead anonymous companies, and confusion surrounded the identities of those involved with the companies.
Now ultimately, a range of people were charged and some went to jail.
But this was an awful tragedy, and it shouldn't have been so difficult just to try and find out who was responsible for those deaths.
Because in an age when there is so much information out there in the open, why should this crucial information about company ownership stay hidden away?
Why should tax evaders, corrupt government officials, arms traders and more, be able to hide their identities from us, the public?
Why should this secrecy be such an accepted business practice?
Anonymous companies might be the norm right now but it wasn't always this way.
Companies were created to give people a chance to innovate and not have to put everything on the line.
Companies were created to limit financial risk, they were never intended to be used as a moral shield.
Companies were never intended to be anonymous, and they don't have to be.
And so I come to my wish.
My wish is for us to know who owns and controls companies so that they can no longer be used anonymously against the public good.
Together let's ignite world opinion, change the law, and launch a new era of openness in business.
So what might this look like?
Well, imagine if you could go online and look up the real owner of a company.
Imagine if this data were open and free, accessible across borders for citizens and businesses and law enforcement alike.
Imagine what a game changer that would be.
So how are we going to do this?
Well, there is only one way.
Together, we have to change the law globally to create public registries which list the true owners of companies and can be accessed by all with no loopholes.
And yes, this is ambitious, but there is momentum on this issue, and over the years I have seen the sheer power of momentum, and it's just starting on this issue.
There is such an opportunity right now.
And the TED community of creative and innovative thinkers and doers across all of society could make the crucial difference.
You really can make this change happen.
Now, a simple starting point is the address behind me for a Facebook page that you can join now to support the campaign and spread the word.
It's going to be a springboard for our global campaigning.
And the techies among you, you could really help us create a prototype public registry to demonstrate what a powerful tool this could be.
Campaign groups from around the world have come together to work on this issue.
The U.K. government is already on board; it supports these public registries.
And just last week, the European Parliament came on board with a vote 600 to 30 in favor of public registries.
That is momentum.
(Applause) But it's early days.
America still needs to come on board, as do so many other countries.
And to succeed we will all together need to help and push our politicians, because without that, real far-reaching, world-shifting change just isn't going to happen.
Because this isn't just about changing the law, this is about starting a conversation about what it's okay for companies to do, and in what ways is it acceptable to use company structures.
This isn't just a dry policy issue.
This is a human issue which affects us all.
This is about being on the right side of history.
Global citizens, innovators, business leaders, individuals, we need you.
Together, let's kickstart this global movement.
Let's just do it, let's end anonymous companies.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to imagine that you're a student in my lab.
What I want you to do is to create a biologically inspired design.
And so here's the challenge: I want you to help me create a fully 3D, dynamic, parameterized contact model.
The translation of that is, could you help me build a foot?
And it is a true challenge, and I do want you to help me.
Of course, in the challenge there is a prize.
It's not quite the TED Prize, but it is an exclusive t-shirt from our lab.
So please send me your ideas about how to design a foot.
Now if we want to design a foot, what do we have to do?
We have to first know what a foot is.
If we go to the dictionary, it says, "It's the lower extremity of a leg that is in direct contact with the ground in standing or walking" That's the traditional definition.
But if you wanted to really do research, what do you have to do?
You have to go to the literature and look up what's known about feet.
So you go to the literature. (Laughter) Maybe you're familiar with this literature.
The problem is, there are many, many feet.
How do you do this?
You need to survey all feet and extract the principles of how they work.
And I want you to help me do that in this next clip.
As you see this clip, look for principles, and also think about experiments that you might design in order to understand how a foot works.
See any common themes? Principles?
What would you do?
What experiments would you run?
Wow. (Applause) Our research on the biomechanics of animal locomotion has allowed us to make a blueprint for a foot.
It's a design inspired by nature, but it's not a copy of any specific foot you just looked at, but it's a synthesis of the secrets of many, many feet.
Now it turns out that animals can go anywhere.
They can locomote on substrates that vary as you saw -- in the probability of contact, the movement of that surface and the type of footholds that are present.
If you want to study how a foot works, we're going to have to simulate those surfaces, or simulate that debris.
When we did that, here's a new experiment that we did: we put an animal and had it run -- this grass spider -- on a surface with 99 percent of the contact area removed.
But it didn't even slow down the animal.
It's still running at the human equivalent of 300 miles per hour.
Now how could it do that? Well, look more carefully.
When we slow it down 50 times we see how the leg is hitting that simulated debris.
The leg is acting as a foot.
And in fact, the animal contacts other parts of its leg more frequently than the traditionally defined foot.
The foot is distributed along the whole leg.
You can do another experiment where you can take a cockroach with a foot, and you can remove its foot.
I'm passing some cockroaches around. Take a look at their feet.
Without a foot, here's what it does. It doesn't even slow down.
It can run the same speed without even that segment.
No problem for the cockroach -- they can grow them back, if you care.
How do they do it?
Look carefully: this is slowed down 100 times, and watch what it's doing with the rest of its leg.
It's acting, again, as a distributed foot -- very effective.
Now, the question we had is, how general is a distributed foot?
And the next behavior I'll show you of this animal just stunned us the first time that we saw it.
Journalists, this is off the record; it's embargoed.
Take a look at what that is!
That's a bipedal octopus that's disguised as a rolling coconut.
It was discovered by Christina Huffard and filmed by Sea Studios, right here from Monterey.
We've also described another species of bipedal octopus.
This one disguises itself as floating algae.
It walks on two legs and it holds the other arms up in the air so that it can't be seen.
(Applause) And look what it does with its foot to get over challenging terrain.
It uses that beautiful distributed foot to make it as if those obstacles are not even there -- truly extraordinary.
In 1951, Escher made this drawing. He thought he created an animal fantasy.
But we know that art imitates life, and it turns out nature, three million years ago, evolved the next animal.
It's a shrimp-like animal called the stomatopod, and here's how it moves on the beaches of Panama: it actually rolls, and it can even roll uphill.
It's the ultimate distributed foot: its whole body in this case is acting like its foot.
So, if we want to then, to our blueprint, add the first important feature, we want to add distributed foot contact.
Not just with the traditional foot, but also the leg, and even of the body.
Can this help us inspire the design of novel robots?
We biologically inspired this robot, named RHex, built by these extraordinary engineers over the last few years.
RHex's foot started off to be quite simple, then it got tuned over time, and ultimately resulted in this half circle.
Why is that? The video will show you.
Watch where the robot, now, contacts its leg in order to deal with this very difficult terrain.
What you'll see, in fact, is that it's using that half circle leg as a distributed foot.
Watch it go over this.
You can see it here well on this debris.
Extraordinary. No sensing, all the control is built right into the tuned legs.
Really simple, but beautiful.
Now, you might have noticed something else about the animals when they were running over the rough terrain.
And my assistant's going to help me here.
When you touched the cockroach leg -- can you get the microphone for him?
When you touched the cockroach leg, what did it feel like?
Did you notice something?
Boy: Spiny.
Robert Full: It's spiny, right? It's really spiny, isn't it? It sort of hurts.
Maybe we could give it to our curator and see if he'd be brave enough to touch the cockroach.
(Laughter) Chris Anderson: Did you touch it?
RF: So if you look carefully at this, what you see is that they have spines and until a few weeks ago, no one knew what they did.
They assumed that they were for protection and for sensory structures.
We found that they're for something else -- here's a segment of that spine.
They're tuned such that they easily collapse in one direction to pull the leg out from debris, but they're stiff in the other direction so they capture disparities in the surface.
Now crabs don't miss footholds, because they normally move on sand -- until they come to our lab.
And where they have a problem with this kind of mesh, because they don't have spines.
The crabs are missing spines, so they have a problem in this kind of rough terrain.
But of course, we can deal with that because we can produce artificial spines.
We can make spines that catch on simulated debris and collapse on removal to easily pull them out.
We did that by putting these artificial spines on crabs, as you see here, and then we tested them.
Do we really understand that principle of tuning? The answer is, yes!
This is slowed down 20-fold, and the crab just zooms across that simulated debris.
(Laughter) (Applause) A little better than nature.
So to our blueprint, we need to add tuned spines.
Now will this help us think about the design of more effective climbing robots?
Well, here's RHex: RHex has trouble on rails -- on smooth rails, as you see here.
So why not add a spine? My colleagues did this at U. Penn.
Dan Koditschek put some steel nails -- very simple version -- on the robot, and here's RHex, now, going over those steel -- those rails. No problem!
How does it do it?
Let's slow it down and you can see the spines in action.
Watch the leg come around, and you'll see it grab on right there.
It couldn't do that before; it would just slip and get stuck and tip over.
And watch again, right there -- successful.
Now just because we have a distributed foot and spines doesn't mean you can climb vertical surfaces.
This is really, really difficult.
But look at this animal do it!
One of the ones I'm passing around is climbing up this vertical surface that's a smooth metal plate.
It's extraordinary how fast it can do it -- but if you slow it down, you see something that's quite extraordinary.
It's a secret. The animal effectively climbs by slipping and look -- and doing, actually, terribly, with respect to grabbing on the surface.
It looks, in fact, like it's swimming up the surface.
We can actually model that behavior better as a fluid, if you look at it.
The distributed foot, actually, is working more like a paddle.
The same is true when we looked at this lizard running on fluidized sand.
Watch its feet.
It's actually functioning as a paddle even though it's interacting with a surface that we normally think of as a solid.
This is not different from what my former undergraduate discovered when she figured out how lizards can run on water itself.
Can you use this to make a better robot?
Martin Buehler did -- who's now at Boston Dynamics -- he took this idea and made RHex to be Aqua RHex.
So here's RHex with paddles, now converted into an incredibly maneuverable swimming robot.
For rough surfaces, though, animals add claws.
And you probably feel them if you grabbed it.
Did you touch it?
CA: I did.
RF: And they do really well at grabbing onto surfaces with these claws.
Mark Cutkosky at Stanford University, one of my collaborators, is an extraordinary engineer who developed this technique called Shape Deposition Manufacturing, where he can imbed claws right into an artificial foot.
And here's the simple version of a foot for a new robot that I'll show you in a bit.
So to our blueprint, let's attach claws.
Now if we look at animals, though, to be really maneuverable in all surfaces, the animals use hybrid mechanisms that include claws, and spines, and hairs, and pads, and glue, and capillary adhesion and a whole bunch of other things.
These are all from different insects.
There's an ant crawling up a vertical surface.
Let's look at that ant.
This is the foot of an ant. You see the hairs and the claws and this thing here.
This is when its foot's in the air.
Watch what happens when the foot goes onto your sandwich.
You see what happens?
That pad comes out. And that's where the glue is.
Here from underneath is an ant foot, and when the claws don't dig in, that pad automatically comes out without the ant doing anything.
It just extrudes.
And this was a hard shot to get -- I think this is the shot of the ant foot on the superstrings.
So it's pretty tough to do.
This is what it looks like close up -- here's the ant foot, and there's the glue.
And we discovered this glue may be an interesting two-phase mixture.
It certainly helps it to hold on.
So to our blueprint, we stick on some sticky pads.
Now you might think for smooth surfaces we get inspiration here.
Now we have something better here.
The gecko's a really great example of nanotechnology in nature.
These are its feet.
They're -- almost look alien. And the secret, which they stick on with, involves their hairy toes.
They can run up a surface at a meter per second, take 30 steps in that one second -- you can hardly see them.
If we slow it down, they attach their feet at eight milliseconds, and detach them in 16 milliseconds.
And when you watch how they detach it, it is bizarre.
They peel away from the surface like you'd peel away a piece of tape.
Very strange. How do they stick?
If you look at their feet, they have leaf-like structures called linalae with millions of hairs.
And each hair has the worst case of split ends possible.
It has a hundred to a thousand split ends, and that's the secret, because it allows intimate contact.
The gecko has a billion of these 200-nanometer-sized split ends.
And they don't stick by glue, or they don't work like Velcro, or they don't work with suction.
We discovered they work by intermolecular forces alone.
So to our blueprint, we split some hairs.
This has inspired the design of the first self-cleaning dry adhesive -- the patent issued, we're happy to say.
And here's the simplest version in nature, and here's my collaborator Ron Fearing's attempt at an artificial version of this dry adhesive made from polyurethane.
And here's the first attempt to have it work on some load.
There's enormous interest in this in a variety of different fields.
You could think of a thousand possible uses, I'm sure.
Lots of people have, and we're excited about realizing this as a product.
We have imagined products; for example, this one: we imagined a bio-inspired Band-Aid, where we took the glue off the Band-Aid.
We took some hairs from a molting gecko; put three rolls of them on here, and then made this Band-Aid.
This is an undergraduate volunteer -- we have 30,000 undergraduates so we can choose among them -- that's actually just a red pen mark.
But it makes an incredible Band-Aid.
It's aerated, it can be peeled off easily, it doesn't cause any irritation, it works underwater.
I think this is an extraordinary example of how curiosity-based research -- we just wondered how they climbed up something -- can lead to things that you could never imagine.
It's just an example of why we need to support curiosity-based research.
Here you are, pulling off the Band-Aid.
So we've redefined, now, what a foot is.
The question is, can we use these secrets, then, to inspire the design of a better foot, better than one that we see in nature?
Here's the new project: we're trying to create the first climbing search-and-rescue robot -- no suction or magnets -- that can only move on limited kinds of surfaces.
I call the new robot RiSE, for "Robot in Scansorial Environment" -- that's a climbing environment -- and we have an extraordinary team of biologists and engineers creating this robot.
And here is RiSE.
It's six-legged and has a tail. Here it is on a fence and a tree.
And here are RiSE's first steps on an incline.
You have the audio? You can hear it go up.
And here it is coming up at you, in its first steps up a wall.
Now it's only using its simplest feet here, so this is very new.
But we think we got the dynamics right of the robot.
Mark Cutkosky, though, is taking it a step further.
He's the one able to build this shape-deposition manufactured feet and toes.
The next step is to make compliant toes, and try to add spines and claws and set it for dry adhesives.
So the idea is to first get the toes and a foot right, attempt to make that climb, and ultimately put it on the robot.
And that's exactly what he's done.
He's built, in fact, a climbing foot-bot inspired by nature.
And here's Cutkosky's and his amazing students' design.
So these are tuned toes -- there are six of them, and they use the principles that I just talked about collectively for the blueprint.
So this is not using any suction, any glue, and it will ultimately, when it's attached to the robot -- it's as biologically inspired as the animal -- hopefully be able to climb any kind of a surface.
Here you see it, next, going up the side of a building at Stanford.
It's sped up -- again, it's a foot climbing.
It's not the whole robot yet, we're working on it -- now you can see how it's attaching.
These tuned structures allow the spines, friction pads and ultimately the adhesive hairs to grab onto very challenging, difficult surfaces.
And so they were able to get this thing -- this is now sped up 20 times -- can you imagine it trying to go up and rescue somebody at that upper floor? OK?
You can visualize this now; it's not impossible.
It's a very challenging task. But more to come later.
To finish: we've gotten design secrets from nature by looking at how feet are built.
We've learned we should distribute control to smart parts.
Don't put it all in the brain, but put some of the control in tuned feet, legs and even body.
That nature uses hybrid solutions, not a single solution, to these problems, and they're integrated and beautifully robust.
And third, we believe strongly that we do not want to mimic nature but instead be inspired by biology, and use these novel principles with the best engineering solutions that are out there to make -- potentially -- something better than nature.
So there's a clear message: whether you care about a fundamental, basic research of really interesting, bizarre, wonderful animals, or you want to build a search-and-rescue robot that can help you in an earthquake, or to save someone in a fire, or you care about medicine, we must preserve nature's designs.
Otherwise these secrets will be lost forever.
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: The rights of citizens, the future of the Internet.
So I would like to welcome to the TED stage the man behind those revelations, Ed Snowden.
(Applause) Ed is in a remote location somewhere in Russia controlling this bot from his laptop, so he can see what the bot can see.
Ed, welcome to the TED stage.
What can you see, as a matter of fact?
Edward Snowden: Ha, I can see everyone.
This is amazing.
(Laughter) CA: Ed, some questions for you.
You've been called many things in the last few months.
You've been called a whistleblower, a traitor, a hero.
What words would you describe yourself with?
ES: You know, everybody who is involved with this debate has been struggling over me and my personality and how to describe me.
But when I think about it, this isn't the question that we should be struggling with.
Who I am really doesn't matter at all.
If I'm the worst person in the world, you can hate me and move on.
What really matters here are the issues.
What really matters here is the kind of government we want, the kind of Internet we want, the kind of relationship between people and societies.
And that's what I'm hoping the debate will move towards, and we've seen that increasing over time.
If I had to describe myself, I wouldn't use words like "hero."
I wouldn't use "patriot," and I wouldn't use "traitor."
I'd say I'm an American and I'm a citizen, just like everyone else.
CA: So just to give some context for those who don't know the whole story -- (Applause) — this time a year ago, you were stationed in Hawaii working as a consultant to the NSA.
As a sysadmin, you had access to their systems, and you began revealing certain classified documents to some handpicked journalists leading the way to June's revelations.
Now, what propelled you to do this?
ES: You know, when I was sitting in Hawaii, and the years before, when I was working in the intelligence community, I saw a lot of things that had disturbed me.
We do a lot of good things in the intelligence community, things that need to be done, and things that help everyone.
But there are also things that go too far.
There are things that shouldn't be done, and decisions that were being made in secret without the public's awareness, without the public's consent, and without even our representatives in government having knowledge of these programs.
When I really came to struggle with these issues, I thought to myself, how can I do this in the most responsible way, that maximizes the public benefit while minimizing the risks?
And out of all the solutions that I could come up with, out of going to Congress, when there were no laws, there were no legal protections for a private employee, a contractor in intelligence like myself, there was a risk that I would be buried along with the information and the public would never find out.
But the First Amendment of the United States Constitution guarantees us a free press for a reason, and that's to enable an adversarial press, to challenge the government, but also to work together with the government, to have a dialogue and debate about how we can inform the public about matters of vital importance without putting our national security at risk.
And by working with journalists, by giving all of my information back to the American people, rather than trusting myself to make the decisions about publication, we've had a robust debate with a deep investment by the government that I think has resulted in a benefit for everyone.
And the risks that have been threatened, the risks that have been played up by the government have never materialized.
We've never seen any evidence of even a single instance of specific harm, and because of that, I'm comfortable with the decisions that I made.
CA: So let me show the audience a couple of examples of what you revealed.
If we could have a slide up, and Ed, I don't know whether you can see, the slides are here.
This is a slide of the PRISM program, and maybe you could tell the audience what that was that was revealed.
ES: The best way to understand PRISM, because there's been a little bit of controversy, is to first talk about what PRISM isn't.
Much of the debate in the U.S. has been about metadata.
They've said it's just metadata, it's just metadata, and they're talking about a specific legal authority called Section 215 of the Patriot Act.
That allows sort of a warrantless wiretapping, mass surveillance of the entire country's phone records, things like that -- who you're talking to, when you're talking to them, where you traveled.
These are all metadata events.
PRISM is about content.
It's a program through which the government could compel corporate America, it could deputize corporate America to do its dirty work for the NSA.
And even though some of these companies did resist, even though some of them -- I believe Yahoo was one of them — challenged them in court, they all lost, because it was never tried by an open court.
They were only tried by a secret court.
And something that we've seen, something about the PRISM program that's very concerning to me is, there's been a talking point in the U.S. government where they've said 15 federal judges have reviewed these programs and found them to be lawful, but what they don't tell you is those are secret judges in a secret court based on secret interpretations of law that's considered 34,000 warrant requests over 33 years, and in 33 years only rejected 11 government requests.
These aren't the people that we want deciding what the role of corporate America in a free and open Internet should be.
CA: Now, this slide that we're showing here shows the dates in which different technology companies, Internet companies, are alleged to have joined the program, and where data collection began from them.
Now, they have denied collaborating with the NSA.
How was that data collected by the NSA?
ES: Right. So the NSA's own slides refer to it as direct access.
What that means to an actual NSA analyst, someone like me who was working as an intelligence analyst targeting, Chinese cyber-hackers, things like that, in Hawaii, is the provenance of that data is directly from their servers.
It doesn't mean that there's a group of company representatives sitting in a smoky room with the NSA palling around and making back-room deals about how they're going to give this stuff away.
Now each company handles it different ways.
Some are responsible.
Some are somewhat less responsible.
But the bottom line is, when we talk about how this information is given, it's coming from the companies themselves.
It's not stolen from the lines.
But there's an important thing to remember here: even though companies pushed back, even though companies demanded, hey, let's do this through a warrant process, let's do this where we actually have some sort of legal review, some sort of basis for handing over these users' data, we saw stories in the Washington Post last year that weren't as well reported as the PRISM story that said the NSA broke in to the data center communications between Google to itself and Yahoo to itself.
So even these companies that are cooperating in at least a compelled but hopefully lawful manner with the NSA, the NSA isn't satisfied with that, and because of that, we need our companies to work very hard to guarantee that they're going to represent the interests of the user, and also advocate for the rights of the users.
And I think over the last year, we've seen the companies that are named on the PRISM slides take great strides to do that, and I encourage them to continue.
CA: What more should they do?
ES: The biggest thing that an Internet company in America can do today, right now, without consulting with lawyers, to protect the rights of users worldwide, is to enable SSL web encryption on every page you visit.
