The last time you were in the presence of a baby -- this happens to be my granddaughter, Mitra.
Isn't she fabulous?
(Laughter) But nonetheless when she popped out despite the fact that her brain had actually been progressing in its development for several months before on the basis of her experiences in the womb -- nonetheless she had very limited abilities, as does every infant at the time of normal, natural full-term birth.
If we were to assay her perceptual abilities, they would be crude.
There is no real indication that there is any real thinking going on.
In fact there is little evidence that there is any cognitive ability in a very young infant.
Infants don't respond to much.
There is not really much of an indication in fact that there is a person on board.
(Laughter) And they can only in a very primitive way, and in a very limited way control their movements.
It would be several months before this infant could do something as simple as reach out and grasp under voluntary control an object and retrieve it, usually to the mouth.
And it will be some months beforeward, and we see a long steady progression of the evolution from the first wiggles, to rolling over, and sitting up, and crawling, standing, walking, before we get to that magical point in which we can motate in the world.
And yet, when we look forward in the brain we see really remarkable advance.
By this age the brain can actually store.
It has stored, recorded, can fastly retrieve the meanings of thousands, tens of thousands of objects, actions, and their relationships in the world.
And those relationships can in fact be constructed in hundreds of thousands, potentially millions of ways.
By this age the brain controls very refined perceptual abilities.
And it actually has a growing repertoire of cognitive skills.
This brain is very much a thinking machine.
And by this age there is absolutely no question that this brain, it has a person on board.
And in fact at this age it is substantially controlling its own self-development.
And by this age we see a remarkable evolution in its capacity to control movement.
Now movement has advanced to the point where it can actually control movement simultaneously, in a complex sequence, in complex ways as would be required for example for playing a complicated game, like soccer.
Now this boy can bounce a soccer ball on his head.
And where this boy comes from, Sao Paulo, Brazil, about 40 percent of boys of his age have this ability.
You could go out into the community in Monterey, and you'd have difficulty finding a boy that has this ability.
And if you did he'd probably be from Sao Paulo.
(Laughter) That's all another way of saying that our individual skills and abilities are very much shaped by our environments.
That environment extends into our contemporary culture, the thing our brain is challenged with.
Because what we've done in our personal evolutions is build up a large repertoire of specific skills and abilities that are specific to our own individual histories.
And in fact they result in a wonderful differentiation in humankind, in the way that, in fact, no two of us are quite alike.
Every one of us has a different set of acquired skills and abilities that all derive out of the plasticity, the adaptability of this really remarkable adaptive machine.
In an adult brain of course we've built up a large repertoire of mastered skills and abilities that we can perform more or less automatically from memory, and that define us as acting, moving, thinking creatures.
Now we study this, as the nerdy, laboratory, university-based scientists that we are, by engaging the brains of animals like rats, or monkeys, or of this particularly curious creature -- one of the more bizarre forms of life on earth -- to engage them in learning new skills and abilities.
And we try to track the changes that occur as the new skill or ability is acquired.
In fact we do this in individuals of any age, in these different species -- that is to say from infancies, infancy up to adulthood and old age.
So we might engage a rat, for example, to acquire a new skill or ability that might involve the rat using its paw to master particular manual grasp behaviors just like we might examine a child and their ability to acquire the sub-skills, or the general overall skill of accomplishing something like mastering the ability to read.
Or you might look in an older individual who has mastered a complex set of abilities that might relate to reading musical notation or performing the mechanical acts of performance that apply to musical performance.
From these studies we defined two great epochs of the plastic history of the brain.
The first great epoch is commonly called the "Critical Period."
And that is the period in which the brain is setting up in its initial form its basic processing machinery.
This is actually a period of dramatic change in which it doesn't take learning, per se, to drive the initial differentiation of the machinery of the brain.
All it takes for example in the sound domain, is exposure to sound.
And the brain actually is at the mercy of the sound environment in which it is reared.
So for example I can rear an animal in an environment in which there is meaningless dumb sound, a repertoire of sound that I make up, that I make, just by exposure, artificially important to the animal and its young brain.
And what I see is that the animal's brain sets up its initial processing of that sound in a form that's idealized, within the limits of its processing achievements to represent it in an organized and orderly way.
The sound doesn't have to be valuable to the animal: I could raise the animal in something that could be hypothetically valuable, like the sounds that simulate the sounds of a native language of a child.
And I see the brain actually develop a processor that is specialized -- specialized for that complex array, a repertoire of sounds.
It actually exaggerates their separateness of representation, in multi-dimensional neuronal representational terms.
Or I can expose the animal to a completely meaningless and destructive sound.
I can raise an animal under conditions that would be equivalent to raising a baby under a moderately loud ceiling fan, in the presence of continuous noise.
And when I do that I actually specialize the brain to be a master processor for that meaningless sound.
And I frustrate its ability to represent any meaningful sound as a consequence.
Such things in the early history of babies occur in real babies.
And they account for, for example the beautiful evolution of a language-specific processor in every normally developing baby.
And so they also account for development of defective processing in a substantial population of children who are more limited, as a consequence, in their language abilities at an older age.
Now in this early period of plasticity the brain actually changes outside of a learning context.
I don't have to be paying attention to what I hear.
The input doesn't really have to be meaningful.
I don't have to be in a behavioral context.
This is required so the brain sets up it's processing so that it can act differentially, so that it can act selectively, so that the creature that wears it, that carries it, can begin to operate on it in a selective way.
In the next great epoch of life, which applies for most of life, the brain is actually refining its machinery as it masters a wide repertoire of skills and abilities.
And in this epoch, which extends from late in the first year of life to death; it's actually doing this under behavioral control.
And that's another way of saying the brain has strategies that define the significance of the input to the brain.
And it's focusing on skill after skill, or ability after ability, under specific attentional control.
It's a function of whether a goal in a behavior is achieved or whether the individual is rewarded in the behavior.
This is actually very powerful.
This lifelong capacity for plasticity, for brain change, is powerfully expressed.
It is the basis of our real differentiation, one individual from another.
You can look down in the brain of an animal that's engaged in a specific skill, and you can witness or document this change on a variety of levels.
So here is a very simple experiment.
It was actually conducted about five years ago in collaboration with scientists from the University of Provence in Marseilles.
It's a very simple experiment where a monkey has been trained in a task that involves it manipulating a tool that's equivalent in its difficulty to a child learning to manipulate or handle a spoon.
The monkey actually mastered the task in about 700 practice tries.
So in the beginning the monkey could not perform this task at all.
It had a success rate of about one in eight tries.
Those tries were elaborate.
Each attempt was substantially different from the other.
But the monkey gradually developed a strategy.
And 700 or so tries later the monkey is performing it flawlessly -- never fails.
He's successful in his retrieval of food with this tool every time.
At this point the task is being performed in a beautifully stereotyped way: very beautifully regulated and highly repeated, trial to trial.
We can look down in the brain of the monkey.
And we see that it's distorted.
We can track these changes, and have tracked these changes in many such behaviors across time.
And here we see the distortion reflected in the map of the skin surfaces of the hand of the monkey.
Now this is a map, down in the surface of the brain, in which, in a very elaborate experiment we've reconstructed the responses, location by location, in a highly detailed response mapping of the responses of its neurons.
We see here a reconstruction of how the hand is represented in the brain.
We've actually distorted the map by the exercise.
And that is indicated in the pink. We have a couple fingertip surfaces that are larger.
These are the surfaces the monkey is using to manipulate the tool.
If we look at the selectivity of responses in the cortex of the monkey, we see that the monkey has actually changed the filter characteristics which represents input from the skin of the fingertips that are engaged.
In other words there is still a single, simple representation of the fingertips in this most organized of cortical areas of the surface of the skin of the body.
Monkey has like you have.
And yet now it's represented in substantially finer grain.
The monkey is getting more detailed information from these surfaces.
And that is an unknown -- unsuspected, maybe, by you -- part of acquiring the skill or ability.
Now actually we've looked in several different cortical areas in the monkey learning this task.
And each one of them changes in ways that are specific to the skill or ability.
So for example we can look to the cortical area that represents input that's controlling the posture of the monkey.
We look in cortical areas that control specific movements, and the sequences of movements that are required in the behavior, and so forth.
They are all remodeled. They all become specialized for the task at hand.
There are 15 or 20 cortical areas that are changed specifically when you learn a simple skill like this.
And that represents in your brain, really massive change.
It represents the change in a reliable way of the responses of tens of millions, possibly hundreds of millions of neurons in your brain.
It represents changes of hundreds of millions, possibly billions of synaptic connections in your brain.
This is constructed by physical change.
And the level of construction that occurs is massive.
Think about the changes that occur in the brain of a child through the course of acquiring their movement behavior abilities in general.
Or acquiring their native language abilities.
The changes are massive.
What it's all about is the selective representations of things that are important to the brain.
Because in most of the life of the brain this is under control of behavioral context.
It's what you pay attention to.
It's what's rewarding to you.
It's what the brain regards, itself, as positive and important to you.
It's all about cortical processing and forebrain specialization.
And that underlies your specialization.
That is why you, in your many skills and abilities, are a unique specialist: a specialist that's vastly different in your physical brain in detail than the brain of an individual 100 years ago; enormously different in the details from the brain of the average individual 1,000 years ago.
Now, one of the characteristics of this change process is that information is always related to other inputs or information that is occurring in immediate time, in context.
And that's because the brain is constructing representations of things that are correlated in little moments of time and that relate to one another in little moments of successive time.
The brain is recording all information and driving all change in temporal context.
Now overwhelmingly the most powerful context that's occurred in your brain is you.
Billions of events have occurred in your history that are related in time to yourself as the receiver, or yourself as the actor, yourself as the thinker, yourself as the mover.
Billions of times little pieces of sensation have come in from the surface of your body that are always associated with you as the receiver, and that result in the embodiment of you.
You are constructed, your self is constructed from these billions of events.
It's constructed. It's created in your brain.
And it's created in the brain via physical change.
This is a marvelously constructed thing that results in individual form because each one of us has vastly different histories, and vastly different experiences, that drive in to us this marvelous differentiation of self, of personhood.
Now we've used this research to try to understand not just how a normal person develops, and elaborates their skills and abilities, but also try to understand the origins of impairment, and the origins of differences or variations that might limit the capacities of a child, or an adult.
I'm going to talk about using these strategies to actually design brain plasticity-based approach to drive corrections in the machinery of a child that increases the competence of the child as a language receiver and user and, thereafter, as a reader.
And I'm going to talk about experiments that involve actually using this brain science, first of all to understand how it contributes to the loss of function as we age.
And then, by using it in a targeted approach we're going to try to differentiate the machinery to recover function in old age.
So the first example I'm going to talk about relates to children with learning impairments.
We now have a large body of literature that demonstrates that the fundamental problem that occurs in the majority of children that have early language impairments, and that are going to struggle to learn to read, is that their language processor is created in a defective form.
And the reason that it rises in a defective form is because early in the baby's brain's life the machine process is noisy.
It's that simple.
It's a signal-to-noise problem. Okay?
And there are a lot of things that contribute to that.
There are numerous inherited faults that could make the machine process noisier.
Now I might say the noise problem could also occur on the basis of information provided in the world from the ears.
If any -- those of you who are older in the audience know that when I was a child we understood that a child born with a cleft palate was born with what we called mental retardation.
We knew that they were going to be slow cognitively; we knew they were going to struggle to learn to develop normal language abilities; and we knew that they were going to struggle to learn to read.
Most of them would be intellectual and academic failures.
That's disappeared. That no longer applies.
That inherited weakness, that inherited condition has evaporated.
We don't hear about that anymore. Where did it go?
Well, it was understood by a Dutch surgeon, about 35 years ago, that if you simply fix the problem early enough, when the brain is still in this initial plastic period so it can set up this machinery adequately, in this initial set up time in the critical period, none of that happens.
What are you doing by operating on the cleft palate to correct it?
You're basically opening up the tubes that drain fluid from the middle ears, which have had them reliably full.
Every sound the child hears uncorrected is muffled.
It's degraded.
The child's native language is such a case is not English.
It's not Japanese.
It's muffled English. It's degraded Japanese.
It's crap.
And the brain specializes for it.
It creates a representation of language crap.
And then the child is stuck with it.
Now the crap doesn't just happen in the ear.
It can also happen in the brain.
The brain itself can be noisy. It's commonly noisy.
There are many inherited faults that can make it noisier.
And the native language for a child with such a brain is degraded.
It's not English. It's noisy English.
And that results in defective representations of sounds of words -- not normal -- a different strategy, by a machine that has different time constants and different space constants.
And you can look in the brain of such a child and record those time constants.
They are about an order of magnitude longer, about 11 times longer in duration on average, than in a normal child.
Space constants are about three times greater.
Such a child will have memory and cognitive deficits in this domain.
Of course they will. Because as a receiver of language, they are receiving it and representing it, and in information it's representing crap.
And they are going to have poor reading skills.
Because reading is dependent upon the translation of word sounds into this orthographic or visual representational form.
If you don't have a brain representation of word sounds that translation makes no sense.
And you are going to have corresponding abnormal neurology.
Then these children increasingly in evaluation after evaluation, in their operations in language, and their operations in reading -- we document that abnormal neurology.
The point is is that you can train the brain out of this.
A way to think about this is you can actually re-refine the processing capacity of the machinery by changing it.
Changing it in detail. It takes about 30 hours on the average.
And we've accomplished that in about 430,000 kids today.
Actually, probably about 15,000 children are being trained as we speak.
And actually when you look at the impacts, the impacts are substantial.
So here we're looking at the normal distribution.
What we're most interested in is these kids on the left side of the distribution.
This is from about 3,000 children.
You can see that most of the children on the left side of the distribution are moving into the middle or the right.
This is in a broad assessment of their language abilities.
This is like an IQ test for language.
The impact in the distribution, if you trained every child in the United States, would be to shift the whole distribution to the right and narrow the distribution.
This is a substantially large impact.
Think of a classroom of children in the language arts.
Think of the children on the slow side of the class.
We have the potential to move most of those children to the middle or to the right side.
In addition to accurate language training it also fixes memory and cognition speech fluency and speech production.
And an important language dependent skill is enabled by this training -- that is to say reading.
And to a large extent it fixes the brain.
You can look down in the brain of a child in a variety of tasks that scientists have at Stanford, and MIT, and UCSF, and UCLA, and a number of other institutions.
And children operating in various language behaviors, or in various reading behaviors, you see for the most extent, for most children, their neuronal responses, complexly abnormal before you start, are normalized by the training.
Now you can also take the same approach to address problems in aging.
Where again the machinery is deteriorating now from competent machinery, it's going south.
Noise is increasing in the brain.
And learning modulation and control is deteriorating.
And you can actually look down on the brain of such an individual and witness a change in the time constants and space constants with which, for example, the brain is representing language again.
Just as the brain came out of chaos at the beginning, it's going back into chaos in the end.
This results in declines in memory in cognition, and in postural ability and agility.
It turns out you can train the brain of such an individual -- this is a small population of such individuals -- train equally intensively for about 30 hours.
These are 80- to 90-year-olds.
And what you see are substantial improvements of their immediate memory, of their ability to remember things after a delay, of their ability to control their attention, their language abilities and visual-spatial abilities.
The overall neuropsychological index of these trained individuals in this population is about two standard deviations.
That means that if you sit at the left side of the distribution, and I'm looking at your neuropyschological abilities, the average person has moved to the middle or the right side of the distribution.
It means that most people who are at risk for senility, more or less immediately, are now in a protected position.
My issues are to try to get to rescuing older citizens more completely and in larger numbers, because I think this can be done in this arena on a vast scale -- and the same for kids.
My main interest is how to elaborate this science to address other maladies.
I'm specifically interested in things like autism, and cerebral palsy, these great childhood catastrophes.
And in older age conditions like Parkinsonism, and in other acquired impairments like schizophrenia.
Your issues as it relates to this science, is how to maintain your own high-functioning learning machine.
And of course, a well-ordered life in which learning is a continuous part of it, is key.
But also in your future is brain aerobics.
Get ready for it. It's going to be a part of every life not too far in the future, just like physical exercise is a part of every well organized life in the contemporary period.
The other way that we will ultimately come to consider this literature and the science that is important to you is in a consideration of how to nurture yourself.
Now that you know, now that science is telling us that you are in charge, that it's under your control, that your happiness, your well-being, your abilities, your capacities, are capable of continuous modification, continuous improvement, and you're the responsible agent and party.
Of course a lot of people will ignore this advice.
It will be a long time before they really understand it.
(Laughter) Now that's another issue and not my fault.
Okay. Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: Nick Bostrom.
So, you have already given us so many crazy ideas out there.
I think a couple of decades ago, you made the case that we might all be living in a simulation, or perhaps probably were.
More recently, you've painted the most vivid examples of how artificial general intelligence could go horribly wrong.
And now this year, you're about to publish a paper that presents something called the vulnerable world hypothesis.
And our job this evening is to give the illustrated guide to that.
So let's do that.
What is that hypothesis?
Nick Bostrom: It's trying to think about a sort of structural feature of the current human condition.
You like the urn metaphor, so I'm going to use that to explain it.
So picture a big urn filled with balls representing ideas, methods, possible technologies.
You can think of the history of human creativity as the process of reaching into this urn and pulling out one ball after another, and the net effect so far has been hugely beneficial, right?
We've extracted a great many white balls, some various shades of gray, mixed blessings.
We haven't so far pulled out the black ball -- a technology that invariably destroys the civilization that discovers it.
So the paper tries to think about what could such a black ball be.
CA: So you define that ball as one that would inevitably bring about civilizational destruction.
NB: Unless we exit what I call the semi-anarchic default condition.
But sort of, by default.
CA: So, you make the case compelling by showing some sort of counterexamples where you believe that so far we've actually got lucky, that we might have pulled out that death ball without even knowing it.
So there's this quote, what's this quote?
NB: Well, I guess it's just meant to illustrate the difficulty of foreseeing what basic discoveries will lead to.
We just don't have that capability.
Because we have become quite good at pulling out balls, but we don't really have the ability to put the ball back into the urn, right.
We can invent, but we can't un-invent.
So our strategy, such as it is, is to hope that there is no black ball in the urn.
CA: So once it's out, it's out, and you can't put it back in, and you think we've been lucky.
So talk through a couple of these examples.
You talk about different types of vulnerability.
NB: So the easiest type to understand is a technology that just makes it very easy to cause massive amounts of destruction.
Synthetic biology might be a fecund source of that kind of black ball, but many other possible things we could -- think of geoengineering, really great, right?
We could combat global warming, but you don't want it to get too easy either, you don't want any random person and his grandmother to have the ability to radically alter the earth's climate.
Or maybe lethal autonomous drones, massed-produced, mosquito-sized killer bot swarms.
Nanotechnology, artificial general intelligence.
CA: You argue in the paper that it's a matter of luck that when we discovered that nuclear power could create a bomb, it might have been the case that you could have created a bomb with much easier resources, accessible to anyone.
NB: Yeah, so think back to the 1930s where for the first time we make some breakthroughs in nuclear physics, some genius figures out that it's possible to create a nuclear chain reaction and then realizes that this could lead to the bomb.
And we do some more work, it turns out that what you require to make a nuclear bomb is highly enriched uranium or plutonium, which are very difficult materials to get.
You need ultracentrifuges, you need reactors, like, massive amounts of energy.
But suppose it had turned out instead there had been an easy way to unlock the energy of the atom.
That maybe by baking sand in the microwave oven or something like that you could have created a nuclear detonation.
So we know that that's physically impossible.
But before you did the relevant physics how could you have known how it would turn out?
CA: Although, couldn't you argue that for life to evolve on Earth that implied sort of stable environment, that if it was possible to create massive nuclear reactions relatively easy, the Earth would never have been stable, that we wouldn't be here at all.
NB: Yeah, unless there were something that is easy to do on purpose but that wouldn't happen by random chance.
So, like things we can easily do, we can stack 10 blocks on top of one another, but in nature, you're not going to find, like, a stack of 10 blocks.
CA: OK, so this is probably the one that many of us worry about most, and yes, synthetic biology is perhaps the quickest route that we can foresee in our near future to get us here.
NB: Yeah, and so think about what that would have meant if, say, anybody by working in their kitchen for an afternoon could destroy a city.
It's hard to see how modern civilization as we know it could have survived that.
Because in any population of a million people, there will always be some who would, for whatever reason, choose to use that destructive power.
So if that apocalyptic residual would choose to destroy a city, or worse, then cities would get destroyed.
CA: So here's another type of vulnerability.
Talk about this.
NB: Yeah, so in addition to these kind of obvious types of black balls that would just make it possible to blow up a lot of things, other types would act by creating bad incentives for humans to do things that are harmful.
So, the Type-2a, we might call it that, is to think about some technology that incentivizes great powers to use their massive amounts of force to create destruction.
So, nuclear weapons were actually very close to this, right?
What we did, we spent over 10 trillion dollars to build 70,000 nuclear warheads and put them on hair-trigger alert.
And there were several times during the Cold War we almost blew each other up.
It's not because a lot of people felt this would be a great idea, let's all spend 10 trillion dollars to blow ourselves up, but the incentives were such that we were finding ourselves -- this could have been worse.
Imagine if there had been a safe first strike.
Then it might have been very tricky, in a crisis situation, to refrain from launching all their nuclear missiles.
If nothing else, because you would fear that the other side might do it.
CA: Right, mutual assured destruction kept the Cold War relatively stable, without that, we might not be here now.
NB: It could have been more unstable than it was.
And there could be other properties of technology.
It could have been harder to have arms treaties, if instead of nuclear weapons there had been some smaller thing or something less distinctive.
CA: And as well as bad incentives for powerful actors, you also worry about bad incentives for all of us, in Type-2b here.
NB: Yeah, so, here we might take the case of global warming.
There are a lot of little conveniences that cause each one of us to do things that individually have no significant effect, right?
But if billions of people do it, cumulatively, it has a damaging effect.
Now, global warming could have been a lot worse than it is.
So we have the climate sensitivity parameter, right.
It's a parameter that says how much warmer does it get if you emit a certain amount of greenhouse gases.
But, suppose that it had been the case that with the amount of greenhouse gases we emitted, instead of the temperature rising by, say, between three and 4.5 degrees by 2100, suppose it had been 15 degrees or 20 degrees.
Like, then we might have been in a very bad situation.
Or suppose that renewable energy had just been a lot harder to do.
Or that there had been more fossil fuels in the ground.
CA: Couldn't you argue that if in that case of -- if what we are doing today had resulted in 10 degrees difference in the time period that we could see, actually humanity would have got off its ass and done something about it.
We're stupid, but we're not maybe that stupid.
Or maybe we are.
NB: I wouldn't bet on it.
(Laughter) You could imagine other features.
So, right now, it's a little bit difficult to switch to renewables and stuff, right, but it can be done.
But it might just have been, with slightly different physics, it could have been much more expensive to do these things.
CA: And what's your view, Nick?
Do you think, putting these possibilities together, that this earth, humanity that we are, we count as a vulnerable world?
That there is a death ball in our future?
NB: It's hard to say.
I mean, I think there might well be various black balls in the urn, that's what it looks like.
There might also be some golden balls that would help us protect against black balls.
And I don't know which order they will come out.
CA: I mean, one possible philosophical critique of this idea is that it implies a view that the future is essentially settled.
That there either is that ball there or it's not.
And in a way, that's not a view of the future that I want to believe.
I want to believe that the future is undetermined, that our decisions today will determine what kind of balls we pull out of that urn.
NB: I mean, if we just keep inventing, like, eventually we will pull out all the balls.
I mean, I think there's a kind of weak form of technological determinism that is quite plausible, like, you're unlikely to encounter a society that uses flint axes and jet planes.
But you can almost think of a technology as a set of affordances.
So technology is the thing that enables us to do various things and achieve various effects in the world.
How we'd then use that, of course depends on human choice.
But if we think about these three types of vulnerability, they make quite weak assumptions about how we would choose to use them.
So a Type-1 vulnerability, again, this massive, destructive power, it's a fairly weak assumption to think that in a population of millions of people there would be some that would choose to use it destructively.
CA: For me, the most single disturbing argument is that we actually might have some kind of view into the urn that makes it actually very likely that we're doomed.
Namely, if you believe in accelerating power, that technology inherently accelerates, that we build the tools that make us more powerful, then at some point you get to a stage where a single individual can take us all down, and then it looks like we're screwed.
Isn't that argument quite alarming?
NB: Ah, yeah.
(Laughter) I think -- Yeah, we get more and more power, and [it's] easier and easier to use those powers, but we can also invent technologies that kind of help us control how people use those powers.
CA: So let's talk about that, let's talk about the response.
Suppose that thinking about all the possibilities that are out there now -- it's not just synbio, it's things like cyberwarfare, artificial intelligence, etc., etc. -- that there might be serious doom in our future.
What are the possible responses?
And you've talked about four possible responses as well.
NB: Restricting technological development doesn't seem promising, if we are talking about a general halt to technological progress.
I think neither feasible, nor would it be desirable even if we could do it.
I think there might be very limited areas where maybe you would want slower technological progress.
You don't, I think, want faster progress in bioweapons, or in, say, isotope separation, that would make it easier to create nukes.
CA: I mean, I used to be fully on board with that.
But I would like to actually push back on that for a minute.
Just because, first of all, if you look at the history of the last couple of decades, you know, it's always been push forward at full speed, it's OK, that's our only choice.
But if you look at globalization and the rapid acceleration of that, if you look at the strategy of "move fast and break things" and what happened with that, and then you look at the potential for synthetic biology, I don't know that we should move forward rapidly or without any kind of restriction to a world where you could have a DNA printer in every home and high school lab.
There are some restrictions, right?
NB: Possibly, there is the first part, the not feasible.
If you think it would be desirable to stop it, there's the problem of feasibility.
So it doesn't really help if one nation kind of -- CA: No, it doesn't help if one nation does, but we've had treaties before.
That's really how we survived the nuclear threat, was by going out there and going through the painful process of negotiating.
I just wonder whether the logic isn't that we, as a matter of global priority, we shouldn't go out there and try, like, now start negotiating really strict rules on where synthetic bioresearch is done, that it's not something that you want to democratize, no?
NB: I totally agree with that -- that it would be desirable, for example, maybe to have DNA synthesis machines, not as a product where each lab has their own device, but maybe as a service.
Maybe there could be four or five places in the world where you send in your digital blueprint and the DNA comes back, right?
And then, you would have the ability, if one day it really looked like it was necessary, we would have like, a finite set of choke points.
So I think you want to look for kind of special opportunities, where you could have tighter control.
CA: Your belief is, fundamentally, we are not going to be successful in just holding back.
Someone, somewhere -- North Korea, you know -- someone is going to go there and discover this knowledge, if it's there to be found.
NB: That looks plausible under current conditions.
It's not just synthetic biology, either.
I mean, any kind of profound, new change in the world could turn out to be a black ball.
CA: Let's look at another possible response.
NB: This also, I think, has only limited potential.
So, with the Type-1 vulnerability again, I mean, if you could reduce the number of people who are incentivized to destroy the world, if only they could get access and the means, that would be good.
CA: In this image that you asked us to do you're imagining these drones flying around the world with facial recognition.
When they spot someone showing signs of sociopathic behavior, they shower them with love, they fix them.
NB: I think it's like a hybrid picture.
Eliminate can either mean, like, incarcerate or kill, or it can mean persuade them to a better view of the world.
But the point is that, suppose you were extremely successful in this, and you reduced the number of such individuals by half.
And if you want to do it by persuasion, you are competing against all other powerful forces that are trying to persuade people, parties, religion, education system.
But suppose you could reduce it by half, I don't think the risk would be reduced by half.
Maybe by five or 10 percent.
CA: You're not recommending that we gamble humanity's future on response two.
NB: I think it's all good to try to deter and persuade people, but we shouldn't rely on that as our only safeguard.
CA: How about three?
NB: I think there are two general methods that we could use to achieve the ability to stabilize the world against the whole spectrum of possible vulnerabilities.
And we probably would need both.
So, one is an extremely effective ability to do preventive policing.
Such that you could intercept.
If anybody started to do this dangerous thing, you could intercept them in real time, and stop them.
So this would require ubiquitous surveillance, everybody would be monitored all the time.
CA: This is "Minority Report," essentially, a form of.
NB: You would have maybe AI algorithms, big freedom centers that were reviewing this, etc., etc.
CA: You know that mass surveillance is not a very popular term right now?
(Laughter) NB: Yeah, so this little device there, imagine that kind of necklace that you would have to wear at all times with multidirectional cameras.
But, to make it go down better, just call it the "freedom tag" or something like that.
(Laughter) CA: OK.
NB: Actually, there's a whole big conversation on this on its own, obviously.
There are huge problems and risks with that, right?
We may come back to that.
So the other, the final, the other general stabilization capability is kind of plugging another governance gap.
So the surveillance would be kind of governance gap at the microlevel, like, preventing anybody from ever doing something highly illegal.
Then, there's a corresponding governance gap at the macro level, at the global level.
You would need the ability, reliably, to prevent the worst kinds of global coordination failures, to avoid wars between great powers, arms races, cataclysmic commons problems, in order to deal with the Type-2a vulnerabilities.
CA: Global governance is a term that's definitely way out of fashion right now, but could you make the case that throughout history, the history of humanity is that at every stage of technological power increase, people have reorganized and sort of centralized the power.
So, for example, when a roving band of criminals could take over a society, the response was, well, you have a nation-state and you centralize force, a police force or an army, so, "No, you can't do that."
The logic, perhaps, of having a single person or a single group able to take out humanity means at some point we're going to have to go this route, at least in some form, no?
NB: It's certainly true that the scale of political organization has increased over the course of human history.
It used to be hunter-gatherer band, right, and then chiefdom, city-states, nations, now there are international organizations and so on and so forth.
Again, I just want to make sure I get the chance to stress that obviously there are huge downsides and indeed, massive risks, both to mass surveillance and to global governance.
I'm just pointing out that if we are lucky, the world could be such that these would be the only ways you could survive a black ball.
CA: The logic of this theory, it seems to me, is that we've got to recognize we can't have it all.
That the sort of, I would say, naive dream that many of us had that technology is always going to be a force for good, keep going, don't stop, go as fast as you can and not pay attention to some of the consequences, that's actually just not an option.
We can have that.
If we have that, we're going to have to accept some of these other very uncomfortable things with it, and kind of be in this arms race with ourselves of, you want the power, you better limit it, you better figure out how to limit it.
NB: I think it is an option, a very tempting option, it's in a sense the easiest option and it might work, but it means we are fundamentally vulnerable to extracting a black ball.
Now, I think with a bit of coordination, like, if you did solve this macrogovernance problem, and the microgovernance problem, then we could extract all the balls from the urn and we'd benefit greatly.
CA: I mean, if we're living in a simulation, does it matter?
We just reboot.
(Laughter) NB: Then ... I ...
(Laughter) I didn't see that one coming.
CA: So what's your view?
Putting all the pieces together, how likely is it that we're doomed?
(Laughter) I love how people laugh when you ask that question.
NB: On an individual level, we seem to kind of be doomed anyway, just with the time line, we're rotting and aging and all kinds of things, right?
(Laughter) It's actually a little bit tricky.
If you want to set up so that you can attach a probability, first, who are we?
If you're very old, probably you'll die of natural causes, if you're very young, you might have a 100-year -- the probability might depend on who you ask.
Then the threshold, like, what counts as civilizational devastation?
In the paper I don't require an existential catastrophe in order for it to count.
This is just a definitional matter, I say a billion dead, or a reduction of world GDP by 50 percent, but depending on what you say the threshold is, you get a different probability estimate.
But I guess you could put me down as a frightened optimist.
(Laughter) CA: You're a frightened optimist, and I think you've just created a large number of other frightened ...
(Laughter) NB: In the simulation.
CA: In a simulation.
Nick Bostrom, your mind amazes me, thank you so much for scaring the living daylights out of us.
(Applause)
I should tell you that when I was asked to be here, I thought to myself that well, it's TED.
And these TEDsters are -- you know, as innocent as that name sounds -- these are the philanthropists and artists and scientists who sort of shape our world.
And what could I possibly have to say that would be distinguished enough to justify my participation in something like that?
And so I thought perhaps a really civilized-sounding British accent might help things a bit.
And then I thought no, no. I should just get up there and be myself and just talk the way I really talk because, after all, this is the great unveiling.
And so I thought I'd come up here and unveil my real voice to you.
Although many of you already know that I do speak the Queen's English because I am from Queens, New York.
(Laughter) But the theme of this session, of course, is invention.
And while I don't have any patents that I'm aware of, you will be meeting a few of my inventions today.
I suppose it's fair to say that I am interested in the invention of self or selves.
We're all born into certain circumstances with particular physical traits, unique developmental experiences, geographical and historical contexts.
But then what?
To what extent do we self-construct, do we self-invent?
How do we self-identify and how mutable is that identity?
Like, what if one could be anyone at any time?
Well my characters, like the ones in my shows, allow me to play with the spaces between those questions.
And so I've brought a couple of them with me.
And well, they're very excited.
What I should tell you -- what I should tell you is that they've each prepared their own little TED talks.
So feel free to think of this as Sarah University.
(Laughter) Okay. Okay. Oh, well.
Oh, wonderful.
Good evening everybody.
Thank you so very much for having me here today.
Ah, thank you very much. My name is Lorraine Levine.
Oh my! There's so many of you.
Hi sweetheart. Okay.
(Laughter) Anyway, I am here because of a young girl, Sarah Jones.
She's a very nice, young black girl.
Well you know, she calls herself black -- she's really more like a caramel color if you look at her.
But anyway.
(Laughter) She has me here because she puts me in her show, what she calls her one-woman show.
And you know what that means, of course.
That means she takes the credit and then makes us come out here and do all the work.
But I don't mind.
Frankly, I'm kvelling just to be here with all the luminaries you have attending something like this, you know.
Really, it's amazing.
Not only, of course, the scientists and all the wonderful giants of the industries but the celebrities.
There are so many celebrities running around here.
I saw -- Glenn Close I saw earlier. I love her.
And she was getting a yogurt in the Google cafe.
Isn't that adorable?
(Laughter) So many others you see, they're just wonderful.
It's lovely to know they're concerned, you know.
And -- oh, I saw Goldie Hawn.
Oh, Goldie Hawn. I love her, too; she's wonderful. Yeah.
You know, she's only half Jewish.
Did you know that about her?
Yeah. But even so, a wonderful talent. (Laughter) And I -- you know, when I saw her, such a wonderful feeling.
Yeah, she's lovely.
But anyway, I should have started by saying just how lucky I feel.
It's such an eye-opening experience to be here.
You're all so responsible for this world that we live in today.
You know, I couldn't have dreamed of such a thing as a young girl.
And you've all made these advancements happen in such a short time -- you're all so young.
You know, your parents must be very proud.
But I -- I also appreciate the diversity that you have here.
I noticed it's very multicultural.
You know, when you're standing up here, you can see all the different people.
It's like a rainbow.
It's okay to say rainbow. Yeah.
I just -- I can't keep up with whether you can say, you know, the different things.
What are you allowed to say or not say?
I just -- I don't want to offend anybody. You know.
But anyway, you know, I just think that to be here with all of you accomplished young people -- literally, some of you, the architects building our brighter future.
You know, it's heartening to me.
Even though, quite frankly, some of your presentations are horrifying, absolutely horrifying.
It's true. It's true.
You know, between the environmental degradation and the crashing of the world markets you're talking about.
And of course, we know it's all because of the -- all the ...
Well, I don't know how else to say it to you, so I'll just say it my way: the ganeyvish schticklich coming from the governments and the, you know, the bankers and the Wall Street. You know it.
Anyway.
(Laughter) The point is, I'm happy somebody has practical ideas to get us out of this mess.
So I salute each of you and your stellar achievements.
Thank you for all that you do.
And congratulations on being such big makhers that you've become TED meisters.
So, happy continued success.
Congratulations. Mazel tov.
(Applause) Hi. Hi.
Thank you everybody.
Sorry, this is such a wonderful opportunity and everything, to be here right now.
My name is Noraida. And I'm just -- I'm so thrilled to be part of like your TED conference that you're doing and everything like that.
I am Dominican-American.
Actually, you could say I grew up in the capital of Dominican Republic, otherwise known as Washington Heights in New York City.
But I don't know if there's any other Dominican people here, but I know that Juan Enriquez, he was here yesterday.
And I think he's Mexican, so that's -- honestly, that's close enough for me right now. So -- (Laughter) I just -- I'm sorry.
I'm just trying not to be nervous because this is a very wonderful experience for me and everything.
And I just -- you know I'm not used to doing the public speaking.
And whenever I get nervous I start to talk really fast.
Nobody can understand nothing I'm saying, which is very frustrating for me, as you can imagine.
I usually have to just like try to calm down and take a deep breath.
But then on top of that, you know, Sarah Jones told me we only have 18 minutes.
So then I'm like, should I be nervous, you know, because maybe it's better.
And I'm just trying not to panic and freak out. So I like, take a deep breath.
Okay. Sorry. So anyway, what I was trying to say is that I really love TED.
Like, I love everything about this. It's amazing.
Like, it's -- I can't get over this right now.
And, like, people would not believe, seriously, where I'm from, that this even exists.
You know, like even, I mean I love like the name, the -- TED.
I mean I know it's a real person and everything, but I'm just saying that like, you know, I think it's very cool how it's also an acronym, you know, which is like, you know, is like very high concept and everything like that.
I like that.
And actually, I can relate to the whole like acronym thing and everything.
Because, actually, I'm a sophomore at college right now.
At my school -- actually I was part of co-founding an organization, which is like a leadership thing, you know, like you guys, you would really like it and everything.
And the organization is called DA BOMB, A\and DA BOMB -- not like what you guys can build and everything -- it's like, DA BOMB, it means like Dominican -- it's an acronym -- Dominican-American Benevolent Organization for Mothers and Babies.
So, I know, see, like the name is like a little bit long, but with the war on terror and everything, the Dean of Student Activities has asked us to stop saying DA BOMB and use the whole thing so nobody would get the wrong idea, whatever.
So, basically like DA BOMB -- what Dominican-American Benevolent Organization for Mothers and Babies does is, basically, we try to advocate for students who show a lot of academic promise and who also happen to be mothers like me.
I am a working mother, and I also go to school full-time.
And, you know, it's like -- it's so important to have like role models out there.
I mean, I know sometimes our lifestyles are very different, whatever.
But like even at my job -- like, I just got promoted.
Right now it's very exciting actually for me because I'm the Junior Assistant to the Associate Director under the Senior Vice President for Business Development -- that's my new title.
So, but I think whether you own your own company or you're just starting out like me, like something like this is so vital for people to just continue expanding their minds and learning.
And if everybody, like all people really had access to that, it would be a very different world out there, as I know you know.
So, I think all people, we need that, but especially, I look at people like me, you know like, I mean, Latinos -- we're about to be the majority, in like two weeks.
So, we deserve just as much to be part of the exchange of ideas as everybody else.
So, I'm very happy that you're, you know, doing this kind of thing, making the talks available online.
That's very good. I love that.
And I just -- I love you guys. I love TED.
And if you don't mind, privately now, in the future, I'm going to think of TED as an acronym for Technology, Entertainment and Dominicans.
Thank you very much.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, that was Noraida, and just like Lorraine and everybody else you're meeting today, these are folks who are based on real people from my real life: friends, neighbors, family members.
I come from a multicultural family.
In fact, the older lady you just met: very, very loosely based on a great aunt on my mother's side.
It's a long story, believe me.
But on top of my family background, my parents also sent me to the United Nations school, where I encountered a plethora of new characters, including Alexandre, my French teacher, okay.
Well, you know, it was beginner French, that I am taking with her, you know.
And it was Madame Bousson, you know, she was very [French].
It was like, you know, she was there in the class, you know, she was kind of typically French.
You know, she was very chic, but she was very filled with ennui, you know.
And she would be there, you know, kind of talking with the class, you know, talking about the, you know, the existential futility of life, you know.
And we were only 11 years old, so it was not appropriate. (Laughter) But [German].
Yes, I took German for three years, [German], and it was quite the experience because I was the only black girl in the class, even in the UN school.
Although, you know, it was wonderful.
The teacher, Herr Schtopf, he never discriminated.
Never. He always, always treated each of us, you know, equally unbearably during the class.
So, there were the teachers and then there were my friends, classmates from everywhere, many of whom are still dear friends to this day.
And they've inspired many characters as well.
For example, a friend of mine.
Well, I just wanted to quickly say good evening.
My name is Praveen Manvi and thank you very much for this opportunity.
Of course, TED, the reputation precedes itself all over the world.
But, you know, I am originally from India, and I wanted to start by telling you that once Sarah Jones told me that we will be having the opportunity to come here to TED in California, originally, I was very pleased and, frankly, relieved because, you know, I am a human rights advocate.
And usually my work, it takes me to Washington D.C.
And there, I must attend these meetings, mingling with some tiresome politicians, trying to make me feel comfortable by telling how often they are eating the curry in Georgetown. (Laughter) So, you can just imagine -- right.
So, but I'm thrilled to be joining all of you here.
I wish we had more time together, but that's for another time. Okay? Great.
(Applause) And, sadly, I don't think we'll have time for you to meet everybody I brought, but -- I'm trying to behave myself, it's my first time here.
But I do want to introduce you to a couple of folks you may recognize, if you saw "Bridge and Tunnel."
Uh, well, thank you.
Good evening.
My name is Pauline Ning, and first I want to tell you that I'm -- of course I am a member of the Chinese community in New York.
But when Sarah Jones asked me to please come to TED, I said, well, you know, first, I don't know that, you know -- before two years ago, you would not find me in front of an audience of people, much less like this because I did not like to give speeches because I feel that, as an immigrant, I do not have good English skills for speaking.
But then, I decided, just like Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, I try anyway.
(Laughter) My daughter -- my daughter wrote that, she told me, "Always start your speech with humor."
But my background -- I want to tell you story only briefly.
My husband and I, we brought our son and daughter here in 1980s to have the freedom we cannot have in China at that time.
And we tried to teach our kids to be proud of their tradition, but it's very hard.
You know, as immigrant, I would speak Chinese to them, and they would always answer me back in English.
They love rock music, pop culture, American culture.
But when they got older, when the time comes for them to start think about getting married, that's when we expect them to realize, a little bit more, their own culture.
But that's where we had some problems.
My son, he says he is not ready to get married.
And he has a sweetheart, but she is American woman, not Chinese.
It's not that it's bad, but I told him, "What's wrong with a Chinese woman?"
But I think he will change his mind soon.
So, then I decide instead, I will concentrate on my daughter.
The daughter's marriage is very special to the mom.
But first, she said she's not interested.
She only wants to spend time with her friends.
And then at college, it's like she never came home.
And she doesn't want me to come and visit.
So I said, "What's wrong in this picture?"
So, I accused my daughter to have like a secret boyfriend.
But she told me, "Mom, you don't have to worry about boys because I don't like them."
(Laughter) And I said, "Yes, men can be difficult, but all women have to get used to that."
She said, "No Mom. I mean, I don't like boys. I like girls.
I am lesbian."
So, I always teach my kids to respect American ideas, but I told my daughter that this is one exception -- (Laughter) -- that she is not gay, she is just confused by this American problem.
But she told me, "Mom, it's not American."
She said she is in love -- in love with a nice Chinese girl.
(Laughter) So, these are the words I am waiting to hear, but from my son, not my daughter.
(Laughter) But at first I did not know what to do.
But then, over time, I have come to understand that this is who she is.
So, even though sometimes it's still hard, I will share with you that it helps me to realize society is more tolerant, usually because of places like this, because of ideas like this, and people like you, with an open mind.
So I think maybe TED, you impact people's lives in the ways maybe even you don't realize.
So, for my daughter's sake, I thank you for your ideas worth spreading.
Thank you. Xie xie.
(Applause) Good evening. My name is Habbi Belahal.
And I would like to first of all thank Sarah Jones for putting all of the pressure on the only Arab who she brought with her to be last today.
I am originally from Jordan.
And I teach comparative literature at Queens College.
It is not Harvard.
But I feel a bit like a fish out of water.
But I am very proud of my students.
And I see that a few of them did make it here to the conference.
So you will get the extra credit I promised you.
But, while I know that I may not look like the typical TED-izen, as you would say, I do like to make the point that we in global society, we are never as different as the appearances may suggest.
So, if you will indulge me, I will share quickly with you a bit of verse, which I memorized as a young girl at 16 years of age.
So, back in the ancient times.
[Arabic] And this roughly translates: "Please, let me hold your hand.
I want to hold your hand.
I want to hold your hand.
And when I touch you, I feel happy inside.
It's such a feeling that my love, I can't hide, I can't hide, I can't hide."
Well, so okay, but please, please, but please.
If it is sounding familiar, it is because I was at the same time in my life listening to the Beatles.
On the radio [unclear], they were very popular.
So, all of that is to say that I like to believe that for every word intended as to render us deaf to one another, there is always a lyric connecting ears and hearts across the continents in rhyme.
And I pray that this is the way that we will self-invent, in time.
That's all, shukran. Thank you very much for the opportunity.
Okay? Great.
(Applause) Thank you all very much. It was lovely.
Thank you for having me.
(Applause) Thank you very, very much. I love you.
(Applause) Well, you have to let me say this.
I just -- thank you.
I want to thank Chris and Jacqueline, and just everyone for having me here.
It's been a long time coming, and I feel like I'm home.
And I know I've performed for some of your companies or some of you have seen me elsewhere, but this is honestly one of the best audiences I've ever experienced.
The whole thing is amazing, and so don't you all go reinventing yourselves any time soon.
(Applause)
Ethic and her robot Hedge agree to help the resistance leader, Adila, sabotage the art-incinerating furnace-bots.
In exchange, Adila promises to lead them to the first object of Ethics quest, an artifact called the Node of Power.
Years ago, there was just one furnace-bot.
It had a 0 inside its furnace and an unknown, randomly generated serial number.
Over time, the original self-replicated to produce more identical furnace-bots.
Each child inherited the originals unknown serial number within its furnace, and had a random, unique serial number of its own inscribed on its shell.
The second generation of furnace- bots also self-replicated in the same way, always passing their own serial numbers to their offsprings furnaces.
This continued on for many generations.
Today, each furnace-bot receives its orders from its parent.
So if Ethic can find the original 0 bot and somehow change its instructions, she could take over the entire army, all at once.
Adila has the perfect solution: a data crystal that shes been carrying for years, waiting for the right moment to activate it.
It contains a program designed to gain control of a bot and give it new instructions.
But if its uploaded to any furnace- bot other than the original, the 0 bot will override the instructions and destroy the data crystal in the process.
The feeding is just a few minutes away, and theres only one chance to get this right.
Fortunately, Hedges ability to store data can help.
In programming, a piece of information gets stored in something called a variable.
Variables are basically containers that hold onto numbers, words, or other values.
How does Ethic program Hedge to find the original 0 bot as quickly as possible?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Heres a hint.
Programs can be written to have as many variables as you need, but you can solve this problem with just one.
Hedge can use it to store a serial number and replace it with a new one as often as he needs.
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
A key insight here is that Hedge doesnt need to map out the entire set of relationships to find the original furnace-bot.
If, for example, he gets lucky and picks the original one right away, hell be done.
But if he starts with any other bot, he can still find a path that leads straight back to the 0-bot by following a simple set of instructions.
To help craft them, lets first simplify the problem.
Lets say there were only three furnace-bots; a parent and two children, but you dont know which is which.
You could have Hedge pick one at random and look inside its furnace.
Now, you know the family tree looks like this.
If the number inside the furnace is a 0, youve found the parent.
If not, then no matter which child you chose, it must have the parents serial number in its furnace.
So in this scenario, youre guaranteed to find the parent in one or two moves.
In actuality, there are many furnace-bots, and you dont know how many generations there are nor what the family tree looks like.
But you dont need to, because Hedge can just keep repeating the same sequence of actions until he gets to the original.
How? With a loop.
Hedge can pick any bot at random, look inside its furnace, and store that serial number as a variable.
Then hell begin the following loop that will repeat until the stored variable equals 0, the furnace number of the original bot: 1. Find the bot whose shell serial number matches the stored number.
2. Look inside its furnace.
3. Store that new number, overwriting the old one.
Once the loop ends, well know that Hedge has found the 0 bot, so he should upload the control program.
So heres what happens: Hedge only takes 5 repetitions to find the original: robot 733 has the 0 in its furnace.
In a blink of a mechanical eye, the program spreads through the entire army, and Adila takes control.
She has the furnace-bots give off theatrical bouts of flame to hide the fact that theyre now secretly safe-guarding all of that artistic output.
Now that Ethics delivered the furnace-bots, Adila honors her end of the deal.
She leads Ethic and Hedge to the location of the first artifact, the Node of Power.
There, one thing is immediately clear: theyll have to steal it.
Meet Lucy.
She was a math major in college, and aced all her courses in probability and statistics.
Which do you think is more likely: that Lucy is a portrait artist, or that Lucy is a portrait artist who also plays poker?
In studies of similar questions, up to 80 percent of participants chose the equivalent of the second statement: that Lucy is a portrait artist who also plays poker.
After all, nothing we know about Lucy suggests an affinity for art, but statistics and probability are useful in poker.
And yet, this is the wrong answer.
Look at the options again.
How do we know the first statement is more likely to be true?
Because its a less specific version of the second statement.
Saying that Lucy is a portrait artist doesnt make any claims about what else she might or might not do.
But even though its far easier to imagine her playing poker than making art based on the background information, the second statement is only true if she does both of these things.
However counterintuitive it seems to imagine Lucy as an artist, the second scenario adds another condition on top of that, making it less likely.
For any possible set of events, the likelihood of A occurring will always be greater than the likelihood of A and B both occurring.
If we took a random sample of a million people who majored in math, the subset who are portrait artists might be relatively small.
But it will necessarily be bigger than the subset who are portrait artists and play poker.
Anyone who belongs to the second group will also belong to the first but not vice versa.
The more conditions there are, the less likely an event becomes.
So why do statements with more conditions sometimes seem more believable?
This is a phenomenon known as the conjunction fallacy.
When were asked to make quick decisions, we tend to look for shortcuts.
In this case, we look for what seems plausible rather than what is statistically most probable.
On its own, Lucy being an artist doesnt match the expectations formed by the preceding information.
The additional detail about her playing poker gives us a narrative that resonates with our intuitions it makes it seem more plausible.
And we choose the option that seems more representative of the overall picture, regardless of its actual probability.
This effect has been observed across multiple studies, including ones with participants who understood statistics well from students betting on sequences of dice rolls, to foreign policy experts predicting the likelihood of a diplomatic crisis.
The conjunction fallacy isnt just a problem in hypothetical situations.
Conspiracy theories and false news stories often rely on a version of the conjunction fallacy to seem credible the more resonant details are added to an outlandish story, the more plausible it begins to seem.
But ultimately, the likelihood a story is true can never be greater than the probability that its least likely component is true.
Juana Ramrez de Asbaje sat before a panel of prestigious theologians, jurists, and mathematicians.
The viceroy of New Spain had invited them to test the young womans knowledge by posing the most difficult questions they could muster.
But Juana successfully answered every challenge, from complicated equations to philosophical queries.
Observers would later liken the scene to a royal galleon fending off a few canoes. The woman who faced this interrogation was born in the mid-17th century.
At that time, Mexico had been a Spanish colony for over a century, leading to a complex and stratified class system.
Juanas maternal grandparents were born in Spain, making them members of Mexicos most esteemed class.
But Juana was born out of wedlock, and her father  a Spanish military captain  left her mother, Doa Isabel, to raise Juana and her sisters alone.
Fortunately, her grandfathers moderate means ensured the family a comfortable existence.
And Doa Isabel set a strong example for her daughters, successfully managing one of her fathers two estates, despite her illiteracy and the misogyny of the time.
It was perhaps this precedent that inspired Juanas lifelong confidence.
At age three, she secretly followed her older sister to school.
When she later learned that higher education was open only to men, she begged her mother to let her attend in disguise.
Her request denied, Juana found solace in her grandfathers private library.
By early adolescence, shed mastered philosophical debate, Latin, and the Aztec language Nahuatl.
Juanas precocious intellect attracted attention from the royal court in Mexico City, and when she was sixteen, the viceroy and his wife took her in as their lady-in-waiting.
Here, her plays and poems alternately dazzled and outraged the court.
Her provocative poem Foolish Men infamously criticized sexist double standards, decrying how men corrupt women while blaming them for immorality.
Despite its controversy, her work still inspired adoration, and numerous proposals.
But Juana was more interested in knowledge than marriage.
And in the patriarchal society of the time, there was only one place she could find it.
The Church, while still under the zealous influence of the Spanish Inquisition, would allow Juana to retain her independence and respectability while remaining unmarried.
At age 20, she entered the Hieronymite Convent of Santa Paula and took on her new name: Sor Juana Ins de la Cruz.
For years, Sor Juana was considered a prized treasure of the church.
She wrote dramas, comedies, and treatises on philosophy and mathematics, in addition to religious music and poetry.
She accrued a massive library, and was visited by many prominent scholars.
While serving as the convents treasurer and archivist, she also protected the livelihoods of her niece and sisters from men who tried to exploit them.
But her outspokenness ultimately brought her into conflict with her benefactors.
In 1690, a bishop published Sor Juanas private critique of a respected sermon.
In the publication, he admonished Sor Juana to devote herself to prayer rather than debate.
She replied that God would not have given women intellect if he did not want them to use it.
The exchange caught the attention of the conservative Archbishop of Mexico.
Slowly, Sor Juana was stripped of her prestige, forced to sell her books and give up writing.
Furious at this censorship, but unwilling to leave the church, she bitterly renewed her vows.
In her last act of defiance, she signed them I, the worst of all, in her own blood.
Deprived of scholarship, Sor Juana threw herself into charity work, and in 1695, she died of an illness she contracted while nursing her sisters.
Today, Sor Juana has been recognized as the first feminist in the Americas.
Shes the subject of countless documentaries, novels, and operas, and appears on Mexicos 200-peso banknote.
In the words of Nobel laureate Octavio Paz: It is not enough to say that Sor Juanas work is a product of history; we must add that history is also a product of her work.
So the first question is, why do we need to even worry about a pandemic threat?
What is it that we're concerned about?
When I say "we," I'm at the Council on Foreign Relations.
We're concerned in the national security community, and of course in the biology community and the public health community.
While globalization has increased travel, it's made it necessary that everybody be everywhere, all the time, all over the world.
And that means that your microbial hitchhikers are moving with you.
So a plague outbreak in Surat, India becomes not an obscure event, but a globalized event -- a globalized concern that has changed the risk equation.
Katrina showed us that we cannot completely depend on government to have readiness in hand, to be capable of handling things.
Indeed, an outbreak would be multiple Katrinas at once.
Our big concern at the moment is a virus called H5N1 flu -- some of you call it bird flu -- which first emerged in southern China, in the mid-1990s, but we didn't know about it until 1997.
At the end of last Christmas only 13 countries had seen H5N1.
But we're now up to 55 countries in the world, have had this virus emerge, in either birds, or people or both.
In the bird outbreaks we now can see that pretty much the whole world has seen this virus except the Americas.
And I'll get into why we've so far been spared in a moment.
In domestic birds, especially chickens, it's 100 percent lethal.
It's one of the most lethal things we've seen in circulation in the world in any recent centuries.
And we've dealt with it by killing off lots and lots and lots of chickens, and unfortunately often not reimbursing the peasant farmers with the result that there's cover-up.
It's also carried on migration patterns of wild migratory aquatic birds.
There has been this centralized event in a place called Lake Chenghai, China.
Two years ago the migrating birds had a multiple event where thousands died because of a mutation occurring in the virus, which made the species range broaden dramatically.
So that birds going to Siberia, to Europe, and to Africa carried the virus, which had not previously been possible.
We're now seeing outbreaks in human populations -- so far, fortunately, small events, tiny outbreaks, occasional clusters.
The virus has mutated dramatically in the last two years to form two distinct families, if you will, of the H5N1 viral tree with branches in them, and with different attributes that are worrying.
So what's concerning us? Well, first of all, at no time in history have we succeeded in making in a timely fashion, a specific vaccine for more than 260 million people.
It's not going to do us very much good in a global pandemic.
You've heard about the vaccine we're stockpiling.
But nobody believes it will actually be particularly effective if we have a real outbreak.
So one thought is: after 9/11, when the airports closed, our flu season was delayed by two weeks.
So the thought is, hey, maybe what we should do is just immediately -- we hear there is H5N1 spreading from human to human, the virus has mutated to be a human-to-human transmitter -- let's shut down the airports.
However, huge supercomputer analyses, done of the likely effectiveness of this, show that it won't buy us much time at all.
And of course it will be hugely disruptive in preparation plans.
For example, all masks are made in China.
How do you get them mobilized around the world if you've shut all the airports down?
How do you get the vaccines moved around the world and the drugs moved, and whatever may or not be available that would work.
So it turns out that shutting down the airports is counterproductive.
We're worried because this virus, unlike any other flu we've ever studied, can be transmitted by eating raw meat of the infected animals.
We've seen transmission to wild cats and domestic cats, and now also domestic pet dogs.
And in experimental feedings to rodents and ferrets, we found that the animals exhibit symptoms never seen with flu: seizures, central nervous system disorders, partial paralysis.
This is not your normal garden-variety flu.
It mimics what we now understand about reconstructing the 1918 flu virus, the last great pandemic, in that it also jumped directly from birds to people.
We had evolution over time, and this unbelievable mortality rate in human beings: 55 percent of people who have become infected with H5N1 have, in fact, succumbed.
And we don't have a huge number of people who got infected and never developed disease.
In experimental feeding in monkeys you can see that it actually downregulates a specific immune system modulator.
The result is that what kills you is not the virus directly, but your own immune system overreacting, saying, "Whatever this is so foreign I'm going berserk."
The result: most of the deaths have been in people under 30 years of age, robustly healthy young adults.
We have seen human-to-human transmission in at least three clusters -- fortunately involving very intimate contact, still not putting the world at large at any kind of risk.
Alright, so I've got you nervous.
Now you probably assume, well the governments are going to do something.
And we have spent a lot of money.
Most of the spending in the Bush administration has actually been more related to the anthrax results and bio-terrorism threat.
But a lot of money has been thrown out at the local level and at the federal level to look at infectious diseases.
End result: only 15 states have been certified to be able to do mass distribution of vaccine and drugs in a pandemic.
Half the states would run out of hospital beds in the first week, maybe two weeks.
And 40 states already have an acute nursing shortage.
Add on pandemic threat, you're in big trouble.
So what have people been doing with this money?
Exercises, drills, all over the world.
Let's pretend there's a pandemic.
Let's everybody run around and play your role.
Main result is that there is tremendous confusion.
Most of these people don't actually know what their job will be.
And the bottom line, major thing that has come through in every single drill: nobody knows who's in charge.
Nobody knows the chain of command.
If it were Los Angeles, is it the mayor, the governor, the President of the United States, the head of Homeland Security?
In fact, the federal government says it's a guy called the Principle Federal Officer, who happens to be with TSA.
The government says the federal responsibility will basically be about trying to keep the virus out, which we all know is impossible, and then to mitigate the impact primarily on our economy.
The rest is up to your local community.
Everything is about your town, where you live.
Well how good a city council you have, how good a mayor you have -- that's who's going to be in charge.
Most local facilities would all be competing to try and get their hands on their piece of the federal stockpile of a drug called Tamiflu, which may or may not be helpful -- I'll get into that -- of available vaccines, and any other treatments, and masks, and anything that's been stockpiled.
And you'll have massive competition.
Now we did purchase a vaccine, you've probably all heard about it, made by Sanofi-Aventis.
Unfortunately it's made against the current form of H5N1.
We know the virus will mutate. It will be a different virus.
The vaccine will probably be useless.
So here's where the decisions come in.
You're the mayor of your local town.
Let's see, should we order that all pets be kept indoors?
Germany did that when H5N1 appeared in Germany last year, in order to minimize the spread between households by household cats, dogs and so on.
What do we do when we don't have any containment rooms with reverse air that will allow the healthcare workers to take care of patients?
These are in Hong Kong; we have nothing like that here.
What about quarantine?
During the SARS epidemic in Beijing quarantine did seem to help.
We have no uniform policies regarding quarantine across the United States.
And some states have differential policies, county by county.
But what about the no-brainer things? Should we close all the schools?
Well then what about all the workers? They won't go to work if their kids aren't in school.
Encouraging telecommuting? What works?
Well the British government did a model of telecommuting.
Six weeks they had all people in the banking industry pretend a pandemic was underway.
What they found was, the core functions -- you know you still sort of had banks, but you couldn't get people to put money in the ATM machines.
Nobody was processing the credit cards.
Your insurance payments didn't go through.
And basically the economy would be in a disaster state of affairs.
And that's just office workers, bankers.
We don't know how important hand washing is for flu -- shocking. One assumes it's a good idea to wash your hands a lot.
But actually in scientific community there is great debate about what percentage of flu transmission between people is from sneezing and coughing and what percentage is on your hands.
The Institute of Medicine tried to look at the masking question.
Can we figure out a way, since we know we won't have enough masks because we don't make them in America anymore, they're all made in China -- do we need N95? A state-of-the-art, top-of-the-line, must-be-fitted-to-your-face mask?
Or can we get away with some different kinds of masks?
In the SARS epidemic, we learned in Hong Kong that most of transmission was because people were removing their masks improperly.
And their hand got contaminated with the outside of the mask, and then they rubbed their nose. Bingo! They got SARS.
It wasn't flying microbes.
If you go online right now, you'll get so much phony-baloney information.
You'll end up buying -- this is called an N95 mask. Ridiculous.
We don't actually have a standard for what should be the protective gear for the first responders, the people who will actually be there on the front lines.
And Tamiflu. You've probably heard of this drug, made by Hoffmann-La Roche, patented drug.
There is some indication that it may buy you some time in the midst of an outbreak.
Should you take Tamiflu for a long period of time, well, one of the side effects is suicidal ideations.
A public health survey analyzed the effect that large-scale Tamiflu use would have, actually shows it counteractive to public health measures, making matters worse.
And here is the other interesting thing: when a human being ingests Tamiflu, only 20 percent is metabolized appropriately to be an active compound in the human being.
The rest turns into a stable compound, which survives filtration into the water systems, thereby exposing the very aquatic birds that would carry flu and providing them a chance to breed resistant strains.
And we now have seen Tamiflu-resistant strains in both Vietnam in person-to-person transmission, and in Egypt in person-to-person transmission.
So I personally think that our life expectancy for Tamiflu as an effective drug is very limited -- very limited indeed.
Nevertheless most of the governments have based their whole flu policies on building stockpiles of Tamiflu.
Russia has actually stockpiled enough for 95 percent of all Russians.
We've stockpiled enough for 30 percent.
When I say enough, that's two weeks worth.
And then you're on your own because the pandemic is going to last for 18 to 24 months.
Some of the poorer countries that have had the most experience with H5N1 have built up stockpiles; they're already expired. They are already out of date.
What do we know from 1918, the last great pandemic?
The federal government abdicated most responsibility.
And so we ended up with this wild patchwork of regulations all over America.
Every city, county, state did their own thing.
And the rules and the belief systems were wildly disparate.
In some cases all schools, all churches, all public venues were closed.
The pandemic circulated three times in 18 months in the absence of commercial air travel.
The second wave was the mutated, super-killer wave.
And in the first wave we had enough healthcare workers.
But by the time the second wave hit it took such a toll among the healthcare workers that we lost most of our doctors and nurses that were on the front lines.
Overall we lost 700,000 people.
The virus was 100 percent lethal to pregnant women and we don't actually know why.
Most of the death toll was 15 to 40 year-olds -- robustly healthy young adults.
It was likened to the plague.
We don't actually know how many people died.
The low-ball estimate is 35 million.
This was based on European and North American data.
A new study by Chris Murray at Harvard shows that if you look at the databases that were kept by the Brits in India, there was a 31-fold greater death rate among the Indians.
So there is a strong belief that in places of poverty the death toll was far higher.
And that a more likely toll is somewhere in the neighborhood of 80 to 100 million people before we had commercial air travel.
So are we ready?
As a nation, no we're not.
And I think even those in the leadership would say that is the case, that we still have a long ways to go.
So what does that mean for you? Well the first thing is, I wouldn't start building up personal stockpiles of anything -- for yourself, your family, or your employees -- unless you've really done your homework.
What mask works, what mask doesn't work.
How many masks do you need?
The Institute of Medicine study felt that you could not recycle masks.
Well if you think it's going to last 18 months, are you going to buy 18 months worth of masks for every single person in your family?
We don't know -- again with Tamiflu, the number one side effect of Tamiflu is flu-like symptoms.
So then how can you tell who in your family has the flu if everybody is taking Tamiflu?
If you expand that out to think of a whole community, or all your employees in your company, you begin to realize how limited the Tamiflu option might be.
Everybody has come up to me and said, well I'll stockpile water or, I'll stockpile food, or what have you.
But really? Do you really have a place to stockpile 18 months worth of food? Twenty-four months worth of food?
Do you want to view the pandemic threat the way back in the 1950s people viewed the civil defense issue, and build your own little bomb shelter for pandemic flu?
I don't think that's rational.
I think it's about having to be prepared as communities, not as individuals -- being prepared as nation, being prepared as state, being prepared as town.
And right now most of the preparedness is deeply flawed.
And I hope I've convinced you of that, which means that the real job is go out and say to your local leaders, and your national leaders, "Why haven't you solved these problems?
Why are you still thinking that the lessons of Katrina do not apply to flu?"
And put the pressure where the pressure needs to be put.
But I guess the other thing to add is, if you do have employees, and you do have a company, I think you have certain responsibilities to demonstrate that you are thinking ahead for them, and you are trying to plan.
At a minimum the British banking plan showed that telecommuting can be helpful.
It probably does reduce exposure because people are not coming into the office and coughing on each other, or touching common objects and sharing things via their hands.
But can you sustain your company that way?
Well if you have a dot-com, maybe you can.
Otherwise you're in trouble.
Happy to take your questions.
(Applause) Audience member: What factors determine the duration of a pandemic?
Laurie Garret: What factors determine the duration of a pandemic, we don't really know.
I could give you a bunch of flip, this, that, and the other.
But I would say that honestly we don't know.
Clearly the bottom line is the virus eventually attenuates, and ceases to be a lethal virus to humanity, and finds other hosts.
But we don't really know how and why that happens.
It's a very complicated ecology.
Audience member: What kind of triggers are you looking for?
You know way more than any of us.
To say ahh, if this happens then we are going to have a pandemic?
LG: The moment that you see any evidence of serious human-to-human to transmission.
Not just intimately between family members who took care of an ailing sister or brother, but a community infected -- spread within a school, spread within a dormitory, something of that nature.
Then I think that there is universal agreement now, at WHO all the way down: Send out the alert.
Audience member: Some research has indicated that statins can be helpful.
Can you talk about that?
LG: Yeah. There is some evidence that taking Lipitor and other common statins for cholesterol control may decrease your vulnerability to influenza.
But we do not completely understand why.
The mechanism isn't clear.
And I don't know that there is any way responsibly for someone to start medicating their children with their personal supply of Lipitor or something of that nature.
We have absolutely no idea what that would do.
You might be causing some very dangerous outcomes in your children, doing such a thing.
Audience member: How far along are we in being able to determine whether someone is actually carrying, whether somebody has this before the symptoms are full-blown?
LG: Right. So I have for a long time said that what we really needed was a rapid diagnostic.
And our Centers for Disease Control has labeled a test they developed a rapid diagnostic.
It takes 24 hours in a very highly developed laboratory, in highly skilled hands.
I'm thinking dipstick.
You could do it to your own kid. It changes color.
It tells you if you have H5N1.
In terms of where we are in science with DNA identification capacities and so on, it's not that far off.
But we're not there. And there hasn't been the kind of investment to get us there.
Audience member: In the 1918 flu I understand that they theorized that there was some attenuation of the virus when it made the leap into humans.
Is that likely, do you think, here?
I mean 100 percent death rate is pretty severe.
LG: Um yeah. So we don't actually know what the lethality was of the 1918 strain to wild birds before it jumped from birds to humans.
It's curious that there is no evidence of mass die-offs of chickens or household birds across America before the human pandemic happened.
That may be because those events were occurring on the other side of the world where nobody was paying attention.
But the virus clearly went through one round around the world in a mild enough form that the British army in World War I actually certified that it was not a threat and would not affect the outcome of the war.
And after circulating around the world came back in a form that was tremendously lethal.
What percentage of infected people were killed by it?
Again we don't really know for sure.
It's clear that if you were malnourished to begin with, you had a weakened immune system, you lived in poverty in India or Africa, your likelihood of dying was far greater.
But we don't really know.
Audience member: One of the things I've heard is that the real death cause when you get a flu is the associated pneumonia, and that a pneumonia vaccine may offer you 50 percent better chance of survival.
LG: For a long time, researchers in emerging diseases were kind of dismissive of the pandemic flu threat on the grounds that back in 1918 they didn't have antibiotics.
And that most people who die of regular flu -- which in regular flu years is about 360,000 people worldwide, most of them senior citizens -- and they die not of the flu but because the flu gives an assault to their immune system.
And along comes pneumococcus or another bacteria, streptococcus and boom, they get a bacterial pneumonia.
But it turns out that in 1918 that was not the case at all.
And so far in the H5N1 cases in people, similarly bacterial infection has not been an issue at all.
It's this absolutely phenomenal disruption of the immune system that is the key to why people die of this virus.
And I would just add we saw the same thing with SARS.
So what's going on here is your body says, your immune system sends out all its sentinels and says, "I don't know what the heck this is.
We've never seen anything even remotely like this before."
It won't do any good to bring in the sharpshooters because those antibodies aren't here.
And it won't do any good to bring in the tanks and the artillery because those T-cells don't recognize it either.
So we're going to have to go all-out thermonuclear response, stimulate the total cytokine cascade.
The whole immune system swarms into the lungs.
And yes they die, drowning in their own fluids, of pneumonia.
But it's not bacterial pneumonia.
And it's not a pneumonia that would respond to a vaccine.
And I think my time is up. I thank you all for your attention.
(Applause)
If you're here today -- and I'm very happy that you are -- you've all heard about how sustainable development will save us from ourselves.
However, when we're not at TED, we are often told that a real sustainability policy agenda is just not feasible, especially in large urban areas like New York City.
And that's because most people with decision-making powers, in both the public and the private sector, really don't feel as though they're in danger.
The reason why I'm here today, in part, is because of a dog -- an abandoned puppy I found back in the rain, back in 1998.
She turned out to be a much bigger dog than I'd anticipated.
When she came into my life, we were fighting against a huge waste facility planned for the East River waterfront despite the fact that our small part of New York City already handled more than 40 percent of the entire city's commercial waste: a sewage treatment pelletizing plant, a sewage sludge plant, four power plants, the world's largest food-distribution center, as well as other industries that bring more than 60,000 diesel truck trips to the area each week.
The area also has one of the lowest ratios of parks to people in the city.
So when I was contacted by the Parks Department about a $10,000 seed-grant initiative to help develop waterfront projects, I thought they were really well-meaning, but a bit naive.
I'd lived in this area all my life, and you could not get to the river, because of all the lovely facilities that I mentioned earlier.
Then, while jogging with my dog one morning, she pulled me into what I thought was just another illegal dump.
There were weeds and piles of garbage and other stuff that I won't mention here, but she kept dragging me, and lo and behold, at the end of that lot was the river.
I knew that this forgotten little street-end, abandoned like the dog that brought me there, was worth saving.
And I knew it would grow to become the proud beginnings of the community-led revitalization of the new South Bronx.
And just like my new dog, it was an idea that got bigger than I'd imagined.
We garnered much support along the way, and the Hunts Point Riverside Park became the first waterfront park that the South Bronx had had in more than 60 years.
We leveraged that $10,000 seed grant more than 300 times, into a $3 million park.
And in the fall, I'm going to exchange marriage vows with my beloved.
(Audience whistles) Thank you very much.
(Applause) That's him pressing my buttons back there, which he does all the time.
(Laughter) (Applause) But those of us living in environmental justice communities are the canary in the coal mine.
We feel the problems right now, and have for some time.
Environmental justice, for those of you who may not be familiar with the term, goes something like this: no community should be saddled with more environmental burdens and less environmental benefits than any other.
Unfortunately, race and class are extremely reliable indicators as to where one might find the good stuff, like parks and trees, and where one might find the bad stuff, like power plants and waste facilities.
As a black person in America, I am twice as likely as a white person to live in an area where air pollution poses the greatest risk to my health.
I am five times more likely to live within walking distance of a power plant or chemical facility, which I do.
These land-use decisions created the hostile conditions that lead to problems like obesity, diabetes and asthma.
Why would someone leave their home to go for a brisk walk in a toxic neighborhood?
Our 27 percent obesity rate is high even for this country, and diabetes comes with it.
One out of four South Bronx children has asthma.
Our asthma hospitalization rate is seven times higher than the national average.
These impacts are coming everyone's way.
And we all pay dearly for solid waste costs, health problems associated with pollution and more odiously, the cost of imprisoning our young black and Latino men, who possess untold amounts of untapped potential.
Fifty percent of our residents live at or below the poverty line; 25 percent of us are unemployed.
Low-income citizens often use emergency-room visits as primary care.
This comes at a high cost to taxpayers and produces no proportional benefits.
Poor people are not only still poor, they are still unhealthy.
Fortunately, there are many people like me who are striving for solutions that won't compromise the lives of low-income communities of color in the short term, and won't destroy us all in the long term.
None of us want that, and we all have that in common.
So what else do we have in common?
Well, first of all, we're all incredibly good-looking.
(Laughter) Graduated high school, college, post-graduate degrees, traveled to interesting places, didn't have kids in your early teens, financially stable, never been imprisoned.
OK. Good.
(Laughter) But, besides being a black woman, I am different from most of you in some other ways.
I watched nearly half of the buildings in my neighborhood burn down.
My big brother Lenny fought in Vietnam, only to be gunned down a few blocks from our home.
Jesus.
I grew up with a crack house across the street.
Yeah, I'm a poor black child from the ghetto.
These things make me different from you.
But the things we have in common set me apart from most of the people in my community, and I am in between these two worlds with enough of my heart to fight for justice in the other.
So how did things get so different for us?
In the late '40s, my dad -- a Pullman porter, son of a slave -- bought a house in the Hunts Point section of the South Bronx, and a few years later, he married my mom.
At the time, the community was a mostly white, working-class neighborhood.
My dad was not alone.
And as others like him pursued their own version of the American dream, white flight became common in the South Bronx and in many cities around the country.
Red-lining was used by banks, wherein certain sections of the city, including ours, were deemed off-limits to any sort of investment.
Many landlords believed it was more profitable to torch their buildings and collect insurance money rather than to sell under those conditions -- dead or injured former tenants notwithstanding.
Hunts Point was formerly a walk-to-work community, but now residents had neither work nor home to walk to.
A national highway construction boom was added to our problems.
In New York State, Robert Moses spearheaded an aggressive highway-expansion campaign.
One of its primary goals was to make it easier for residents of wealthy communities in Westchester County to go to Manhattan.
The South Bronx, which lies in between, did not stand a chance.
Residents were often given less than a month's notice before their buildings were razed.
600,000 people were displaced.
The common perception was that only pimps and pushers and prostitutes were from the South Bronx.
And if you are told from your earliest days that nothing good is going to come from your community, that it's bad and ugly, how could it not reflect on you?
So now, my family's property was worthless, save for that it was our home, and all we had.
And luckily for me, that home and the love inside of it, along with help from teachers, mentors and friends along the way, was enough.
Now, why is this story important?
Because from a planning perspective, economic degradation begets environmental degradation, which begets social degradation.
The disinvestment that began in the 1960s set the stage for all the environmental injustices that were to come.
Antiquated zoning and land-use regulations are still used to this day to continue putting polluting facilities in my neighborhood.
Are these factors taken into consideration when land-use policy is decided?
What costs are associated with these decisions?
And who pays? Who profits?
Does anything justify what the local community goes through?
This was "planning" -- in quotes -- that did not have our best interests in mind.
Once we realized that, we decided it was time to do our own planning.
That small park I told you about earlier was the first stage of building a Greenway movement in the South Bronx.
I wrote a one-and-a-quarter-million dollar federal transportation grant to design the plan for a waterfront esplanade with dedicated on-street bike paths.
Physical improvements help inform public policy regarding traffic safety, the placement of the waste and other facilities, which, if done properly, don't compromise a community's quality of life.
They provide opportunities to be more physically active, as well as local economic development.
Think bike shops, juice stands.
We secured 20 million dollars to build first-phase projects.
This is Lafayette Avenue -- and that's redesigned by Mathews Nielsen Landscape Architects.
And once this path is constructed, it'll connect the South Bronx with more than 400 acres of Randall's Island Park.
Right now we're separated by about 25 feet of water, but this link will change that.
As we nurture the natural environment, its abundance will give us back even more.
We run a project called the Bronx [Environmental] Stewardship Training, which provides job training in the fields of ecological restoration, so that folks from our community have the skills to compete for these well-paying jobs.
Little by little, we're seeding the area with green-collar jobs -- and with people that have both a financial and personal stake in their environment.
The Sheridan Expressway is an underutilized relic of the Robert Moses era, built with no regard for the neighborhoods that were divided by it.
Even during rush hour, it goes virtually unused.
The community created an alternative transportation plan that allows for the removal of the highway.
We have the opportunity now to bring together all the stakeholders to re-envision how this 28 acres can be better utilized for parkland, affordable housing and local economic development.
We also built New York City's first green and cool roof demonstration project on top of our offices.
Cool roofs are highly-reflective surfaces that don't absorb solar heat, and pass it on to the building or atmosphere.
Green roofs are soil and living plants.
Both can be used instead of petroleum-based roofing materials that absorb heat, contribute to urban "heat island" effect and degrade under the sun, which we in turn breathe.
Green roofs also retain up to 75 percent of rainfall, so they reduce a city's need to fund costly end-of-pipe solutions -- which, incidentally, are often located in environmental justice communities like mine.
And they provide habitats for our little friends!
[Butterfly] (Laughter) So cool!
Anyway, the demonstration project is a springboard for our own green roof installation business, bringing jobs and sustainable economic activity to the South Bronx.
[Green is the new black ...] (Laughter) (Applause) I like that, too.
Anyway, I know Chris told us not to do pitches up here, but since I have all of your attention: We need investors. End of pitch.
It's better to ask for forgiveness than permission.
Anyway -- (Laughter) (Applause) OK. Katrina.
Prior to Katrina, the South Bronx and New Orleans' Ninth Ward had a lot in common.
Both were largely populated by poor people of color, both hotbeds of cultural innovation: think hip-hop and jazz.
Both are waterfront communities that host both industries and residents in close proximity of one another.
In the post-Katrina era, we have still more in common.
We're at best ignored, and maligned and abused, at worst, by negligent regulatory agencies, pernicious zoning and lax governmental accountability.
Neither the destruction of the Ninth Ward nor the South Bronx was inevitable.
But we have emerged with valuable lessons about how to dig ourselves out.
We are more than simply national symbols of urban blight or problems to be solved by empty campaign promises of presidents come and gone.
Now will we let the Gulf Coast languish for a decade or two, like the South Bronx did?
Or will we take proactive steps and learn from the homegrown resource of grassroots activists that have been born of desperation in communities like mine?
Now listen, I do not expect individuals, corporations or government to make the world a better place because it is right or moral.
This presentation today only represents some of what I've been through.
Like a tiny little bit. You've no clue.
But I'll tell you later, if you want to know.
(Laughter) But -- I know it's the bottom line, or one's perception of it, that motivates people in the end.
I'm interested in what I like to call the "triple bottom line" that sustainable development can produce.
Developments that have the potential to create positive returns for all concerned: the developers, government and the community where these projects go up.
At present, that's not happening in New York City.
And we are operating with a comprehensive urban-planning deficit.
A parade of government subsidies is going to propose big-box and stadium developments in the South Bronx, but there is scant coordination between city agencies on how to deal with the cumulative effects of increased traffic, pollution, solid waste and the impacts on open space.
And their approaches to local economic and job development are so lame it's not even funny.
Because on top of that, the world's richest sports team is replacing the House That Ruth Built by destroying two well-loved community parks.
Now, we'll have even less than that stat I told you about earlier.
And although less than 25 percent of South Bronx residents own cars, these projects include thousands of new parking spaces, yet zip in terms of mass public transit.
Now, what's missing from the larger debate is a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis between not fixing an unhealthy, environmentally-challenged community, versus incorporating structural, sustainable changes.
My agency is working closely with Columbia University and others to shine a light on these issues.
Now let's get this straight: I am not anti-development.
Ours is a city, not a wilderness preserve.
And I've embraced my inner capitalist.
And, but I don't have -- (Laughter) You probably all have, and if you haven't, you need to.
(Laughter) So I don't have a problem with developers making money.
There's enough precedent out there to show that a sustainable, community-friendly development can still make a fortune.
Fellow TEDsters Bill McDonough and Amory Lovins -- both heroes of mine by the way -- have shown that you can actually do that.
I do have a problem with developments that hyper-exploit politically vulnerable communities for profit.
That it continues is a shame upon us all, because we are all responsible for the future that we create.
But one of the things I do to remind myself of greater possibilities, is to learn from visionaries in other cities.
This is my version of globalization.
Let's take Bogota.
Poor, Latino, surrounded by runaway gun violence and drug trafficking; a reputation not unlike that of the South Bronx.
However, this city was blessed in the late 1990s with a highly-influential mayor named Enrique Pealosa.
He looked at the demographics.
Few Bogotanos own cars, yet a huge portion of the city's resources was dedicated to serving them.
If you're a mayor, you can do something about that.
His administration narrowed key municipal thoroughfares from five lanes to three, outlawed parking on those streets, expanded pedestrian walkways and bike lanes, created public plazas, created one of the most efficient bus mass-transit systems in the entire world.
For his brilliant efforts, he was nearly impeached.
But as people began to see that they were being put first on issues reflecting their day-to-day lives, incredible things happened.
People stopped littering.
Crime rates dropped, because the streets were alive with people.
His administration attacked several typical urban problems at one time, and on a third-world budget, at that.
We have no excuse in this country, I'm sorry.
But the bottom line is: their people-first agenda was not meant to penalize those who could actually afford cars, but rather, to provide opportunities for all Bogotanos to participate in the city's resurgence.
That development should not come at the expense of the majority of the population is still considered a radical idea here in the U.S.
But Bogota's example has the power to change that.
You, however, are blessed with the gift of influence.
That's why you're here and why you value the information we exchange.
Use your influence in support of comprehensive, sustainable change everywhere.
Don't just talk about it at TED.
This is a nationwide policy agenda I'm trying to build, and as you all know, politics are personal.
Help me make green the new black.
Help me make sustainability sexy.
Make it a part of your dinner and cocktail conversations.
Help me fight for environmental and economic justice.
Support investments with a triple-bottom-line return.
Help me democratize sustainability by bringing everyone to the table, and insisting that comprehensive planning can be addressed everywhere.
Oh good, glad I have a little more time!
Listen -- when I spoke to Mr. Gore the other day after breakfast, I asked him how environmental justice activists were going to be included in his new marketing strategy.
His response was a grant program.
I don't think he understood that I wasn't asking for funding.
I was making him an offer.
(Applause) What troubled me was that this top-down approach is still around.
Now, don't get me wrong, we need money.
(Laughter) But grassroots groups are needed at the table during the decision-making process.
Of the 90 percent of the energy that Mr. Gore reminded us that we waste every day, don't add wasting our energy, intelligence and hard-earned experience to that count.
(Applause) I have come from so far to meet you like this.
Please don't waste me.
By working together, we can become one of those small, rapidly-growing groups of individuals who actually have the audacity and courage to believe that we actually can change the world.
We might have come to this conference from very, very different stations in life, but believe me, we all share one incredibly powerful thing.
We have nothing to lose and everything to gain.
Ciao, bellos!
(Applause)
Last year at TED I gave an introduction to the LHC.
And I promised to come back and give you an update on how that machine worked.
So this is it. And for those of you that weren't there, the LHC is the largest scientific experiment ever attempted -- 27 kilometers in circumference.
Its job is to recreate the conditions that were present less than a billionth of a second after the universe began, up to 600 million times a second.
It's nothing if not ambitious.
This is the machine below Geneva.
We take the pictures of those mini-Big Bangs inside detectors.
This is the one I work on. It's called the ATLAS detector -- 44 meters wide, 22 meters in diameter.
Spectacular picture here of ATLAS under construction so you can see the scale.
On the 10th of September last year we turned the machine on for the first time.
And this picture was taken by ATLAS.
It caused immense celebration in the control room.
It's a picture of the first beam particle going all the way around the LHC, colliding with a piece of the LHC deliberately, and showering particles into the detector.
In other words, when we saw that picture on September 10th we knew the machine worked, which is a great triumph.
I don't know whether this got the biggest cheer, or this, when someone went onto Google and saw the front page was like that.
It means we made cultural impact as well as scientific impact.
About a week later we had a problem with the machine, related actually to these bits of wire here -- these gold wires.
Those wires carry 13 thousand amps when the machine is working in full power.
Now the engineers amongst you will look at them and say, "No they don't. They're small wires."
They can do that because when they are very cold they are what's called superconducting wire.
So at minus 271 degrees, colder than the space between the stars, those wires can take that current.
In one of the joints between over 9,000 magnets in LHC, there was a manufacturing defect.
So the wire heated up slightly, and its 13,000 amps suddenly encountered electrical resistance.
This was the result.
Now that's more impressive when you consider those magnets weigh over 20 tons, and they moved about a foot.
So we damaged about 50 of the magnets.
We had to take them out, which we did.
We reconditioned them all, fixed them.
They're all on their way back underground now.
By the end of March the LHC will be intact again.
We will switch it on, and we expect to take data in June or July, and continue with our quest to find out what the building blocks of the universe are.
Now of course, in a way those accidents reignite the debate about the value of science and engineering at the edge. It's easy to refute.
I think that the fact that it's so difficult, the fact that we're overreaching, is the value of things like the LHC.
I will leave the final word to an English scientist, Humphrey Davy, who, I suspect, when defending his protege's useless experiments -- his protege was Michael Faraday -- said this, "Nothing is so dangerous to the progress of the human mind than to assume that our views of science are ultimate, that there are no mysteries in nature, that our triumphs are complete, and that there are no new worlds to conquer."
Thank you.
(Applause)
We look around the media, as we see on the news from Iraq, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, and the conflict seems incomprehensible to us.
And that's certainly how it seemed to me when I started this project.
But as a physicist, I thought, well if you give me some data, I could maybe understand this. You know, give us a go.
So as a naive New Zealander I thought, well I'll go to the Pentagon.
Can you get me some information?
(Laughter) No. So I had to think a little harder.
And I was watching the news one night in Oxford.
And I looked down at the chattering heads on my channel of choice.
And I saw that there was information there.
There was data within the streams of news that we consume.
All this noise around us actually has information.
So what I started thinking was, perhaps there is something like open source intelligence here.
If we can get enough of these streams of information together, we can perhaps start to understand the war.
So this is exactly what I did. We started bringing a team together, an interdisciplinary team of scientists, of economists, mathematicians.
We brought these guys together and we started to try and solve this.
We did it in three steps.
The first step we did was to collect. We did 130 different sources of information -- from NGO reports to newspapers and cable news.
We brought this raw data in and we filtered it.
We extracted the key bits on information to build the database.
That database contained the timing of attacks, the location, the size and the weapons used.
It's all in the streams of information we consume daily, we just have to know how to pull it out.
And once we had this we could start doing some cool stuff.
What if we were to look at the distribution of the sizes of attacks?
What would that tell us?
So we started doing this. And you can see here on the horizontal axis you've got the number of people killed in an attack or the size of the attack.
And on the vertical axis you've got the number of attacks.
So we plot data for sample on this.
You see some sort of random distribution -- perhaps 67 attacks, one person was killed, or 47 attacks where seven people were killed.
We did this exact same thing for Iraq.
And we didn't know, for Iraq what we were going to find.
It turns out what we found was pretty surprising.
You take all of the conflict, all of the chaos, all of the noise, and out of that comes this precise mathematical distribution of the way attacks are ordered in this conflict.
This blew our mind.
Why should a conflict like Iraq have this as its fundamental signature?
Why should there be order in war?
We didn't really understand that.
We thought maybe there is something special about Iraq.
So we looked at a few more conflicts.
We looked at Colombia, we looked at Afghanistan, and we looked at Senegal.
And the same pattern emerged in each conflict.
This wasn't supposed to happen.
These are different wars, with different religious factions, different political factions, and different socioeconomic problems.
And yet the fundamental patterns underlying them are the same.
So we went a little wider.
We looked around the world at all the data we could get our hands on.
From Peru to Indonesia, we studied this same pattern again.
And we found that not only were the distributions these straight lines, but the slope of these lines, they clustered around this value of alpha equals 2.5.
And we could generate an equation that could predict the likelihood of an attack.
What we're saying here is the probability of an attack killing X number of people in a country like Iraq is equal to a constant, times the size of that attack, raised to the power of negative alpha.
And negative alpha is the slope of that line I showed you before.
So what?
This is data, statistics. What does it tell us about these conflicts?
That was a challenge we had to face as physicists.
How do we explain this?
And what we really found was that alpha, if we think about it, is the organizational structure of the insurgency.
Alpha is the distribution of the sizes of attacks, which is really the distribution of the group strength carrying out the attacks.
So we look at a process of group dynamics: coalescence and fragmentation, groups coming together, groups breaking apart.
And we start running the numbers on this. Can we simulate it?
Can we create the kind of patterns that we're seeing in places like Iraq?
Turns out we kind of do a reasonable job.
We can run these simulations.
We can recreate this using a process of group dynamics to explain the patterns that we see all around the conflicts around the world.
So what's going on?
Why should these different -- seemingly different conflicts have the same patterns?
Now what I believe is going on is that the insurgent forces, they evolve over time. They adapt.
And it turns out there is only one solution to fight a much stronger enemy.
And if you don't find that solution as an insurgent force, you don't exist.
So every insurgent force that is ongoing, every conflict that is ongoing, it's going to look something like this.
And that is what we think is happening.
Taking it forward, how do we change it?
How do we end a war like Iraq?
What does it look like?
Alpha is the structure. It's got a stable state at 2.5.
This is what wars look like when they continue.
We've got to change that.
We can push it up: the forces become more fragmented; there is more of them, but they are weaker.
Or we push it down: they're more robust; there is less groups; but perhaps you can sit and talk to them.
So this graph here, I'm going to show you now.
No one has seen this before. This is literally stuff that we've come through last week.
And we see the evolution of Alpha through time.
We see it start. And we see it grow up to the stable state the wars around the world look like.
And it stays there through the invasion of Fallujah until the Samarra bombings in the Iraqi elections of '06.
And the system gets perturbed. It moves upwards to a fragmented state.
This is when the surge happens.
And depending on who you ask, the surge was supposed to push it up even further.
The opposite happened.
The groups became stronger.
They became more robust.
And so I'm thinking, right, great, it's going to keep going down.
We can talk to them. We can get a solution. The opposite happened.
It's moved up again. The groups are more fragmented.
And this tells me one of two things.
Either we're back where we started and the surge has had no effect; or finally the groups have been fragmented to the extent that we can start to think about maybe moving out.
I don't know what the answer is to that.
But I know that we should be looking at the structure of the insurgency to answer that question.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Corn currently accounts for more than one tenth of our global crop production.
The United States alone has enough cornfields to cover Germany.
But while other crops we grow come in a range of varieties, over 99% of cultivated corn is the exact same type: Yellow Dent #2.
This means that humans grow more Yellow Dent #2 than any other plant on the planet.
So how did this single variety of this single plant become the biggest success story in agricultural history?
Nearly 9,000 years ago, corn, also called maize, was first domesticated from teosinte, a grass native to Mesoamerica.
Teosintes rock-hard seeds were barely edible, but its fibrous husk could be turned into a versatile material.
Over the next 4,700 years, farmers bred the plant into a staple crop, with larger cobs and edible kernels.
As maize spread throughout the Americas, it took on an important role, with multiple indigenous societies revering a Corn Mother as the goddess who created agriculture.
When Europeans first arrived in America, they shunned the strange plant.
Many even believed it was the source of physical and cultural differences between them and the Mesoamericans.
However, their attempts to cultivate European crops in American soil quickly failed, and the settlers were forced to expand their diet.
Finding the crop to their taste, maize soon crossed the Atlantic, where its ability to grow in diverse climates made it a popular grain in many European countries.
But the newly established United States was still the corn capital of the world.
In the early 1800s, different regions across the country produced strains of varying size and taste.
In the 1850s, however, these unique varieties proved difficult for train operators to package, and for traders to sell.
Trade boards in rail hubs like Chicago encouraged corn farmers to breed one standardized crop.
This dream would finally be realized at 1893s Worlds Fair, where James Reids yellow dent corn won the Blue Ribbon.
Over the next 50 years, yellow dent corn swept the nation.
Following the technological developments of World War II, mechanized harvesters became widely available.
This meant a batch of corn that previously took a full day to harvest by hand could now be collected in just 5 minutes.
Another wartime technology, the chemical explosive ammonium nitrate, also found new life on the farm.
With this new synthetic fertilizer, farmers could plant dense fields of corn year after year, without the need to rotate their crops and restore nitrogen to the soil.
While these advances made corn an attractive crop to American farmers, US agricultural policy limited the amount farmers could grow to ensure high sale prices.
But in 1972, President Richard Nixon removed these limitations while negotiating massive grain sales to the Soviet Union.
With this new trade deal and WWII technology, corn production exploded into a global phenomenon.
These mountains of maize inspired numerous corn concoctions.
Cornstarch could be used as a thickening agent for everything from gasoline to glue or processed into a low-cost sweetener known as High-Fructose Corn Syrup.
Maize quickly became one of the cheapest animal feeds worldwide.
This allowed for inexpensive meat production, which in turn increased the demand for meat and corn feed.
Today, humans eat only 40% of all cultivated corn, while the remaining 60% supports consumer good industries worldwide.
Yet the spread of this wonder-crop has come at a price.
Global water sources are polluted by excess ammonium nitrate from cornfields.
Corn accounts for a large portion of agriculture-related carbon emissions, partly due to the increased meat production it enables.
The use of high fructose corn syrup may be a contributor to diabetes and obesity.
And the rise of monoculture farming has left our food supply dangerously vulnerable to pests and pathogens a single virus could infect the worlds supply of this ubiquitous crop.
Corn has gone from a bushy grass to an essential element of the worlds industries.
But only time will tell if it has led us into a maze of unsustainability.
What I want to do today is spend some time talking about some stuff that's giving me a little bit of existential angst, for lack of a better word, over the past couple of years.
And basically, these three quotes tell what's going on.
"When God made the color purple, God was just showing off," Alice Walker wrote in "The Color Purple."
And Zora Neale Hurston wrote in "Dust Tracks On A Road," "Research is a formalized curiosity.
It's poking and prying with a purpose."
And then finally, when I think about the near future, we have this attitude, "Well, whatever happens, happens."
Right?
So that goes along with the Cheshire Cat saying, "If you don't care much where you want to get to, it doesn't much matter which way you go."
But I think it does matter which way we go and what road we take, because when I think about design in the near future, what I think are the most important issues, what's really crucial and vital, is that we need to revitalize the arts and sciences right now, in 2002.
(Applause) If we describe the near future as 10, 20, 15 years from now, that means that what we do today is going to be critically important, because in the year 2015, in the year 2020, 2025, the world our society is going to be building on, the basic knowledge and abstract ideas, the discoveries that we came up with today, just as all these wonderful things we're hearing about here at the TED conference that we take for granted in the world right now, were really knowledge and ideas that came up in the 50s, the 60s and the 70s.
That's the substrate that we're exploiting today.
Whether it's the internet, genetic engineering, laser scanners, guided missiles, fiber optics, high-definition television, remote sensing from space and the wonderful remote-sensing photos that we see in 3D weaving, TV programs like Tracker and Enterprise, CD-rewrite drives, flat-screen, Alvin Ailey's "Suite Otis," or Sarah Jones's "Your Revolution Will Not [Happen] Between These Thighs," which, by the way, was banned by the FCC, or ska -- all of these things, without question, almost without exception, are really based on ideas and abstract and creativity from years before.
So we have to ask ourselves: What are we contributing to that legacy right now?
And when I think about it, I'm really worried.
To be quite frank, I'm concerned.
I'm skeptical that we're doing very much of anything.
We're, in a sense, failing to act in the future.
We're purposefully, consciously being laggards.
We're lagging behind.
Frantz Fanon, who was a psychiatrist from Martinique, said, "Each generation must, out of relative obscurity, discover its mission and fulfill or betray it."
What is our mission? What do we have to do?
I think our mission is to reconcile, to reintegrate science and the arts, because right now, there's a schism that exists in popular culture.
People have this idea that science and the arts are really separate; we think of them as separate and different things.
And this idea was probably introduced centuries ago, but it's really becoming critical now, because we're making decisions about our society every day that, if we keep thinking that the arts are separate from the sciences, and we keep thinking it's cute to say, "I don't understand anything about this one, I don't understand anything about the other one," then we're going to have problems.
Now, I know no one here at TED thinks this.
All of us, we already know that they're very connected.
But I'm going to let you know that some folks in the outside world, believe it or not, think it's neat when they say, "Scientists and science is not creative.
Maybe scientists are ingenious, but they're not creative."
And then we have this tendency, the career counselors and various people say things like, "Artists are not analytical.
They're ingenious, perhaps, but not analytical."
And when these concepts underlie our teaching and what we think about the world, then we have a problem, because we stymie support for everything.
By accepting this dichotomy, whether it's tongue-in-cheek, when we attempt to accommodate it in our world, and we try to build our foundation for the world, we're messing up the future, because: Who wants to be uncreative?
Who wants to be illogical?
Talent would run from either of these fields if you said you had to choose either.
Then they'll go to something where they think, "Well, I can be creative and logical at the same time."
Now, I grew up in the '60s and I'll admit it -- actually, my childhood spanned the '60s, and I was a wannabe hippie, and I always resented the fact that I wasn't old enough to be a hippie.
And I know there are people here, the younger generation, who want to be hippies.
And they talk about the anarchy that was there.
But when I think about the '60s, what I took away from it was that there was hope for the future.
We thought everyone could participate.
There were wonderful, incredible ideas that were always percolating, and so much of what's cool or hot today is really based on some of those concepts, whether it's people trying to use the Prime Directive from Star Trek, being involved in things, or, again, that three-dimensional weaving and fax machines that I read about in my weekly readers that the technology and engineering was just getting started.
But the '60s left me with a problem.
You see, I always assumed I would go into space, because I followed all of this.
You see, when I was growing up as a little girl and as a teenager, I loved designing and making doll clothes and wanting to be a fashion designer.
I took art and ceramics.
I loved dance: Lola Falana, Alvin Ailey, Jerome Robbins.
And I also avidly followed the Gemini and the Apollo programs.
I had science projects and tons of astronomy books.
I took calculus and philosophy.
I wondered about infinity and the Big Bang theory.
And when I was at Stanford, I found myself, my senior year, chemical engineering major, half the folks thought I was a political science and performing arts major, which was sort of true, because I was Black Student Union President, and I did major in some other things.
And I found myself the last quarter juggling chemical engineering separation processes, logic classes, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and also producing and choreographing a dance production.
And I had to do the lighting and the design work, and I was trying to figure out: Do I go to New York City to try to become a professional dancer, or to go to medical school?
Now, my mother helped me figure that one out.
(Laughter) But when I went into space, I carried a number of things up with me.
I carried a poster by Alvin Ailey -- you can figure out now, I love the dance company -- an Alvin Ailey poster of Judith Jamison performing the dance "Cry," dedicated to all black women everywhere; a Bundu statue, which was from the women's society in Sierra Leone; and a certificate for the Chicago Public School students to work to improve their science and math.
And folks asked me, "Why did you take up what you took up?"
And I had to say, "Because it represents human creativity; the creativity that allowed us, that we were required to have to conceive and build and launch the space shuttle, which springs from the same source as the imagination and analysis that it took to carve a Bundu statue, or the ingenuity it took to design, choreograph and stage "Cry."
Each one of them are different manifestations, incarnations, of creativity -- avatars of human creativity.
And that's what we have to reconcile in our minds, how these things fit together.
The difference between arts and sciences is not analytical versus intuitive.
Right?
E = mc2 required an intuitive leap, and then you had to do the analysis afterwards.
Einstein said, in fact, "The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious.
Dance requires us to express and want to express the jubilation in life, but then you have to figure out: Exactly what movement do I do to make sure it comes across correctly?
The difference between arts and sciences is also not constructive versus deconstructive.
A lot of people think of the sciences as deconstructive, you have to pull things apart.
And yeah, subatomic physics is deconstructive -- you literally try to tear atoms apart to understand what's inside of them.
But sculpture, from what I understand from great sculptors, is deconstructive, because you see a piece and you remove what doesn't need to be there.
Biotechnology is constructive.
Orchestral arranging is constructive.
So, in fact, we use constructive and deconstructive techniques in everything.
The difference between science and the arts is not that they are different sides of the same coin, even, or even different parts of the same continuum, but rather, they're manifestations of the same thing.
Different quantum states of an atom?
Or maybe if I want to be more 21st century, I could say that they're different harmonic resonances of a superstring.
But we'll leave that alone.
They spring from the same source.
The arts and sciences are avatars of human creativity.
It's our attempt as humans to build an understanding of the universe, the world around us.
It's our attempt to influence things, the universe internal to ourselves and external to us.
The sciences, to me, are manifestations of our attempt to express or share our understanding, our experience, to influence the universe external to ourselves.
It doesn't rely on us as individuals.
It's the universe, as experienced by everyone.
The arts manifest our desire, our attempt to share or influence others through experiences that are peculiar to us as individuals.
Let me say it again another way: science provides an understanding of a universal experience, and arts provide a universal understanding of a personal experience.
That's what we have to think about, that they're all part of us, they're all part of a continuum.
It's not just the tools, it's not just the sciences, the mathematics and the numerical stuff and the statistics, because we heard, very much on this stage, people talked about music being mathematical.
Arts don't just use clay, aren't the only ones that use clay, light and sound and movement.
They use analysis as well.
So people might say, "Well, I still like that intuitive versus analytical thing," because everybody wants to do the right brain, left brain thing.
We've all been accused of being right-brained or left-brained at some point in time, depending on who we disagreed with.
(Laughter) You know, people say "intuitive" -- that's like you're in touch with nature, in touch with yourself and relationships; analytical, you put your mind to work.
I'm going to tell you a little secret. You all know this, though.
But sometimes people use this analysis idea, that things are outside of ourselves, to say, this is what we're going to elevate as the true, most important sciences, right?
Then you have artists -- and you all know this is true as well -- artists will say things about scientists because they say they're too concrete, they're disconnected from the world.
But, we've even had that here on stage, so don't act like you don't know what I'm talking about.
(Laughter) We had folks talking about the Flat Earth Society and flower arrangers, so there's this whole dichotomy that we continue to carry along, even when we know better.
And folks say we need to choose either-or.
But it would really be foolish to choose either one, intuitive versus analytical.
That's a foolish choice.
It's foolish just like trying to choose between being realistic or idealistic.
You need both in life.
Why do people do this?
I'm going to quote a molecular biologist, Sydney Brenner, who's 70 years old, so he can say this.
He said, "It's always important to distinguish between chastity and impotence."
Now -- (Laughter) I want to share with you a little equation, OK?
How does understanding science and the arts fit into our lives and what's going on and the things we're talking about here at the design conference?
And this is a little thing I came up with: understanding and our resources and our will cause us to have outcomes.
Our understanding is our science, our arts, our religion; how we see the universe around us; our resources, our money, our labor, our minerals -- those things that are out there in the world we have to work with.
But more importantly, there's our will.
This is our vision, our aspirations of the future, our hopes, our dreams, our struggles and our fears.
Our successes and our failures influence what we do with all of those.
And to me, design and engineering, craftsmanship and skilled labor, are all the things that work on this to have our outcome, which is our human quality of life.
Where do we want the world to be?
And guess what?
Regardless of how we look at this, whether we look at arts and sciences as separate or different, they're both being influenced now and they're both having problems.
I did a project called S.E.E.ing the Future: Science, Engineering and Education.
It was looking at how to shed light on the most effective use of government funding.
We got a bunch of scientists in all stages of their careers.
They came to Dartmouth College, where I was teaching.
And they talked about, with theologians and financiers: What are some of the issues of public funding for science and engineering research?
What's most important about it?
There are some ideas that emerged that I think have really powerful parallels to the arts.
The first thing they said was that the circumstances that we find ourselves in today in the sciences and engineering that made us world leaders are very different than the '40s, the '50s, and the '60s and the '70s, when we emerged as world leaders, because we're no longer in competition with fascism, with Soviet-style communism.
And by the way, that competition wasn't just military; it included social competition and political competition as well, that allowed us to look at space as one of those platforms to prove that our social system was better.
Another thing they talked about was that the infrastructure that supports the sciences is becoming obsolete.
We look at universities and colleges -- small, mid-sized community colleges across the country -- their laboratories are becoming obsolete.
And this is where we train most of our science workers and our researchers -- and our teachers, by the way.
And there's a media that doesn't support the dissemination of any more than the most mundane and inane of information.
There's pseudoscience, crop circles, alien autopsy, haunted houses, or disasters.
And that's what we see.
This isn't really the information you need to operate in everyday life and figure out how to participate in this democracy and determine what's going on.
They also said there's a change in the corporate mentality.
Whereas government money had always been there for basic science and engineering research, we also counted on some companies to do some basic research.
But what's happened now is companies put more energy into short-term product development than they do in basic engineering and science research.
And education is not keeping up.
In K through 12, people are taking out wet labs.
They think if we put a computer in the room, it's going to take the place of actually mixing the acids or growing the potatoes.
And government funding is decreasing in spending, and then they're saying, let's have corporations take over, and that's not true.
Government funding should at least do things like recognize cost benefits of basic science and engineering research.
We have to know that we have a responsibility as global citizens in this world.
We have to look at the education of humans.
We need to build our resources today to make sure that they're trained so they understand the importance of these things.
And we have to support the vitality of science.
That doesn't mean that everything has to have one thing that's going to go on, or that we know exactly what's going to be the outcome of it, but that we support the vitality and the intellectual curiosity that goes along [with it].
And if you think about those parallels to the arts -- the competition with the Bolshoi Ballet spurred the Joffrey and the New York City Ballet to become better.
Infrastructure, museums, theaters, movie houses across the country are disappearing.
We have more television stations with less to watch, we have more money spent on rewrites to get old television programs in the movies.
We have corporate funding now that, when it goes to support the arts, it almost requires that the product be part of the picture that the artist draws.
We have stadiums that are named over and over again by corporations.
In Houston, we're trying to figure out what to do with that Enron Stadium thing.
(Laughter) Fine arts and education in the schools is disappearing, And we have a government that seems like it's gutting the NEA and other programs.
So we have to really stop and think: What are we trying to do with the sciences and the arts?
There's a need to revitalize them.
We have to pay attention to it.
I just want to tell you quickly what I'm doing -- (Applause) I want to tell you what I've been doing a little bit since ...
I feel this need to sort of integrate some of the ideas that I've had and run across over time.
One of the things that I found out is that there's a need to repair the dichotomy between the mind and body as well.
My mother always told me, you have to be observant, know what's going on in your mind and your body.
And as a dancer, I had this tremendous faith in my ability to know my body, just as I knew how to sense colors.
Then I went to medical school, and I was supposed to just go on what the machine said about bodies.
You know, you would ask patients questions and some people would tell you, "Don't listen to what the patient said."
We know that patients know and understand their bodies better, but these days we're trying to divorce them from that idea.
We have to reconcile the patient's knowledge of their body with physicians' measurements.
We had someone talk about measuring emotions and getting machines to figure out what to keep us from acting crazy.
No, we shouldn't measure.
We shouldn't use machines to measure road rage and then do something to keep us from engaging in it.
Maybe we can have machines help us to recognize that we have road rage, and then we need to know how to control that without the machines.
We even need to be able to recognize that without the machines.
What I'm very concerned about is: How do we bolster our self-awareness as humans, as biological organisms?
Michael Moschen spoke of having to teach and learn how to feel with my eyes, to see with my hands.
We have all kinds of possibilities to use our senses by, and that's what we have to do.
That's what I want to do -- to try to use bioinstrumentation, those kind of things, to help our senses in what we do.
That's the work I've been doing now, as a company called BioSentient Corporation.
I figured I'd have to do that ad, because I'm an entrepreneur, and "entrepreneur" says "somebody who does what they want to do, because they're not broke enough that they have to get a real job."
(Laughter) But that's the work I'm doing, BioSentient Corporation, trying to figure out: How do we integrate these things?
Let me finish by saying that my personal design issue for the future is really about integrating; to think about that intuitive and that analytical.
The arts and sciences are not separate.
High school physics lesson before you leave: high school physics teacher used to hold up a ball.
She would say, "This ball has potential energy.
But nothing will happen to it, it can't do any work, until I drop it and it changes states."
I like to think of ideas as potential energy.
They're really wonderful, but nothing will happen until we risk putting them into action.
This conference is filled with wonderful ideas.
We're going to share lots of things with people.
But nothing's going to happen until we risk putting those ideas into action.
We need to revitalize the arts and sciences today.
We need to take responsibility for the future.
We can't hide behind saying it's just for company profits, or it's just a business, or I'm an artist or an academician.
Here's how you judge what you're doing: I talked about that balance between intuitive, analytical.
Fran Lebowitz, my favorite cynic, said, "The three questions of greatest concern ..." -- now I'm going to add on to design -- "... are: Is it attractive?"
That's the intuitive.
"Is it amusing?" -- the analytical, and, "Does it know its place?" -- the balance.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
This is a sculpture I made, which is a way of, kind of, freeing a form into an object that has different degrees of freedom.
So, it can balance on a point.
This is a bronze ball, an aluminum arm here, and then this wooden disk.
And the wooden disk was really thought about as something that you'd want to hold on to, and that would glide easily through your hands.
The aluminum is because it's very light.
The bronze is nice hard, durable material that could roll on the ground.
Inside of the bronze ball there's a lead weight that is free-swinging on an axle that's on two bearings that pass in between, across it, like this, that counterbalance this weight.
So it allows it to roll.
And the sphere has that balance property that it always sort of stays still and looks the same from every direction.
But if you put something on top of it, it disbalances it. And so it would tip over.
But in this case because the interior is free-swinging in relation to the sphere, it can stand up on one point.
And then there was a second level to this object, which is that it -- I wanted it to convey some proportions that I was interested in, which is the diameter of the Moon and the diameter of the Earth in proportion to each other.
I was exploring, really early on, wanting to make things float in the air.
And I thought up a lot of ideas.
This is sculpture that I made that -- it's magnetically levitated.
The thing is, is that it's slightly dangerous.
Normally it's sort of cordoned off when it's in a museum.
But it's uh -- let's see if I can manipulate it a little bit without, um -- oops.
So this is just floating, floating on a permanent magnetic field, which stabilizes it in all directions.
Except there is a slight tether here, which keeps it from going over the top of its field.
It's sort of surfing on a magnetic field at the crest of a wave.
And that's what supports the object and keeps it stable.
I think we could roll the tape, admin.
I have a sort of a collection of videos that I took of different installations, which I could narrate.
This is a sculpture of the Sun and the Earth, in proportion.
Representing that eight and a half minutes that it takes light and gravity to connect the two.
So here is the Earth. It's a little less than a millimeter that was turned of solid bronze.
And here is a similar sculpture.
That's the Sun at that end.
And then in a series of 55 balls, it reduces, proportionately -- each ball and the spaces between them reduce proportionately, until they get down to this little Earth.
This is in a sculpture park in Taejon.
This one is about the Moon and then the distance to the Earth, in proportion also.
This is a little stone ball, floating.
As you can see the little tether, that it's also magnetically levitated.
And then this is the first part of -- this is 109 spheres, since the Sun is 109 times the diameter of the Earth.
And so this is the size of the Sun.
And then each of these little spheres is the size of the Earth in proportion to the Sun.
It's made up of 16 concentric shells. Each one has 92 spheres.
This is in the courtyard of a twelfth-century alchemist.
I was thinking that the Sun is kind of the ultimate alchemist. (Laughter) So this, again, is on the subject -- a slice from the equator of the Earth.
And then the Moon in the center, and it's floating. And this is in France.
This is in Sapporo.
It's balancing on a shaft and a ball, right at the center of gravity, or just slightly above the center of gravity, which means that the lower half of the object is just a little bit more weighty.
So you can see it rotating here.
It weighs about a ton or over a ton.
It's made of stainless steel, quite thick.
But it's being balanced like that in equilibrium.
It's susceptible to motion by the air currents.
This is another species of work that I do.
These are these arrays. These spheres are all suspended, but they have magnets horizontally in them that make them all like compasses.
So all the red sides, for example, face one direction: south.
And the blue side, the compliment, faces the other way.
So as you turn around you're seeing different colors.
This is based on the structure of a diamond.
It was a diamond cell structure was the point of departure.
And then there were kind of large spaces in the hollows between the atoms.
And so I placed one more element of each one of them.
These were white spheres.
Then I had video projectors that were projecting intermittently onto the spheres.
So they would catch parts of the images, and make sort of three-dimensional color volumes, as you walk through it, through the object.
This is something I did of a tactile communication system.
It was the idea of isolating the tactile component of sculpture, and then putting it into a communication system.
This is an idea of moving a sculpture, a ball, that would be directed around the room by a computer.
This is a clock I designed.
It has Buckminster Fuller's Dymaxion Map edited here.
It turns once per day in synchrony with the Earth.
And then, this is like projects that are harder to build.
(Laughter) This has a diamond-bottomed lake.
So it's a floating island with water, fresh water, that can fly from place to place.
This would be grown, I suppose, with nanotechnology in the future sometime.
In the course of doing my work I sort of have a broad range of interests.
And some of it is just the idea of creating media -- media as a sculpture, something that would keep the sculpture fresh and ever-changing, by just creating the media that the sculpture is made of.
And I had a lot of -- always interested in the concept of a crystal ball.
And the idea that you could see things inside of a crystal ball and predict the future -- or a television set, where it's sort of like a magic box where anything can appear.
I had thought about, a long time ago, in the late '60s -- when I was just starting out, I was under the influence of thinking about Buckminster Fuller's grand project for an electric globe across from the United Nations -- and other things that were happening, the space program at that time, and Whole Earth Catalog, things like that.
I was thinking about mass produced spherical television sets that could be linked to orbiting camera satellites.
So if we could roll the next film here.
This has evolved over the years in a lot of different iterations.
But this the current version of it, is a flying airship that is about 35 meters in diameter, about 110 feet in diameter.
The whole surface of it is covered with 60 million diodes, red, blue, and green, that allow you to have a high-resolution picture, visible in daylight.
I came with a plan.
I brought it to Paul MacCready's company AeroVironment to do a feasibility study, and they analyzed it, and came up with a lot of innovative ideas about how to propel it.
So we have a physical plan of how to make this actually happen.
This is the control room inside of the ship.
The idea of this air genie is, it's something that can just transform and become anything.
It's like a traveling show.
It has speakers on it. And it has cameras over the surface of it.
So it can see its environment, and then it can mimic its environment and disappear.
Here the legs are retracting.
The cabin is open or closed, as you like.
It weighs about 20 tons.
It has on-board generators.
It can generate about a million kilowatts, in order to be bright enough to be visible in daylight.
The idea of it is to make a kind of a traveling show.
It really would be dedicated to the arts and to interacting.
There would be on board a crew of artists, musicians, that would allow the thing to become actually kind of a conscious object that would respond to the moment, and to interact as an entity that was aware, that could communicate.
It's completely silent and nonpolluting.
It has electric motors with a novel propulsion system.
It could be interacted with large crowds in different ways.
Primarily I would be interested in how it would interact with, say, going to a college campus, and then being used as a way of talking about the earth sciences, the world, the situation of the globe.
The default image on the object would probably be a high-resolution Earth image.
But then one could interact with that and show plate tectonics or global warming issues, or migrations -- all of the things that we're concerned with today.
And then at night the idea is that it would be used as kind of a rave situation, where the people could cut loose, and the music and the lights, and everything.
So it could land in a park, for example.
Or this could represent a college green.
And then it would have a corresponding website that would show the itinerary of this.
And so interacting with the same kind of imagery.
It would also be able to be an open code, so people could interact with it.
It would be forum for people's ideas about what they would like to see on a giant screen of this type.
So that's pretty much it.
Okay. Thank you.
(Applause)
Last year I showed these two slides so that demonstrate that the arctic ice cap, which for most of the last three million years has been the size of the lower 48 states, has shrunk by 40 percent.
But this understates the seriousness of this particular problem because it doesn't show the thickness of the ice.
The arctic ice cap is, in a sense, the beating heart of the global climate system.
It expands in winter and contracts in summer.
The next slide I show you will be a rapid fast-forward of what's happened over the last 25 years.
The permanent ice is marked in red.
As you see, it expands to the dark blue -- that's the annual ice in winter, and it contracts in summer.
The so-called permanent ice, five years old or older, you can see is almost like blood, spilling out of the body here.
In 25 years it's gone from this, to this.
This is a problem because the warming heats up the frozen ground around the Arctic Ocean, where there is a massive amount of frozen carbon which, when it thaws, is turned into methane by microbes.
Compared to the total amount of global warming pollution in the atmosphere, that amount could double if we cross this tipping point.
Already in some shallow lakes in Alaska, methane is actively bubbling up out of the water.
Professor Katey Walter from the University of Alaska went out with another team to another shallow lake last winter.
Video: Whoa! (Laughter) Al Gore: She's okay. The question is whether we will be.
And one reason is, this enormous heat sink heats up Greenland from the north.
This is an annual melting river.
But the volumes are much larger than ever.
This is the Kangerlussuaq River in southwest Greenland.
If you want to know how sea level rises from land-base ice melting this is where it reaches the sea.
These flows are increasing very rapidly.
At the other end of the planet, Antarctica the largest mass of ice on the planet.
Last month scientists reported the entire continent is now in negative ice balance.
And west Antarctica cropped up on top some under-sea islands, is particularly rapid in its melting.
That's equal to 20 feet of sea level, as is Greenland.
In the Himalayas, the third largest mass of ice: at the top you see new lakes, which a few years ago were glaciers.
40 percent of all the people in the world get half of their drinking water from that melting flow.
In the Andes, this glacier is the source of drinking water for this city.
The flows have increased.
But when they go away, so does much of the drinking water.
In California there has been a 40 percent decline in the Sierra snowpack.
This is hitting the reservoirs.
And the predictions, as you've read, are serious.
This drying around the world has lead to a dramatic increase in fires.
And the disasters around the world have been increasing at an absolutely extraordinary and unprecedented rate.
Four times as many in the last 30 years as in the previous 75.
This is a completely unsustainable pattern.
If you look at in the context of history you can see what this is doing.
In the last five years we've added 70 million tons of CO2 every 24 hours -- 25 million tons every day to the oceans.
Look carefully at the area of the eastern Pacific, from the Americas, extending westward, and on either side of the Indian subcontinent, where there is a radical depletion of oxygen in the oceans.
The biggest single cause of global warming, along with deforestation, which is 20 percent of it, is the burning of fossil fuels.
Oil is a problem, and coal is the most serious problem.
The United States is one of the two largest emitters, along with China.
And the proposal has been to build a lot more coal plants.
But we're beginning to see a sea change.
Here are the ones that have been cancelled in the last few years with some green alternatives proposed.
(Applause) However there is a political battle in our country.
And the coal industries and the oil industries spent a quarter of a billion dollars in the last calendar year promoting clean coal, which is an oxymoron.
That image reminded me of something.
(Laughter) Around Christmas, in my home in Tennessee, a billion gallons of coal sludge was spilled.
You probably saw it on the news.
This, all over the country, is the second largest waste stream in America.
This happened around Christmas.
One of the coal industry's ads around Christmas was this one.
Video:  Frosty the coal man is a jolly, happy soul.
He's abundant here in America, and he helps our economy grow.
Frosty the coal man is getting cleaner everyday.
He's affordable and adorable, and workers keep their pay.
Al Gore: This is the source of much of the coal in West Virginia.
The largest mountaintop miner is the head of Massey Coal.
Video: Don Blankenship: Let me be clear about it. Al Gore, Nancy Pelosi, Harry Reid, they don't know what they're talking about.
Al Gore: So the Alliance for Climate Protection has launched two campaigns.
This is one of them, part of one of them.
Video: Actor: At COALergy we view climate change as a very serious threat to our business.
That's why we've made it our primary goal to spend a large sum of money on an advertising effort to help bring out and complicate the truth about coal.
The fact is, coal isn't dirty.
We think it's clean -- smells good, too.
So don't worry about climate change.
Leave that up to us.
(Laughter) Video: Actor: Clean coal -- you've heard a lot about it.
So let's take a tour of this state-of-the-art clean coal facility.
Amazing! The machinery is kind of loud.
But that's the sound of clean coal technology.
And while burning coal is one of the leading causes of global warming, the remarkable clean coal technology you see here changes everything.
Take a good long look: this is today's clean coal technology.
Al Gore: Finally, the positive alternative meshes with our economic challenge and our national security challenge.
Video: Narrator: America is in crisis -- the economy, national security, the climate crisis.
The thread that links them all: our addiction to carbon based fuels, like dirty coal and foreign oil.
But now there is a bold new solution to get us out of this mess.
Repower America with 100 percent clean electricity within 10 years.
A plan to put America back to work, make us more secure, and help stop global warming.
Finally, a solution that's big enough to solve our problems.
Repower America. Find out more.
Al Gore: This is the last one.
Video: Narrator: It's about repowering America.
One of the fastest ways to cut our dependence on old dirty fuels that are killing our planet.
Man: Future's over here. Wind, sun, a new energy grid.
Man #2: New investments to create high-paying jobs.
Narrator: Repower America. It's time to get real.
Al Gore: There is an old African proverb that says, "If you want to go quickly, go alone.
If you want to go far, go together."
We need to go far, quickly.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The one conversation that uplifted me more than any other in my life was with a woman who told me how, a few days earlier, she drove her Jeep Wrangler to the edge of the Grand Canyon and sat there, revving the engine, thinking about driving over.
Even though I had severe social anxiety, in that conversation, I was totally at ease.
(Laughter) She told me what was going on in her life in the days and months leading up, what her thoughts were at that exact moment, why she wanted to die, and why she didn't do it.
We nodded and half-smiled, and then it was my turn to talk about my journey to a dining table in the hygienic community area of the mental health wing of a mountain-town hospital.
I took too many sleeping pills, and after they treated me for that, they were like, "Hey, we would love it if you would be our guest in the psych ward."
(Laughter) We joked that her suicide would have made a way better postcard.
(Laughter) We talked shop.
(Laughter) She allowed me to be deeply depressed and have a genuine connection to another person, simultaneously.
For the first time, I identified as somebody living with depression, and I felt good about it -- like I wasn't a bad person for it.
Now imagine one of the people at that table was a member of your family or a close friend.
Would you be comfortable talking to them?
What if instead of the hospital, they were at your kitchen table and told you they were really depressed?
The World Health Organization says that depression is the leading cause of ill health and disability worldwide, affecting 350 million people.
The National Institute of Mental Health reports seven percent of Americans experiencing depression in a year.
So depression is super common, yet in my experience, most folks don't want to talk to depressed people unless we pretend to be happy.
A cheerful facade is appropriate for casual interactions.
A depressed person can ask for extra syrup in their pumpkin spice latte without explaining that they need it because they're trapped in the infinite darkness of their soul and they've lost all hope of escape -- (Laughter) again.
(Laughter) Depression doesn't diminish a person's desire to connect with other people, just their ability.
So in spite of what you might think, talking to friends and family living with depression can be really easy and maybe even fun.
Not, like, Facebook-selfie-with-Lady-Gaga- at-an-underground-party fun -- I'm talking about the kind of fun where people enjoy each other's company effortlessly.
Nobody feels awkward, and no one accuses the sad person of ruining the holidays.
Why does this chasm even exist?
On the one side, you have people living with depression who may act in off-putting or confusing ways because they're fighting a war in their head that nobody else can see.
On the other side, the vast majority of people look across the chasm and shake their heads, like, "Why you gotta be so depressed?"
You may recognize a divide like this in your life.
Do you want to build a bridge across it?
You may not want to build a bridge -- and that's a totally valid choice.
Or maybe you'd like to build a stronger connection, but you have a lot of questions and concerns.
You're what I might call "bridge curious."
(Laughter) Here are some possible reasons why some of you may avoid depressed people.
You might be afraid that if you talk to somebody while they're depressed, you're suddenly responsible for their well-being.
You're not expected to be Dr. Phil.
Just be friendly -- more like Ellen.
(Laughter) You may worry that you won't know what to say, and every attempt at conversation will be awkward, and the only time you'll feel comfortable is when you both just give up on talking and stare at your phones.
Words are not the most important thing to focus on.
You might fear seeing your shadow.
Hey, if you have been successfully outrunning your personal emotional demons, that's awesome.
May the wind be at your back.
(Laughter) You can be the least woo-woo person in the world and still connect with depressed people.
Maybe you've heard that depression is contagious, and you're afraid of catching it.
Bring some hand sanitizer.
(Laughter) You're much more likely to catch the joy of human bonding.
Maybe you see depressed people differently.
You think of them as flawed or defective.
Multiple university studies have shown that A students are more likely to have bipolar condition.
Our brains aren't broken or damaged, they just work differently.
I spent a lot of years thinking happy people just don't get it.
(Laughter) I did eventually stop discriminating against happy people -- (Laughter) I began battling depression when I was eight, and decades later, to my surprise, I started winning.
I shifted from being miserable much of the time to enjoying life.
I live pretty well with my bipolar condition, and I've overcome some other mental health conditions like overeating, addiction and social anxiety.
So I live on both sides of this chasm.
And I'm offering some guidance based on my experience to help you build a bridge across it if you want to.
It's not hard science, but I worked with a lot people I know who've lived with depression to refine these suggestions.
First up, some things you might want to avoid -- some "don'ts."
One of the most off-putting things you can say is, "Just get over it."
Great idea -- love it, it's just we already thought of that.
(Laughter) The absence of the ability to just get over it is depression.
(Laughter) (Applause) We feel it in our bodies -- it's a physical thing for us.
And medically it's no different from telling someone with a broken ankle or cancer, "just get over it."
Don't be hell-bent on fixing us.
Like, thank you, but ...
the pressure can make us depressed people feel like we're disappointing you.
Also, things that make some people feel better may not work for us.
You can't cure clinical depression by getting ice cream ...
which is unfortunate, because that would be living the dream.
(Laughter) Don't take a negative response personally.
So, I have a friend who, about a year ago, messaged me that he was really isolated and depressed.
And I suggested some things for him to do, and he was like, "No, no and no."
And I got mad, like, how dare he not embrace my brilliant wisdom?
(Laughter) And then I remembered times I've been depressed, and how I thought I was doomed in all possible futures, or everybody suddenly hated me, and things like that.
It didn't matter how many people told me otherwise -- I didn't believe them.
So I let my friend know I cared, and I didn't take it personally.
Don't let a lack of bubbly happiness freak you out.
It's not a shark attack.
"Call the coast guard, my friend is sad!"
(Laughter) We can be sad and OK at the same time.
I'm going to say that again, because in our society, we're taught the opposite, and so it's counterintuitive.
People can be sad and OK at the same time.
So some of these things may apply to you personally, some may not.
Take what's useful.
And remember, you don't have to connect.
If you want to, here are some suggestions that may help -- some "dos."
Talk to us in your natural voice, right?
(Laughter) You don't need to put on a sad voice because we're depressed -- you don't sneeze when you're talking to somebody with a cold.
(Laughter) It's not rude to be upbeat.
You can be you, OK?
If you make an offer to be there for us, clearly state what you can and can't do.
I have told people, "Hey, call or text any time, but I might not be able to get back to you that same day."
It's totally cool to not make an offer, or to make a narrow offer with really clear boundaries around it.
Give us a sense of control.
Like, get our consent.
I have a friend who, a while back, when I was having a depressive episode, reached out and said, "Hey, I want to check in with you.
Can I call you every day?
Maybe text you every day and call later in the week?
What works for you?"
By getting my permission, she earned my complete confidence and remains one of my best friends today.
And my last suggestion is: interact about not depression, aka, normal stuff.
I have a friend who, when people were worried about him, they would call and ask if he wanted to go shopping or help them clean out their garage.
Your depressed friends could be a good source of free labor -- (Laughter) What I'm really getting at is, invite them to contribute to your life in some way, even if it's as small as asking you to go see a movie that you wanted to see in the theater.
So that's a lot of dos and don'ts and maybes, and it's not by any means a definitive list.
The thing to remember is that they're all grounded in one guiding principle.
It's what allowed the woman in the Jeep Wrangler to start me on the path to recovery without even trying.
She talked to me like I belonged and contributed exactly as I was at that moment.
If you talk to a depressed person as if their life is just as valuable, intense and beautiful as yours, then there's no need to build a bridge between you, because you've closed the chasm.
Focus on that instead of your words, and it may be the most uplifting conversation of their life.
What could that do for somebody you care about?
What could it do for you?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Almost 30 years ago, my country was facing the need to rebuild everything from scratch.
After years of Soviet occupation, Estonia regained its independence, but we were left with nothing.
No infrastructure, no administration, no legal code.
Organizational chaos.
Out of necessity, the state leaders back then had to make some daring choices.
There was a lot of experimentation and uncertainty but also a bit of luck involved, particularly in the fact that we could count on a number of brilliant visionaries, cryptographers and engineers.
I was just a kid back then.
Today, we are called the most digital society on earth.
I'm from Estonia, and we've been declaring taxes online since 2001.
We have been using digital identity and signature since 2002.
We've been voting online since 2005.
And for today, pretty much the whole range of the public services that you can imagine: education, police, justice, starting a company, applying for benefits, looking at your health record or challenging a parking ticket -- that's everything that is done online.
In fact, it's much easier to tell you what are the three things we cannot yet do online.
We have to show up to pick up our ID documents, get married or divorced, or sell real estate.
That's pretty much it.
So, that's why don't freak out when I tell you that every year I can't wait to start doing my tax declaration.
(Laughter) Because all I have to do is sit on my couch with a mobile phone, swipe a few pages with prefilled data on income and deductions and hit submit.
After three minutes, I'm looking at the tax return amount.
It actually feels like a quite rewarding experience.
No tax advisors, no collecting receipts, no doing the math.
And have I mentioned that I have not visited a state office for almost seven years?
Indeed, one of the features of the modern life that has no reason to exist anymore, considering technological possibilities of today, is the labyrinth of bureaucracy.
We've almost got rid of it completely in Estonia, in an effort coordinated by the government that has also digitized itself.
For instance, cabinet of ministers' work in e-Cabinet is absolutely paperless.
The central idea behind this development is transformation of the state role and digitalization of trust.
Think about it.
In most countries, people don't trust their governments.
And the governments don't trust them back.
And all the complicated paper-based formal procedures are supposed to solve that problem.
Except that they don't.
They just make life more complicated.
I believe Estonian experience is showing that technology can be the remedy for getting the trust back, while creating an efficient, user-centric service delivery system that actively responds to citizens' needs.
We did not do it by digitizing bureaucracy as it is.
But by rather agreeing on a few strong, common principles, redesigning rules and procedures, getting rid of unnecessary data collection and task duplication, and becoming open and transparent.
Let me give you a glimpse into some of the key e-Estonia design principles today.
First, it is essential to guarantee privacy and confidentiality of data and information.
This is achieved through a strong digital identity that is issued by the state and compatible with everything.
In fact, every Estonian has one.
The identity is doubled with a strong digital signature that is accepted, used and legally binding both in Estonia and the European Union.
When the system can properly and securely identify who is using it, after logging in, it will provide access to the personal data of the citizen and all the public services within one tool, and allow to authorize anything by signing digitally.
A second principle, and one of the most transformative, is called "Once only."
It means that the state cannot ask for the same data more than once, nor can store it in more than one place.
For instance, if you've already provided your birth or marital certificate to the population registry, this is the only place where this data is going to be held.
And no other institution will be ever asking for it again.
Once only is a very powerful rule, as it defines the whole structure of the data collection in a country, what information is collected and who is responsible for maintaining it, making sure we avoid centralization of data, duplication of data, and guarantee that it's actually up to date.
This distributed approach also avoids the problem of the single point of failure.
But since the data cannot be replicated, or collected more than once, it means that the design has to keep in mind secure and robust access to that information at all times, so the public institution can offer a service.
This is exactly the role of the data exchange platform called the X-Road that has been in use since 2001.
Just like a highway, it connects public sector databases and registries, local municipalities and businesses, organizing a real-time, secure and regulated data exchange, saving an auditable trace after each move.
Here's a screenshot of a live feed showing all the requests performed on the X-Road and all the services that it actually facilitates.
And this is the real picture of all the connections between public and private sector databases.
As you can see, there is no central database whatsoever.
Confidentiality and privacy are definitely very important.
But in the digital world, reliability and integrity of information is just critical for operations.
For instance, if someone changes your medical health record, let's say allergies, without you or your doctor knowing, treatment could be deadly.
That's why in a digital society, a system like an Estonian one, when there's almost no paper originals, there's almost only digital originals, integrity of data, data exchange rules, software components and log files is paramount.
We use a form of blockchain that we invented back in 2007, way before blockchain even became a thing, to check and guarantee the integrity of data in real time.
Blockchain is our auditor and a promise that no access to the data or data manipulation remains unrecorded.
Data ownership is another key principle in the design of the system.
Aren't you worried by the fact that governments, tech companies and other businesses around the world claim data they've collected about you is theirs, generally refuse to give access to that information, and often fail to prove how it was used or shared with third parties?
I don't know, for me it seems like a quite disturbing situation.
The Estonian system is based on the principle that an individual is the owner of the data collected about him, thus has an absolute right to know what information is collected and who has been accessing it.
Every time a policeman, a doctor or any state officer is accessing personal information of the citizens online, first they only get to access it after logging in to the information they're authorized to see to do their job.
And secondly, every time they're making requests, this is saved in a log file.
This detailed log file is part of the state public services and allows real transparency, making sure no privacy violation will remain unnoticed to the citizen.
Now, of course, this is only a simplified summary of all the design principles that e-Estonia is built on.
And now, government is building up to get ready for use of artificial intelligence and building a whole new generation of public services -- proactive services that would activate seamlessly based on different life situations that people might be in, such as childbirth, unemployment or starting a business.
Now, of course, running a digital society with no paper backup can be an issue, right?
Even though we trust our systems to be solid, but one can never be too cautious as we experienced back in 2007, when the first cyberincident happened, and it literally blocked part of our networks, making access to the services impossible for hours.
We survived.
But this event put cybersecurity at the very top of agenda, both in terms of strengthening the platform and backing it up.
So how do you back up a country-wide system in a small state where everything is super close?
Well for instance, you can export a copy of the data outside the country territory to an extraterritorial space of an embassy.
Today, we have those data embassies that are holding the most critical digital assets of Estonia, guaranteeing continuity of operations, protection of our data, and most importantly, our sovereignty.
Some of you might be thinking by now: Where are the downsides?
Well, going all digital is administratively, and let's be honest, financially more efficient.
Interfacing primarily with computer systems might create an impression that the human factor, elected politicians and participating in democratic processes is somehow less important.
And there are also some people who feel threatened by pervasive technology that might make their skills obsolete.
So all in all, unfortunately, running a country on a digital platform has not saved us from political power struggles and polarization in the society, as we have seen in the last elections.
Well, until there are humans involved.
One last question.
If everything is location-independent and I can access all of the services from anywhere in the world, why cannot others tap into some of these services, even if they don't reside within Estonian borders?
Five years ago, we launched a governmental start-up called e-Residency program that for today joins tens of thousands of people.
These are businessmen and women from 136 different countries, who establish their businesses digitally, who do their banking online, and who run their companies virtually over e-Estonia platform, within European Union legal framework, using an e-identity card similar to mine and all of that from anywhere in the world.
The Estonian system is location-independent and user-centric.
It prioritizes inclusiveness, openness and reliability.
It puts security and transparency at its center.
And the data into the hands of the rightful owner, the person they refer to.
Don't take my word for it.
Try it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Have you ever felt lonely?
The urge of wanting to connect with people, but you seem to have no one you really would want to contact?
Or, it's a Friday night and you want to be with others, but you have no energy to go out, so instead you sit at home all evening, watch Netflix and feel more alone than ever?
You feel like a monster between humans that know how to function.
This is what loneliness felt like to me.
So I'm an artist, and I process my emotional world by sharing my feelings through my art.
If you share your feelings with someone, and they understand and share those feelings too, you create an emotional and deep connection.
This is why you can be surrounded by hundreds of people, jump from one candidate to the next, but still feel lonely.
It's because these deeper connections haven't been made.
I was an always-happy child.
I think we nearly have no single photo of me where I don't smile broadly or laugh or joke around.
And this went on until ...
well, it's still the case.
But I had many friend groups up until, as a young adult, I moved to another city for my first job as a comic artist.
And like so many young, thriving people all over the planet, I concentrated all my energy into my work life.
But, if you spend, like, 90 percent of your daily capacity trying to succeed at work, of course there is nothing left to take care of all the other important aspects in your life, like your human relationships.
Nourishing friendships as an adult is work.
You need to be consistent with connecting.
You need to be open, you need to be honest.
And this is all I struggled with, because I tend to camouflage my real feelings by trying to appear always happy and trying to make everyone else happy, too, by trying to fix their problems.
And I know a lot of us are guilty of this, because it's an easy way to not think about your own issues.
Isn't it?
Hmm? Hmm? Hmm?
(Laughter) OK.
The turning point came when I fell into an emotionally abusive relationship just a few years ago.
He isolated me and left me feeling more alone than ever.
It was the lowest point in my life, but it was also my wake-up call, because it was the first time that I really felt loneliness.
Many others put their feelings into their art.
There are endless books, movies, paintings, music, all filled with the real emotion of an artist.
So, as an artist myself, I did the same.
I shared my feelings.
I wanted to help people cope with loneliness.
I wanted, yeah, to make them understand it, to really experience it through my art in the form of an interactive story, a video game.
So, in our game -- we called it "Sea of Solitude" -- you are a person named Kay, who is suffering from such strong loneliness that her inner feelings -- the anger, the feeling of hopelessness, worthlessness -- turn to the outside, and she becomes a monster.
The game -- well, Kay -- is actually a representation of me and the path I went through to overcome my struggles.
The game plays, actually, in Kay's mind, so you walk through a world that is flooded by her tears, and the weather is changing by her mood, how her mood is changing.
And, well, the only thing Kay wears, the only thing, is her backpack.
It's the baggage we all carry throughout our life.
And Kay doesn't know how to cope with her emotions in the right way, so her backpack becomes bigger and bigger until it bursts, and she finally is forced to overcome her own struggles.
In our story, we present many different manifestations of loneliness.
Loneliness through social exclusion is very common.
In our game, the brother of Kay got bullied in his school, and he just wants to hide and fly away.
And we portray him as a huge bird monster surrounded by thick fog.
The player has to actually walk through his school and experience, really feel the harm, that the brother had been through, because for a long time, nobody really listens to him.
But the very moment friends and family start to listen, the first step towards overcoming this form of loneliness had been made.
We also show loneliness in relationships, like when parents just stay together for the sake of their kids but end up hurting the entire family.
We put the player literally in between the two parents while they are fighting, and you get hurt in the middle.
They don't even see that their daughter, Kay, is right there until she breaks down.
We also show loneliness through mental health issues, with the boyfriend of Kay, who suffers from depression and shows that sometimes it is most important to focus on your own well-being first.
The boyfriend also tends to camouflage his feelings, so he appears like a lone, shiny white wolf.
But the moment he starts to interact with his girlfriend, Kay, the mask falls off, and we see the black dog beneath it: depression.
Sometimes we put on a smile instead of dealing with the issues at hand, and that can ultimately make it worse, affect the people around us and damage our relationships.
So Kay herself we portray as ripped apart into her basic emotions.
Some help you, some are trying to stop you.
Self-Doubt is a huge creature, always telling Kay how worthless she is and that she should just give up.
Like in real life, Self-Doubt is blocking the path, and it seems impossible to overcome it.
Destroying the omnipresence of Self-Doubt is a slow process.
But in the game, you can slowly, like, shrink her, so she turns from self-doubt to actually healthy doubt, and you can finally trust her advice.
We also show Self-Destruction.
It's a huge monster always lurking nearby under the water's surface.
Self-Destruction is actually the main antagonist of the game, and she is always trying to drown you in the ocean of tears.
But, when she actually drowns you, you wake up just a few moments [before], and you have a chance to progress again.
We wanted to show that we all go through hardships in our life, we all do.
But if you at least, like, stand up and try to move forward, you are very likely to make it through your struggle, step by step.
Joy is something that Kay cannot really embrace or touch.
It's always something in the distance.
We portrayed Joy as a child version of Kay, with a yellow raincoat, so she is invulnerable to the ocean of tears.
But Joy can also turn into obsession and start to be actually harmful for Kay, like when she starts obsessing over her boyfriend.
Joy will not turn back to normal until Kay realizes that her happiness should not depend on anybody else but herself.
So our monsters appear huge and scary, but if you overcome your reluctance and approach them, you soon see that they are no monsters at all, but just fragile beings that are simply overwhelmed by what life throws at them.
All of those emotions, be it self-doubt or even self-destruction, don't completely vanish in our game.
The key message is to not only chase for joy or happiness but to embrace all your emotions and bring them into balance, being OK with sometimes not being OK.
Everyone has their own loneliness story to tell.
This realization changed everything for me.
Being much more open with my emotions and concentrating much more on my private life, my friends, my family.
When we released the game, literally thousands of fans wrote us, all sharing their stories with us and telling us they felt not so alone anymore just because they played our game.
Many people wrote us that they felt hope for a better future for themselves for the first time in decades.
Many wrote us that they seek therapy now, just because they played our game and felt hopeful to overcome their own struggles.
Our game is not a therapy.
It's just my friends and me sharing our stories through our art, video games.
But we are so deeply thankful for every single message that people feel better, just because we shared our story with them.
So ...
I didn't completely overcome my urge to help others.
But I don't want to overcome it anymore.
I love it.
I just needed to bring it to a healthy size, so it doesn't stand in the way of deeper relationships anymore, but even help me to connect with people.
So, if you have an inner monster that is born out of negative emotions, it is not only the goal to kill that monster but to understand that we humans are complex beings.
Look at what part of your life is so big that others fall short.
Look at what emotions you barely feel or maybe feel too much and move towards lowering those peaks.
Most of all, it's about understanding that all the wide range of emotions and struggles makes us what we are: humans.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 1990, the Italian government enlisted top engineers to stabilize Pisas famous Leaning Tower.
Thered been many attempts to right the tower during its 800 year history, but this teams computer models revealed the urgency of their situation.
They projected the tower would topple if it reached an angle of 5.44 degrees and it was currently leaning at 5.5.
No one knew how the tower was still standing, but the crisis was clear: they had to solve a problem that stumped centuries of engineers, and they needed to do it fast.
To understand their situation, its helpful to understand why the tower tilted in the first place.
In the 12th century, the wealthy maritime republic of Pisa set about turning its cathedral square into a magnificent landmark.
Workers embellished and enlarged the existing church, and added a massive domed baptistry to the plaza.
In 1173, construction began on a free-standing campanile, or bell tower.
The engineers and architects of the time were masters of their craft.
But for all their engineering knowledge, they knew far less about the ground they stood on.
Pisas name comes from a Greek word for marshy land," which perfectly describes the clay, mud, and wet sand below the citys surface.
Ancient Romans counteracted similar conditions with massive stone pillars called piles which rest on Earths stable bedrock.
However, the towers architects believed a three-meter foundation would suffice for their relatively short structure.
Unfortunately for them, less than five years later, the towers southern side was already underground.
Such a shifting foundation would normally have been a fatal flaw.
If workers added more weight, the pressure from upper stories would sink the structure and fatally increase the lean.
But construction halted at the fourth story for nearly a century as Pisa descended into prolonged warfare.
This long pause allowed the soil to settle, and when construction began again in 1272, the foundation was on slightly more stable footing.
Under the direction of architect Giovanni di Simone, workers compensated for the towers minor tilt by making the next few floors taller on the southern side.
But the weight of the extra masonry made that side sink even deeper.
By the time they completed the seventh floor and bell chamber, the angle of the tilt was 1.6 degrees.
For centuries, engineers tried numerous strategies to address the lean.
In 1838, they dug a walkway around the base to examine the sunken foundation.
But removing the supporting sand only worsened the tilt.
In 1935, the Italian Corps of Engineers injected mortar to strengthen the base.
However, the mortar wasnt evenly distributed throughout the foundation, resulting in another sudden drop.
All these failed attempts, along with the ever-sinking foundation, moved the tower closer to its tipping point.
And without definitive knowledge of the soil composition, engineers couldnt pinpoint the towers fatal angle or devise a way to stop its fall.
In the years following WWII, researchers developed tests to identify those missing variables.
And in the 1970s, engineers calculated the curved towers center of gravity.
With this data and new computing technology, engineers could model how stiff the soil was, the towers trajectory, and the exact amount of excavation needed for the tower to remain standing.
In 1992, the team drilled diagonal tunnels to remove 38 cubic meters of soil from under the towers north end.
Then, they temporarily counterbalanced the structure with 600 tons of lead ingots before anchoring the base with steel cables.
More than six centuries after its construction, the tower was finally straightened to a tilt of about four degrees.
No one wanted the tower to fall, but they also didnt want to lose the landmarks most famous feature.
Today the tower stands at 55 or 56 meters tall, and it should remain stable for at least 300 years as a monument to the beauty of imperfection.
During World War I, one of the horrors of trench warfare was a poisonous yellow cloud called mustard gas.
For those unlucky enough to be exposed, it made the air impossible to breathe, burned their eyes, and caused huge blisters on exposed skin.
Scientists tried desperately to develop an antidote to this vicious weapon of war.
In the process they discovered the gas was irrevocably damaging the bone marrow of affected soldiers halting its ability to make blood cells.
Despite these awful effects, it gave scientists an idea.
Cancer cells share a characteristic with bone marrow: both replicate rapidly.
So could one of the atrocities of war become a champion in the fight against cancer?
Researchers in the 1930s investigated this idea by injecting compounds derived from mustard gas into the veins of cancer patients.
It took time and trial and error to find treatments that did more good than harm, but by the end of World War II, they discovered what became known as the first chemotherapy drugs.
Today, there are more than 100.
Chemotherapy drugs are delivered through pills and injections and use "cytotoxic agents," which means compounds that are toxic to living cells.
Essentially, these medicines cause some level of harm to all cells in the body even healthy ones.
But they reserve their most powerful effects for rapidly-dividing cells, which is precisely the hallmark of cancer.
Take, for example, those first chemotherapy drugs, which are still used today and are called alkylating agents.
Theyre injected into the bloodstream, which delivers them to cells all over the body.
Once inside, when the cell exposes its DNA in order to copy it, they damage the building blocks of DNAs double helix structure, which can lead to cell death unless the damage is repaired.
Because cancer cells multiply rapidly, they take in a high concentration of alkylating agents, and their DNA is frequently exposed and rarely repaired.
So they die off more often than most other cells, which have time to fix damaged DNA and dont accumulate the same concentrations of alkylating agents.
Another form of chemotherapy involves compounds called microtubule stabilizers.
Cells have small tubes that assemble to help with cell division and DNA replication, then break back down.
When microtubule stabilizers get inside a cell, they keep those tiny tubes from disassembling.
That prevents the cell from completing its replication, leading to its death.
These are just two examples of the six classes of chemotherapy drugs we use to treat cancer today.
But despite its huge benefits, chemotherapy has one big disadvantage: it affects other healthy cells in the body that naturally have to renew rapidly.
Hair follicles, the cells of the mouth, the gastrointestinal lining, the reproductive system, and bone marrow are hit nearly as hard as cancer.
Similar to cancer cells, the rapid production of these normal cells means that theyre reaching for resources more frequently and are therefore more exposed to the effects of chemo drugs.
That leads to several common side effects of chemotherapy, including hair loss, fatigue, infertility, nausea, and vomiting.
Doctors commonly prescribe options to help manage these side-effects, such as strong anti-nausea medications.
For hair loss, devices called cold caps can help lower the temperature around the head and constrict blood vessels, limiting the amount of chemotherapy drugs that reach hair follicles.
And once a course of chemo treatment is over, the healthy tissues thatve been badly affected by the drug will recover and begin to renew as usual.
In 2018 alone, over 17 million people world-wide received a cancer diagnosis.
But chemotherapy and other treatments have changed the outlook for so many.
Just take the fact that up to 95% of individuals with testicular cancer survive it, thanks to advances in treatment.
Even in people with acute myeloid leukemia an aggressive blood cancer chemotherapy puts an estimated 60% of patients under 60 into remission following their first phase of treatment.
Researchers are still developing more precise interventions that only target the intended cancer cells.
Thatll help improve survival rates while leaving healthy tissues with reduced harm, making one of the best tools we have in the fight against cancer even better.
I'm not at all a cook.
So don't fear, this is not going to be a cooking demonstration.
But I do want to talk to you about something that I think is dear to all of us.
And that is bread -- something which is as simple as our basic, most fundamental human staple.
And I think few of us spend the day without eating bread in some form.
Unless you're on one of these Californian low-carb diets, bread is standard.
Bread is not only standard in the Western diet.
As I will show to you, it is actually the mainstay of modern life.
So I'm going to bake bread for you.
In the meantime I'm also talking to you, so my life is going to be complicated. Bear with me.
First of all, a little bit of audience participation.
I have two loaves of bread here.
One is a supermarket standard: white bread, pre-packaged, which I'm told is called a Wonderbread.
(Laughter) I didn't know this word until I arrived.
And this is more or less, a whole-meal, handmade, small-bakery loaf of bread.
Here we go. I want to see a show of hands.
Who prefers the whole-meal bread?
Okay let me do this differently. Is anybody preferring the Wonderbread at all?
(Laughter) I have two tentative male hands.
(Laughter) Okay, now the question is really, why is this so?
And I think it is because we feel that this kind of bread really is about authenticity.
It's about a traditional way of living.
A way that is perhaps more real, more honest.
This is an image from Tuscany, where we feel agriculture is still about beauty.
And life is really, too.
And this is about good taste, good traditions.
Why do we have this image?
Why do we feel that this is more true than this?
Well I think it has a lot to do with our history.
In the 10,000 years since agriculture evolved, most of our ancestors have actually been agriculturalists or they were closely related to food production.
And we have this mythical image of how life was in rural areas in the past.
Art has helped us to maintain that kind of image.
It was a mythical past.
Of course, the reality is quite different.
These poor farmers working the land by hand or with their animals, had yield levels that are comparable to the poorest farmers today in West Africa.
But we have, somehow, in the course of the last few centuries, or even decades, started to cultivate an image of a mythical, rural agricultural past.
It was only 200 years ago that we had the advent of the Industrial Revolution.
And while I'm starting to make some bread for you here, it's very important to understand what that revolution did to us.
It brought us power. It brought us mechanization, fertilizers.
And it actually drove up our yields.
And even sort of horrible things, like picking beans by hand, can now be done automatically.
All that is a real, great improvement, as we shall see.
Of course we also, particularly in the last decade, managed to envelop the world in a dense chain of supermarkets, in a chain of global trade.
And it means that you now eat products, which can come from all around the world.
That is the reality of our modern life.
Now you may prefer this loaf of bread.
Excuse my hands but this is how it is.
But actually the real relevant bread, historically, is this white Wonder loaf.
And don't despise the white bread because it really, I think, symbolizes the fact that bread and food have become plentiful and affordable to all.
And that is a feat that we are not really conscious of that much.
But it has changed the world.
This tiny bread that is tasteless in some ways and has a lot of problems has changed the world.
So what is happening?
Well the best way to look at that is to do a tiny bit of simplistic statistics.
With the advent of the Industrial Revolution with modernization of agriculture in the last few decades, since the 1960s, food availability, per head, in this world, has increased by 25 percent.
And the world population in the meantime has doubled.
That means that we have now more food available than ever before in human history.
And that is the result, directly, of being so successful at increasing the scale and volume of our production.
And this is true, as you can see, for all countries, including the so-called developing countries.
What happened to our bread in the meantime?
As food became plentiful here, it also meant that we were able to decrease the number of people working in agriculture to something like, on average, in the high income countries, five percent or less of the population.
In the U.S. only one percent of the people are actually farmers.
And it frees us all up to do other things -- to sit at TED meetings and not to worry about our food.
That is, historically, a really unique situation.
Never before has the responsibility to feed the world been in the hands of so few people.
And never before have so many people been oblivious of that fact.
So as food became more plentiful, bread became cheaper.
And as it became cheaper, bread manufacturers decided to add in all kinds of things.
We added in more sugar.
We add in raisins and oil and milk and all kinds of things to make bread, from a simple food into kind of a support for calories.
And today, bread now is associated with obesity, which is very strange.
It is the basic, most fundamental food that we've had in the last ten thousand years.
Wheat is the most important crop -- the first crop we domesticated and the most important crop we still grow today.
But this is now this strange concoction of high calories.
And that's not only true in this country, it is true all over the world.
Bread has migrated to tropical countries, where the middle classes now eat French rolls and hamburgers and where the commuters find bread much more handy to use than rice or cassava.
So bread has become from a main staple, a source of calories associated with obesity and also a source of modernity, of modern life.
And the whiter the bread, in many countries, the better it is.
So this is the story of bread as we know it now.
But of course the price of mass production has been that we moved large-scale.
And large-scale has meant destruction of many of our landscapes, destruction of biodiversity -- still a lonely emu here in the Brazilian cerrado soybean fields.
The costs have been tremendous -- water pollution, all the things you know about, destruction of our habitats.
What we need to do is to go back to understanding what our food is about.
And this is where I have to query all of you.
How many of you can actually tell wheat apart from other cereals?
How many of you actually can make a bread in this way, without starting with a bread machine or just some kind of packaged flavor?
Can you actually bake bread? Do you know how much a loaf of bread actually costs?
We have become very removed from what our bread really is, which, again, evolutionarily speaking, is very strange.
In fact not many of you know that our bread, of course, was not a European invention.
It was invented by farmers in Iraq and Syria in particular.
The tiny spike on the left to the center is actually the forefather of wheat.
This is where it all comes from, and where these farmers who actually, ten thousand years ago, put us on the road of bread.
Now it is not surprising that with this massification and large-scale production, there is a counter-movement that emerged -- very much also here in California.
The counter-movement says, "Let's go back to this.
Let's go back to traditional farming.
Let's go back to small-scale, to farmers' markets, small bakeries and all that." Wonderful.
Don't we all agree? I certainly agree.
I would love to go back to Tuscany to this kind of traditional setting, gastronomy, good food.
But this is a fallacy.
And the fallacy comes from idealizing a past that we have forgotten about.
If we do this, if we want to stay with traditional small-scale farming we are going, actually, to relegate these poor farmers and their husbands -- among whom I have lived for many years, working without electricity and water, to try to improve their food production -- we relegate them to poverty.
What they want are implements to increase their production: something to fertilize the soil, something to protect their crop and to bring it to a market.
We cannot just think that small-scale is the solution to the world food problem.
It's a luxury solution for us who can afford it, if you want to afford it.
In fact we do not want this poor woman to work the land like this.
If we say just small-scale production, as is the tendency here, to go back to local food means that a poor man like Hans Rosling cannot even eat oranges anymore because in Scandinavia we don't have oranges.
So local food production is out.
But also we do not want to relegate to poverty in the rural areas.
And we do not want to relegate the urban poor to starvation.
So we must find other solutions.
One of our problems is that world food production needs to increase very rapidly -- doubling by about 2030.
The main driver of that is actually meat.
And meat consumption in Southeast Asia and China in particular is what drives the prices of cereals.
That need for animal protein is going to continue.
We can discuss alternatives in another talk, perhaps one day, but this is our driving force.
So what can we do?
Can we find a solution to produce more?
Yes. But we need mechanization.
And I'm making a real plea here.
I feel so strongly that you cannot ask a small farmer to work the land and bend over to grow a hectare of rice, 150,000 times, just to plant a crop and weed it.
You cannot ask people to work under these conditions.
We need clever low-key mechanization that avoids the problems of the large-scale mechanization that we've had.
So what can we do?
We must feed three billion people in cities.
We will not do that through small farmers' markets because these people have no small farmers' markets at their disposal.
They have low incomes. And they benefit from cheap, affordable, safe and diverse food.
That's what we must aim for in the next 20 to 30 years.
But yes there are some solutions.
And let me just do one simple conceptual thing: if I plot science as a proxy for control of the production process and scale.
What you see is that we've started in the left-hand corner with traditional agriculture, which was sort of small-scale and low-control.
We've moved towards large-scale and very high control.
What I want us to do is to keep up the science and even get more science in there but go to a kind of regional scale -- not just in terms of the scale of the fields, but in terms of the entire food network.
That's where we should move.
And the ultimate may be, but it doesn't apply to cereals, that we have entirely closed ecosystems -- the horticultural systems right at the top left-hand corner.
So we need to think differently about agriculture science.
Agriculture science for most people -- and there are not many farmers among you here -- has this name of being bad, of being about pollution, about large-scale, about the destruction of the environment.
That is not necessary.
We need more science and not less. And we need good science.
So what kind of science can we have?
Well first of all I think we can do much better on the existing technologies.
Use biotechnology where useful, particularly in pest and disease resistance.
There are also robots, for example, who can recognize weeds with a resolution of half an inch.
We have much cleverer irrigation.
We do not need to spill the water if we don't want to.
And we need to think very dispassionately about the comparative advantages of small-scale and large-scale.
We need to think that land is multi-functional.
It has different functions.
There are different ways in which we must use it -- for residential, for nature, for agriculture purposes.
And we also need to re-examine livestock.
Go regional and go to urban food systems.
I want to see fish ponds in parking lots and basements.
I want to have horticulture and greenhouses on top of residential areas.
And I want to use the energy that comes from those greenhouses and from the fermentation of crops to heat our residential areas.
There are all kinds of ways we can do it.
We cannot solve the world food problem by using biological agriculture.
But we can do a lot more.
And the main thing that I would really ask all of you as you go back to your countries, or as you stay here: ask your government for an integrated food policy.
Food is as important as energy, as security, as the environment.
Everything is linked together.
So we can do that. In fact in a densely populated country like the River Delta, where I live in the Netherlands, we have combined these functions.
So this is not science fiction. We can combine things even in a social sense of making the rural areas more accessible to people -- to house, for example, the chronically sick.
There is all kinds of things we can do.
But there is something you must do. It's not enough for me to say, "Let's get more bold science into agriculture."
You must go back and think about your own food chain.
Talk to farmers. When was the last time you went to a farm and talked to a farmer?
Talk to people in restaurants.
Understand where you are in the food chain, where your food comes from.
Understand that you are part of this enormous chain of events.
And that frees you up to do other things.
And above all, to me, food is about respect.
It's about understanding, when you eat, that there are also many people who are still in this situation, who are still struggling for their daily food.
And the kind of simplistic solutions that we sometimes have, to think that doing everything by hand is going to be the solution, is really not morally justified.
We need to help to lift them out of poverty.
We need to make them proud of being a farmer because they allow us to survive.
Never before, as I said, has the responsibility for food been in the hands of so few.
And never before have we had the luxury of taking it for granted because it is now so cheap.
And I think there is nobody else who has expressed better, to me, the idea that food, in the end, in our own tradition, is something holy.
It's not about nutrients and calories.
It's about sharing. It's about honesty. It's about identity.
Who said this so beautifully was Mahatma Gandhi, 75 years ago, when he spoke about bread.
He did not speak about rice, in India. He said, "To those who have to go without two meals a day, God can only appear as bread."
And so as I'm finishing my bread here -- and I've been baking it, and I'll try not to burn my hands.
Let me share with those of you here in the first row.
Let me share some of the food with you.
Take some of my bread.
And as you eat it, and as you try it -- please come and stand up.
Have some of it.
I want you to think that every bite connects you to the past and the future: to these anonymous farmers, that first bred the first wheat varieties; and to the farmers of today, who've been making this. And you don't even know who they are.
Every meal you eat contains ingredients from all across the world.
Everything makes us so privileged, that we can eat this food, that we don't struggle every day.
And that, I think, evolutionarily-speaking is unique.
We've never had that before.
So enjoy your bread.
Eat it, and feel privileged.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So sometimes I get invited to give weird talks.
I got invited to speak to the people who dress up in big stuffed animal costumes to perform at sporting events.
Unfortunately I couldn't go.
But it got me thinking about the fact that these guys, at least most of them, know what it is that they do for a living.
What they do is they dress up as stuffed animals and entertain people at sporting events.
Shortly after that I got invited to speak at the convention of the people who make balloon animals.
And again, I couldn't go. But it's a fascinating group. They make balloon animals.
There is a big schism between the ones who make gospel animals and porn animals, but -- (Laughter) they do a lot of really cool stuff with balloons.
Sometimes they get in trouble, but not often.
And the other thing about these guys is, they also know what they do for a living.
They make balloon animals.
But what do we do for a living?
What exactly to the people watching this do every day?
And I want to argue that what we do is we try to change everything.
That we try to find a piece of the status quo -- something that bothers us, something that needs to be improved, something that is itching to be changed -- and we change it.
We try to make big, permanent, important change.
But we don't think about it that way.
And we haven't spent a lot of time talking about what that process is like.
And I've been studying it for a couple years.
And I want to share a couple stories with you today.
First, about a guy named Nathan Winograd.
Nathan was the number two person at the San Francisco SPCA.
And what you may not know about the history of the SPCA is, it was founded to kill dogs and cats.
Cities gave them a charter to get rid of the stray animals on the street and destroy them.
In a typical year four million dogs and cats were killed, most of them within 24 hours of being scooped off of the street.
Nathan and his boss saw this, and they could not tolerate it.
So they set out to make San Francisco a no-kill city: create an entire city where every dog and cat, unless it was ill or dangerous, would be adopted, not killed.
And everyone said it was impossible.
Nathan and his boss went to the city council to get a change in the ordinance.
And people from SPCAs and humane shelters around the country flew to San Francisco to testify against them -- to say it would hurt the movement and it was inhumane.
They persisted. And Nathan went directly to the community.
He connected with people who cared about this: nonprofessionals, people with passion.
And within just a couple years, San Francisco became the first no-kill city, running no deficit, completely supported by the community.
Nathan left and went to Tompkins County, New York -- a place as different from San Francisco as you can be and still be in the United States. And he did it again.
He went from being a glorified dogcatcher to completely transforming the community.
And then he went to North Carolina and did it again.
And he went to Reno and he did it again.
And when I think about what Nathan did, and when I think about what people here do, I think about ideas.
And I think about the idea that creating an idea, spreading an idea has a lot behind it.
I don't know if you've ever been to a Jewish wedding, but what they do is, they take a light bulb and they smash it.
Now there is a bunch of reasons for that, and stories about it.
But one reason is because it indicates a change, from before to after.
It is a moment in time.
And I want to argue that we are living through and are right at the key moment of a change in the way ideas are created and spread and implemented.
We started with the factory idea: that you could change the whole world if you had an efficient factory that could churn out change.
We then went to the TV idea, that said if you had a big enough mouthpiece, if you could get on TV enough times, if you could buy enough ads, you could win.
And now we're in this new model of leadership, where the way we make change is not by using money or power to lever a system, but by leading.
So let me tell you about the three cycles. The first one is the factory cycle.
Henry Ford comes up with a really cool idea.
It enables him to hire men who used to get paid 50 cents a day and pay them five dollars a day.
Because he's got an efficient enough factory.
Well with that sort of advantage you can churn out a lot of cars.
You can make a lot of change. You can get roads built.
You can change the fabric of an entire country.
That the essence of what you're doing is you need ever-cheaper labor, and ever-faster machines.
And the problem we've run into is, we're running out of both.
Ever-cheaper labor and ever-faster machines.
(Laughter) So we shift gears for a minute, and say, "I know: television; advertising. Push push.
Take a good idea and push it on the world.
I have a better mousetrap.
And if I can just get enough money to tell enough people, I'll sell enough."
And you can build an entire industry on that.
If necessary you can put babies in your ads.
If necessary you can use babies to sell other stuff.
And if babies don't work, you can use doctors.
But be careful.
Because you don't want to get an unfortunate juxtaposition, where you're talking about one thing instead of the other.
(Laughter) This model requires you to act like the king, like the person in the front of the room throwing things to the peons in the back.
That you are in charge, and you're going to tell people what to do next.
The quick little diagram of it is, you're up here, and you are pushing it out to the world.
This method -- mass marketing -- requires average ideas, because you're going to the masses, and plenty of ads.
What we've done as spammers is tried to hypnotize everyone into buying our idea, hypnotize everyone into donating to our cause, hypnotize everyone into voting for our candidate.
And, unfortunately, it doesn't work so well anymore either.
(Laughter) But there is good news around the corner -- really good news.
I call it the idea of tribes.
What tribes are, is a very simple concept that goes back 50,000 years.
It's about leading and connecting people and ideas.
And it's something that people have wanted forever.
Lots of people are used to having a spiritual tribe, or a church tribe, having a work tribe, having a community tribe.
But now, thanks to the internet, thanks to the explosion of mass media, thanks to a lot of other things that are bubbling through our society around the world, tribes are everywhere.
The Internet was supposed to homogenize everyone by connecting us all.
Instead what it's allowed is silos of interest.
So you've got the red-hat ladies over here.
You've got the red-hat triathletes over there.
You've got the organized armies over here.
You've got the disorganized rebels over here.
You've got people in white hats making food.
And people in white hats sailing boats.
The point is that you can find Ukrainian folk dancers and connect with them, because you want to be connected.
That people on the fringes can find each other, connect and go somewhere.
Every town that has a volunteer fire department understands this way of thinking.
(Laughter) Now it turns out this is a legitimate non-photoshopped photo.
People I know who are firemen told me that this is not uncommon.
And that what firemen do to train sometimes is they take a house that is going to be torn down, and they burn it down instead, and practice putting it out.
But they always stop and take a picture.
(Laughter) You know the pirate tribe is a fascinating one.
They've got their own flag. They've got the eye patches.
You can tell when you're running into someone in a tribe.
And it turns out that it's tribes -- not money, not factories -- that can change our world, that can change politics, that can align large numbers of people.
Not because you force them to do something against their will, but because they wanted to connect.
That what we do for a living now, all of us, I think, is find something worth changing, and then assemble tribes that assemble tribes that spread the idea and spread the idea.
And it becomes something far bigger than ourselves, it becomes a movement.
So when Al Gore set out to change the world again, he didn't do it by himself.
And he didn't do it by buying a lot of ads.
He did it by creating a movement.
Thousands of people around the country who could give his presentation for him, because he can't be in 100 or 200 or 500 cities in each night.
You don't need everyone.
What Kevin Kelley has taught us is you just need, I don't know, a thousand true fans -- a thousand people who care enough that they will get you the next round and the next round and the next round.
And that means that the idea you create, the product you create, the movement you create isn't for everyone, it's not a mass thing. That's not what this is about.
What it's about instead is finding the true believers.
It's easy to look at what I've said so far, and say, "Wait a minute, I don't have what it takes to be that kind of leader."
So here are two leaders. They don't have a lot in common.
They're about the same age. But that's about it.
What they did, though, is each in their own way, created a different way of navigating your way through technology.
So some people will go out and get people to be on one team.
And some people will get people to be on the other team.
It also informs the decisions you make when you make products or services.
You know, this is one of my favorite devices.
But what a shame that it's not organized to help authors create movements.
What would happen if, when you're using your Kindle, you could see the comments and quotes and notes from all the other people reading the same book as you in that moment.
Or from your book group. Or from your friends, or from the circle you want.
What would happen if authors, or people with ideas could use version two, which comes out on Monday, and use it to organize people who want to talk about something.
Now there is a million things I could share with you about the mechanics here.
But let me just try a couple.
The Beatles did not invent teenagers.
They merely decided to lead them.
That most movements, most leadership that we're doing is about finding a group that's disconnected but already has a yearning -- not persuading people to want something they don't have yet.
When Diane Hatz worked on "The Meatrix," her video that spread all across the internet about the way farm animals are treated, she didn't invent the idea of being a vegan.
She didn't invent the idea of caring about this issue.
But she helped organize people, and helped turn it into a movement.
Hugo Chavez did not invent the disaffected middle and lower class of Venezuela. He merely led them.
Bob Marley did not invent Rastafarians.
He just stepped up and said, "Follow me."
Derek Sivers invented CD Baby, which allowed independent musicians to have a place to sell their music without selling out to the man -- to have place to take the mission they already wanted to go to, and connect with each other.
What all these people have in common is that they are heretics.
That heretics look at the status quo and say, "This will not stand. I can't abide this status quo.
I am willing to stand up and be counted and move things forward.
I see what the status quo is; I don't like it."
That instead of looking at all the little rules and following each one of them, that instead of being what I call a sheepwalker -- somebody who's half asleep, following instructions, keeping their head down, fitting in -- every once in a while someone stands up and says, "Not me."
Someone stands up and says, "This one is important.
We need to organize around it."
And not everyone will. But you don't need everyone.
You just need a few people -- (Laughter) -- who will look at the rules, realize they make no sense, and realize how much they want to be connected.
So Tony Hsieh does not run a shoe store.
Zappos isn't a shoe store.
Zappos is the one, the only, the best-there-ever-was place for people who are into shoes to find each other, to talk about their passion, to connect with people who care more about customer service than making a nickel tomorrow.
It can be something as prosaic as shoes, and something as complicated as overthrowing a government.
It's exactly the same behavior though.
What it requires, as Geraldine Carter has discovered, is to be able to say, "I can't do this by myself.
But if I can get other people to join my Climb and Ride, then together we can get something that we all want.
We're just waiting for someone to lead us."
Michelle Kaufman has pioneered new ways of thinking about environmental architecture.
She doesn't do it by quietly building one house at a time.
She does it by telling a story to people who want to hear it.
By connecting a tribe of people who are desperate to be connected to each other.
By leading a movement and making change.
And around and around and around it goes.
So three questions I'd offer you.
The first one is, who exactly are you upsetting?
Because if you're not upsetting anyone, you're not changing the status quo.
The second question is, who are you connecting?
Because for a lot of people, that's what they're in it for: the connections that are being made, one to the other.
And the third one is, who are you leading?
Because focusing on that part of it -- not the mechanics of what you're building, but the who, and the leading part -- is where change comes.
So Blake, at Tom's Shoes, had a very simple idea.
"What would happen if every time someone bought a pair of these shoes I gave exactly the same pair to someone who doesn't even own a pair of shoes?"
This is not the story of how you get shelf space at Neiman Marcus.
It's a story of a product that tells a story.
And as you walk around with this remarkable pair of shoes and someone says, "What are those?"
You get to tell the story on Blake's behalf, on behalf of the people who got the shoes.
And suddenly it's not one pair of shoes or 100 pairs of shoes.
It's tens of thousands of pairs of shoes.
My friend Red Maxwell has spent the last 10 years fighting against juvenile diabetes.
Not fighting the organization that's fighting it -- fighting with them, leading them, connecting them, challenging the status quo because it's important to him.
And the people he surrounds himself with need the connection.
They need the leadership. It makes a difference.
You don't need permission from people to lead them.
But in case you do, here it is: they're waiting, we're waiting for you to show us where to go next.
So here is what leaders have in common. The first thing is, they challenge the status quo.
They challenge what's currently there.
The second thing is, they build a culture.
A secret language, a seven-second handshake, a way of knowing that you're in or out.
They have curiosity. Curiosity about people in the tribe, curiosity about outsiders. They're asking questions.
They connect people to one another.
Do you know what people want more than anything?
They want to be missed.
They want to be missed the day they don't show up.
They want to be missed when they're gone.
And tribe leaders can do that.
It's fascinating, because all tribe leaders have charisma, but you don't need charisma to become a leader.
Being a leader gives you charisma.
If you look and study the leaders who have succeeded, that's where charisma comes from -- from the leading.
Finally, they commit.
They commit to the cause. They commit to the tribe.
They commit to the people who are there.
So I'd like you to do something for me.
And I hope you'll think about it before you reject it out-of-hand.
What I want you to do, it only takes 24 hours, is: create a movement.
Something that matters. Start. Do it. We need it.
Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
(Applause)
I'm going to take you on a journey very quickly.
To explain the wish, I'm going to have to take you somewhere where many people haven't been, and that's around the world.
When I was about 24 years old, Kate Stohr and myself started an organization to get architects and designers involved in humanitarian work, not only about responding to natural disasters, but involved in systemic issues.
We believe that where the resources and expertise are scarce, innovative, sustainable design can really make a difference in people's lives.
So I started my life as an architect, or training as an architect, and I was always interested in socially responsible design, and how you can really make an impact.
But when I went to architecture school, it seemed that I was a black sheep in the family.
Many architects seemed to think that when you design, you design a jewel, and it's a jewel that you try and crave for; whereas I felt that when you design, you either improve or you create a detriment to the community in which you're designing.
So you're not just doing a building for the residents or for the people who are going to use it, but for the community as a whole.
And in 1999, we started by responding to the issue of the housing crisis for returning refugees in Kosovo.
And I didn't know what I was doing -- like I said, mid-20s -- and I'm the Internet generation, so we started a website.
We put a call out there, and to my surprise, in a couple of months, we had hundreds of entries from around the world.
That led to a number of prototypes being built and really experimenting with some ideas.
Two years later we started doing a project on developing mobile health clinics in sub-Saharan Africa, responding to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
That led to 550 entries from 53 countries.
We also have designers from around the world that participate.
And we had an exhibit of work that followed that.
2004 was the tipping point for us.
We started responding to natural disasters and getting involved in Iran, in Bam, also following up on our work in Africa.
Working within the United States -- most people look at poverty and they see the face of a foreigner.
But I live in Bozeman, Montana -- go up to the north plains on the reservations, or go down to Alabama or Mississippi, pre-Katrina, and I could have shown you places that have far worse conditions than many developing countries that I've been to.
So we got involved in and worked in inner cities and elsewhere; and also, I will go into some more projects.
2005: Mother Nature kicked our ass.
I think we can pretty much assume that 2005 was a horrific year when it comes to natural disasters.
And because of the Internet, and because of connections to blogs and so forth, within literally hours of the tsunami, we were already raising funds, getting involved, working with people on the ground.
We run from a couple of laptops, and in the first couple of days, I had 4,000 emails from people needing help.
So we began to get involved in projects there, and I'll talk about some others.
And then of course, this year we've been responding to Katrina, as well as following up on our reconstruction work.
So this is a brief overview.
In 2004, I really couldn't manage the number of people who wanted to help, or the number of requests that I was getting.
It was all coming into my laptop and cell phone.
So we decided to embrace an open-source model of business -- so that anyone, anywhere in the world, could start a local chapter, and they can get involved in local problems.
Because I believe there is no such thing as Utopia.
All problems are local. All solutions are local.
So that means, you know, somebody who's based in Mississippi knows more about Mississippi than I do.
So what happened is, we used Meetup and all these other Internet tools, and we ended up having 40 chapters starting up, thousands of architects in 104 countries.
So the bullet point -- sorry, I never do a suit, so I knew that I was going to take this off.
OK, because I'm going to do it very quick.
What it showed me is that there's a grassroots movement going on, of socially responsible designers who really believe that this world has got a lot smaller, and that we have the opportunity -- not the responsibility, but the opportunity -- to really get involved in making change.
(Laughter) (Laughter) I'm adding that to my time.
(Laughter) So what you don't know is, we've got these thousands of designers working around the world, connected basically by a website, and we have a staff of three.
The fact that nobody told us we couldn't do it, we did it.
And so there's something to be said about navet.
So seven years later, we've developed so that we've got advocacy, instigation and implementation.
We advocate for good design, not only through student workshops and lectures and public forums, op-eds; we have a book on humanitarian work; but also disaster mitigation and dealing with public policy.
We can talk about FEMA, but that's another talk.
Instigation, developing ideas with communities and NGOs, doing open-source design competitions.
Referring, matchmaking with communities.
And then implementing -- actually going out there and doing the work, because when you invent, it's never a reality until it's built.
So it's really important that if we're designing and trying to create change, we build that change.
So here's a select number of projects.
Kosovo.
We did an open design competition, like I said.
And this wasn't about emergency shelter, but transitional shelter that would last five to 10 years, that would be placed next to the land the resident lived in, and that they would rebuild their own home.
This wasn't imposing an architecture on a community; this was giving them the tools and the space to allow them to rebuild and regrow the way they want to.
We had from the sublime to the ridiculous, but they worked.
This is an inflatable hemp house. It was built; it works.
This is a shipping container.
And a whole variety of ideas that not only dealt with architectural building, but also the issues of governance, and the idea of creating communities through complex networks.
So we've engaged not just designers, but also a whole variety of technology-based professionals.
Using rubble from destroyed homes to create new homes.
Using straw bale construction, creating heat walls.
And then something remarkable happened in '99.
We went to Africa originally to look at the housing issue.
Within three days, we realized the problem was not housing; it was the growing pandemic of HIV/AIDS.
And it wasn't doctors telling us this; it was actual villagers that we were staying with.
And so we came up with the bright idea that instead of getting people to walk 10, 15 kilometers to see doctors, you get the doctors to the people.
And we started engaging the medical community, and you know, we thought we were real bright sparks -- "We've come up with this great idea: mobile health clinics, widely distributed throughout sub-Saharan Africa."
And the medical community there said, "We've said this for the last decade.
We know this. We just don't know how to show this."
So in a way, we had taken pre-existing needs and shown solutions.
And so again, we had a whole variety of ideas that came in.
This one I personally love, because the idea is that architecture is not just about solutions, but about raising awareness.
This is a kenaf clinic.
You get seed and you grow it in a plot of land, and it grows 14 feet in a month.
And on the fourth week, the doctors come and they mow out an area, put a tensile structure on the top, and when the doctors have finished treating and seeing patients and villagers, you cut down the clinic and you eat it.
So it's dealing with the fact that if you have AIDS, you also need to have nutrition rates, and the idea of nutrition is as important as getting antiretrovirals out there.
So you know, this is a serious solution.
This one I love.
This looked at setting up trade routes and economic engines within the community, so it can be a self-sustaining project.
Every one of these projects is sustainable.
That's not because I'm a tree-hugging green person.
It's because when you live on four dollars a day, you're living on survival and you have to be sustainable.
You have to know where your energy is coming from, you have to know where your resource is coming from, and you have to keep the maintenance down.
So this is about getting an economic engine, and then at night, it turns into a movie theater.
So it's not an AIDS clinic. It's a community center.
So you can see ideas.
And these ideas developed into prototypes, and they were eventually built.
And currently, as of this year, there are clinics rolling out in Nigeria and Kenya.
From that, we also developed Siyathemba.
The community came to us and said, "The problem is that the girls don't have education."
And we're working in an area where young women between the ages of 16 and 24 have a 50 percent HIV/AIDS rate.
And that's not because they're promiscuous, it's because there's no knowledge.
And so we decided to look at the idea of sports, and create a youth sports center that doubled as an HIV/AIDS outreach center, and the coaches of the girls' team were also trained doctors.
So that there would be a very slow way of developing confidence in health care.
And we picked nine finalists, and then those nine finalists were distributed throughout the entire region, and then the community picked their design.
They said, this is our design, because it's not only about engaging a community; it's about empowering a community, and about getting them to be a part of the rebuilding process.
So, the winning design is here.
And then, of course, we actually go and work with the community and the clients.
So this is the designer.
And they can tell it better.
(A cappella singing in a South African language) Video: Well, my name is Cee Cee Mkhonza.
I work at the Africa Centre, I'm an IT user consultant.
I'm also the national football player for South Africa, Banyana Banyana.
And I also play in the Vodacom League, for the team called Tembisa, which has now changed to Siyathemba.
This is our home ground.
Cameron Sinclair: I'm going to show that later because I'm running out of time.
I can see Chris looking at me slyly.
This was a connection, just a meeting with somebody who wanted to develop Africa's first telemedicine center, in Tanzania.
And we met, literally, a couple of months ago.
The team is over there, working in partnership.
This was a matchmaking, thanks to a couple of TEDsters -- Sun [Microsystems], Cheryl Heller and Andrew Zolli, who connected me with this amazing African woman.
And we start construction in June, and it will be opened by TEDGlobal.
So when you come to TEDGlobal, you can check it out.
But what we're known probably most for is dealing with disasters and development, and we've been involved in a lot of issues, such as the tsunami and also things like Hurricane Katrina.
This is a 370-dollar shelter that can be easily assembled.
This is a community-designed community center.
And what that means is we actually live and work with the community, and they're part of the design process.
The kids actually get involved in mapping out where the community center should be.
And then eventually, the community, through skills training, end up building the building with us.
Here is another school.
This is what the UN gave these guys for six months -- 12 plastic tarps.
This was in August.
This was the replacement; that's supposed to last for two years.
When the rain comes down, you can't hear a thing, and in the summer, it's about 140 degrees inside.
So we said, if the rain's coming down, let's get fresh water.
So every one of our schools has a rainwater collection system.
Very low cost: three classrooms and rainwater collection is 5,000 dollars.
This was raised by hot chocolate sales in Atlanta.
It's built by the parents of the kids.
The kids are out there on-site, building the buildings.
And it opened a couple of weeks ago, and there's 600 kids that are now using the schools.
(Applause) So, disaster hits home.
We see the bad stories on CNN and Fox and all that, but we don't see the good stories.
Here is a community that got together, and they said "no" to waiting.
They formed a partnership, a diverse partnership of players, to actually map out East Biloxi, to figure out who's getting involved.
We've had over 1,500 volunteers rebuilding, rehabbing homes.
Figuring out what FEMA regulations are, not waiting for them to dictate to us how you should rebuild.
Working with residents, getting them out of their homes, so they don't get ill.
This is what they're cleaning up on their own.
Designing housing.
This is a rehabbed home, done in four days.
This is a utility room for a woman who is on a walker.
She's 70 years old. This is what FEMA gave her.
600 bucks, happened two days ago.
We put together, very quickly, a washroom.
It's built, it's running and she just started a business today, where she's washing other people's clothes.
These are the Calhouns.
They're photographers who had documented the Lower Ninth for the last 40 years.
That was their home, and these are the photographs they took.
And we're helping, working with them to create a new building.
Projects we've done.
Why don't aid agencies do this?
This is the new UN tent, just introduced this year.
Quick to assemble.
It took 20 years to design this and get it implemented in the field.
I was 12 years old.
Luckily, we're not alone.
There are hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of architects and designers and inventors around the world that are getting involved in humanitarian work.
More hemp houses -- it's a theme in Japan, apparently.
I'm not sure what they're smoking.
(Laughter) This is a Grip Clip, designed by somebody who said, "All you need is some way to attach membrane structures to physical support beams."
This guy designed for NASA, is now doing housing.
I'm going to whip through this quickly, because I know I've got only a couple of minutes.
So this is all done in the last two years.
I showed you something that took 20 years to do.
And this is just a selection of things that were built in the last couple of years.
From Brazil to India, Mexico, Alabama, China, Israel, Palestine, Vietnam.
The average age of a designer who gets involved in this project is 32 -- that's how old I am.
So it's a young -- I just have to stop here, because Arup is in the room, and this is the best-designed toilet in the world.
(Laughter) Chris Luebkeman will tell you why.
I'm sure that's how he wanted to spend the party.
But the future is not going to be the sky-scraping cities of New York, but this.
What I see is many, many inventors.
One billion people live in abject poverty.
We hear about them all the time.
Four billion live in growing but fragile economies.
One in seven live in unplanned settlements.
If we do nothing about the housing crisis that's about to happen, in 20 years, one in three people will live in an unplanned settlement or a refugee camp.
How do we improve the living standards of five billion people?
With 10 million solutions.
So I wish to develop a community that actively embraces innovative and sustainable design to improve the living conditions for everyone.
Chris Anderson: Wait a sec -- that's your wish?
CS: That's my wish.
CA: That's his wish!
(Applause) CS: We started Architecture for Humanity with 700 dollars and a website.
So Chris somehow decided to give me 100,000.
So why not this many people?
Open-source architecture is the way to go.
You have a diverse community of participants -- and we're not just talking about inventors and designers, but we're talking about the funding model.
My role is not as a designer; it's as a conduit between the design world and the humanitarian world.
And what we need is something that replicates me globally, because I haven't slept in seven years.
(Laughter) Secondly, what will this thing be?
Designers want to respond to issues of humanitarian crisis, but they don't want some company in the West taking their idea and basically profiting from it.
So Creative Commons has developed the Developing Nations license.
And what that means is that a designer can -- The Siyathemba project I showed was the first ever building to have a Creative Commons license on it.
As soon as that is built, anyone in Africa or any developing nation can take the construction documents and replicate it for free.
(Applause) So why not allow designers the opportunity to do this, but still protect their rights here?
We want to have a community where you can upload ideas, and those ideas can be tested in an earthquake, in flood, in all sorts of austere environments.
The reason that's important is I don't want to wait for the next Katrina to find out if my house works.
That's too late, we need to do it now.
So doing that globally -- and I want this whole thing to work multi-lingually.
When you look at the face of an architect, most people think a gray-haired white guy.
I don't see that; I see the face of the world.
So I want everyone from all over the planet to be able to be a part of this design and development.
The idea of needs-based competitions -- XPRIZE for the other 98 percent, if you want to call it that.
We also want to look at ways of matchmaking and putting funding partners together, and the idea of integrating manufacturers -- fab labs in every country.
When I hear about the $100 laptop and it's going to educate every child -- educate every designer in the world.
Put one in every favela, every slum settlement.
Because you know what? Innovation will happen.
And I need to know that. It's called the leap-back.
We talk about leapfrog technologies.
I write with Worldchanging, and the one thing we've been talking about is, I learn more on the ground than I've ever learned here.
So let's take those ideas, adapt them, and we can use them.
These ideas are supposed to be adaptable; they should have the potential for evolution; they should be developed by every nation in the world and useful for every nation in the world.
There should be a sheet.
I don't have time to read this, because I'm going to be yanked off.
CA: Let's just leave it up for a sec.
CS: Well, what will it take? You guys are smart.
So it's going to take a lot of computing power, because I want the idea that any laptop anywhere in the world can plug into the system and be able to not only participate in developing these designs, but utilize the designs.
I want every Arup engineer in the world to check and make sure that we're doing stuff that's standing, because those guys are the best in the world.
Plug.
And so, you know, I want these -- I just should note: I have two laptops and one of them is there, and that has 3000 designs on it.
So it's important to have these proven ideas put up there, easy to use, easy to get ahold of.
(Laughter) I'm fed up of talking about making change.
You only make it by doing it.
We've changed FEMA guidelines; we've changed public policy; we've changed international response -- based on building things.
So for me, it's important that we create a real conduit for innovation, and that it's free innovation.
Think of free culture -- this is free innovation.
Somebody said this a couple of years back.
I will give points for those who know it.
But I think the man was maybe 25 years too early.
So let's do it.
(Applause)
(Applause) AIDS was discovered 1981; the virus, 1983.
These Gapminder bubbles show you how the spread of the virus was in 1983 in the world, or how we estimate that it was.
What we are showing here is -- on this axis here, I'm showing percent of infected adults.
And on this axis, I'm showing dollars per person in income.
And the size of these bubbles, the size of the bubbles here, that shows how many are infected in each country, and the color is the continent.
Now, you can see United States, in 1983, had a very low percentage infected, but due to the big population, still a sizable bubble.
There were quite many people infected in the United States.
And, up there, you see Uganda.
They had almost five percent infected, and quite a big bubble in spite of being a small country, then.
And they were probably the most infected country in the world.
Now, what has happened?
Now you have understood the graph and now, in the next 60 seconds, we will play the HIV epidemic in the world.
But first, I have a new invention here.
(Laughter) I have solidified the beam of the laser pointer.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, ready, steady, go!
First, we have the fast rise in Uganda and Zimbabwe.
They went upwards like this.
In Asia, the first country to be heavily infected was Thailand -- they reached one to two percent.
Then, Uganda started to turn back, whereas Zimbabwe skyrocketed, and some years later South Africa had a terrible rise of HIV frequency.
Look, India got many infected, but had a low level.
And almost the same happens here.
See, Uganda coming down, Zimbabwe coming down, Russia went to one percent.
In the last two to three years, we have reached a steady state of HIV epidemic in the world.
25 years it took.
But, steady state doesn't mean that things are getting better, it's just that they have stopped getting worse.
And it has -- the steady state is, more or less, one percent of the adult world population is HIV-infected.
It means 30 to 40 million people, the whole of California -- every person, that's more or less what we have today in the world.
Now, let me make a fast replay of Botswana.
Botswana -- upper middle-income country in southern Africa, democratic government, good economy, and this is what happened there.
They started low, they skyrocketed, they peaked up there in 2003, and now they are down.
But they are falling only slowly, because in Botswana, with good economy and governance, they can manage to treat people.
And if people who are infected are treated, they don't die of AIDS.
These percentages won't come down because people can survive 10 to 20 years.
So there's some problem with these metrics now.
But the poorer countries in Africa, the low-income countries down here, there the rates fall faster, of the percentage infected, because people still die.
In spite of PEPFAR, the generous PEPFAR, all people are not reached by treatment, and of those who are reached by treatment in the poor countries, only 60 percent are left on treatment after two years.
It's not realistic with lifelong treatment for everyone in the poorest countries.
But it's very good that what is done is being done.
But focus now is back on prevention.
It is only by stopping the transmission that the world will be able to deal with it.
Drugs is too costly -- had we had the vaccine, or when we will get the vaccine, that's something more effective -- but the drugs are very costly for the poor.
Not the drug in itself, but the treatment and the care which is needed around it.
So, when we look at the pattern, one thing comes out very clearly: you see the blue bubbles and people say HIV is very high in Africa.
I would say, HIV is very different in Africa.
You'll find the highest HIV rate in the world in African countries, and yet you'll find Senegal, down here -- the same rate as United States.
And you'll find Madagascar, and you'll find a lot of African countries about as low as the rest of the world.
It's this terrible simplification that there's one Africa and things go on in one way in Africa.
We have to stop that.
It's not respectful, and it's not very clever to think that way.
(Applause) I had the fortune to live and work for a time in the United States.
I found out that Salt Lake City and San Francisco were different.
(Laughter) And so it is in Africa -- it's a lot of difference.
So, why is it so high? Is it war?
No, it's not. Look here.
War-torn Congo is down there -- two, three, four percent.
And this is peaceful Zambia, neighboring country -- 15 percent.
And there's good studies of the refugees coming out of Congo -- they have two, three percent infected, and peaceful Zambia -- much higher.
There are now studies clearly showing that the wars are terrible, that rapes are terrible, but this is not the driving force for the high levels in Africa.
So, is it poverty?
Well if you look at the macro level, it seems more money, more HIV.
But that's very simplistic, so let's go down and look at Tanzania.
I will split Tanzania in five income groups, from the highest income to the lowest income, and here we go.
The ones with the highest income, the better off -- I wouldn't say rich -- they have higher HIV.
The difference goes from 11 percent down to four percent, and it is even bigger among women.
There's a lot of things that we thought, that now, good research, done by African institutions and researchers together with the international researchers, show that that's not the case.
So, this is the difference within Tanzania.
And, I can't avoid showing Kenya.
Look here at Kenya.
I've split Kenya in its provinces.
Here it goes.
See the difference within one African country -- it goes from very low level to very high level, and most of the provinces in Kenya is quite modest.
So, what is it then?
Why do we see this extremely high levels in some countries?
Well, it is more common with multiple partners, there is less condom use, and there is age-disparate sex -- that is, older men tend to have sex with younger women.
We see higher rates in younger women than younger men in many of these highly affected countries.
But where are they situated?
I will swap the bubbles to a map.
Look, the highly infected are four percent of all population and they hold 50 percent of the HIV-infected.
HIV exists all over the world.
Look, you have bubbles all over the world here.
Brazil has many HIV-infected.
Arab countries not so much, but Iran is quite high.
They have heroin addiction and also prostitution in Iran.
India has many because they are many.
Southeast Asia, and so on.
But, there is one part of Africa -- and the difficult thing is, at the same time, not to make a uniform statement about Africa, not to come to simple ideas of why it is like this, on one hand.
On the other hand, try to say that this is not the case, because there is a scientific consensus about this pattern now.
UNAIDS have done good data available, finally, about the spread of HIV.
It could be concurrency.
It could be some virus types.
It could be that there is other things which makes transmission occur in a higher frequency.
After all, if you are completely healthy and you have heterosexual sex, the risk of infection in one intercourse is one in 1,000.
Don't jump to conclusions now on how to behave tonight and so on.
(Laughter) But -- and if you are in an unfavorable situation, more sexually transmitted diseases, it can be one in 100.
But what we think is that it could be concurrency.
And what is concurrency?
In Sweden, we have no concurrency.
We have serial monogamy.
Vodka, New Year's Eve -- new partner for the spring.
Vodka, Midsummer's Eve -- new partner for the fall.
Vodka -- and it goes on like this, you know?
And you collect a big number of exes.
And we have a terrible chlamydia epidemic -- terrible chlamydia epidemic which sticks around for many years.
HIV has a peak three to six weeks after infection and therefore, having more than one partner in the same month is much more dangerous for HIV than others.
Probably, it's a combination of this.
And what makes me so happy is that we are moving now towards fact when we look at this.
You can get this chart, free.
We have uploaded UNAIDS data on the Gapminder site.
And we hope that when we act on global problems in the future we will not only have the heart, we will not only have the money, but we will also use the brain.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
There was a time when simple infections were deadly, but now, thanks to the wide availability of antibiotics, this is merely a relic of the past.
But actually, I should say "was," because nowadays, we're using antibiotics so much that the bacteria that cause these infections are becoming resistant.
And that should really scare the hell out of all of us.
If we do not change our behavior and wean ourselves off antibiotics, the UN predicts that by 2050, antimicrobial resistance will become our single biggest killer.
So we must start to act.
But "where to begin" is an interesting question, because we humans are not the only ones using antibiotics.
Worldwide, 50 to 80 percent of all antibiotics are used by animals.
Not all of these are critical for human health, but if we do not get it under control right now, we're looking at a very scary future for humans and animals alike.
To begin, let's talk about how we ended up here.
The first large-scale use of antibiotics was in the early '50s of the last century.
In the Western world, prosperity was increasing and people wanted to eat more animal protein.
When animals were sick, you could now treat them with antibiotics so they did not die and kept growing.
But soon, it was discovered that adding small and regular amounts of antibiotics to the feed kept the animals healthy, made them grow faster and caused them to need less feed.
So these antibiotics worked well -- really well, actually.
And with increasing animal production, also antibiotic use skyrocketed worldwide.
Unfortunately, so did antibiotic resistance.
The reason your doctor tells you to finish the entire bottle of antibiotics is if you shorten your dose, you will not kill all of the bugs.
And the ones that stick around build up the antibiotic resistance.
It's the same problem with giving animals small and regular doses of antibiotics: some bad bugs die but not all of them.
Spread that across an entire industry, and you can understand that we accidentally build up a large reservoir of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
But I hate to break it to you -- the problem doesn't stop there.
You know who else takes antibiotics?
Fluffy, your cat, and Rover, your dog.
(Laughter) Pets rank even amongst the heaviest users of all, and they use antibiotics that are much more critical for human health.
Combine this with how close we live with our companion animals and you understand the risk of you picking up antibiotic-resistant bacteria from your own pet.
But how do these antibiotic-resistant bacteria in farm animals affect you?
Let me give you an example we have, actually, data on.
The levels of antibiotic-resistant salmonella in pigs in Europe against different types of antibiotics range from less than a percent to as high [as] 60 percent.
Which means that in most cases, this antibiotic will not work anymore to kill this salmonella.
And there was a high correlation between antibiotic-resistant salmonella in the pig and in the final product.
Whether that is pork chop, spare ribs or minced meat.
Now, luckily, typically less than one percent of all raw meat, fish or eggs will contain salmonella.
And this only poses a risk when not treated well.
Still, there are over 100,000 human salmonella cases in the EU and more than a million cases in the US.
In the US, leading to 23,000 hospitalizations and 450 people dead each year.
With antibiotic-resistant salmonella on the rise, this death toll is likely to increase.
But it's not only about consuming yourself.
This year, more than 100 people got infected with a multidrug-resistant salmonella after feeding pig ears, as a treat, to their dog.
So we really must cut back on antibiotic use in animal production.
And luckily, this is starting to happen.
The EU was the first region to ban putting antibiotics in low doses in the feed.
From '99 on, in several steps, the amount of different types of antibiotics allowed was reduced, and in 2006, a complete ban went into place.
Antibiotics were only allowed when a veterinarian determined the animal was sick.
Sounds great, right?
Problem solved.
No, wait, not so fast.
As soon as the reduction program started, it was very quickly discovered that antibiotics had been the perfect blanket to cover up a lot of bad farm practices.
More and more animals became sick and needed to be cured with ... antibiotics.
So instead of the total amount going down, it actually increased.
Surely, that was not the way to go.
But luckily, that was not the end of the story.
The whole European agricultural sector started on a journey, and I think it's a journey anybody can learn from.
This is also the time I personally entered the scene.
I joined a large European feed compounder.
A feed compounder makes a total diet for a farmer to feed to his animals and often also provides the advice on how to raise the animals in the best way.
I was really motivated to work together with my colleagues, veterinarians and, of course, the farmers to figure out how to keep the animals healthy and antibiotic-free.
Now there are three major things that need to happen for antibiotic-free production.
Let me walk you through the playbook.
To start -- and it sounds very obvious -- that our hygiene is the place to start.
Better cleaning of the stable and the drinking-water lines making it harder for the disease to come in and spread across the stable.
That's all very important, but the part I was personally most interested in was better feeding for the animals, better nutrition.
Feeding a well-balanced diet is important.
Think about it this way: when you yourself do not eat enough fiber, you do not feel well.
Part of the food you consume is not digested by yourself but fermented in your large intestine by bacteria.
So you're feeding those microbes with part of your diet.
Initially, most young animals were fed low-fiber, high-starch and protein, very finely ground and highly digestible diets.
Like being yourself on a diet of hamburger buns, rice, waffles and protein bars.
We changed this to a lower-protein, higher-fiber, coarser type of diet.
Like being on a diet of whole grains, salad with meat or beans.
This shifted the bacterial flora in the animals' guts to the more beneficial ones and reduced the chance that pathogens would flourish.
You might be surprised but not only diet composition, also diet structure plays a role.
Simply the fact that the same diet is coarser will lead to a better-developed digestive tract, and thus, a healthier animal.
But the best part was that farmers started to buy this actually, too.
Unlike some other parts of the world, Western European farmers mainly still make their independent buying decisions: who to buy the feed from and sell their animals to.
So what you're actually selling in the end reflects the actual local need of these farmers.
For example, the protein content in piglet diets in countries that are much more vigilant in reducing antibiotics, like, for example, Germany and the Netherlands, were already 10 to 15 percent lower than in a country like the UK, which was slower to pick this up.
But, like with better hygiene, better nutrition helps but will not totally prevent you from becoming sick.
So more is needed.
And that's why we turned to the microbiome.
Making the water with the feed more acidic helps to create an environment that benefits the more beneficial bacteria and inhibits the pathogens.
Like fermented food, whether it's yogurt, sauerkraut or salami, they'll all spoil less quickly, too.
Now, with modern techniques, like the ones based on DNA testing, we can see that there are many more different microorganisms present.
And this ecosystem, which we call the microbiome, is much more complex.
Turns out there are about eight times more microorganisms in your gut as tissue cells in your body.
And for animals, the impact is no less.
So if we want to work without antibiotics in animal production, we have to make the animals much more robust.
So that when a disease strikes, the animals are much more resilient.
And this three-pronged nutribiosis approach involving the host, nutrition and the microbiome is the way to do it.
Now the practice of raising animals on an antibiotic-containing or antibiotic-use-provoking diet is a bit cheaper at farm level.
But in the end, we are talking about a few percent at the consumer level.
That's actually quite affordable for the middle- and high-income part of the world population.
And a very small price to pay when our own health or our loved ones' health is at stake.
So what do you think, what direction do we take?
Do we allow antimicrobial resistance to become our biggest killer, at huge financial and a special personal cost?
Or do we, besides reducing human antibiotic consumption, truly start embracing antibiotic-free animal production?
For me, the choice is very obvious.
But to make this happen, we have to set reduction targets and make sure that they're followed all around the world.
Because farmers compete with each other.
And at a country level, trading block or the global market, costs are very important.
And also, we have to be realistic.
Farmers need to have the possibilities to invest more in better management and better feed in order to achieve this reduction.
And besides legal limits, the market can play a role, by offering antibiotic-reduced or antibiotic-free products.
And with growing consumer awareness, these market forces will increase in power.
Now everything I've been talking about seems to be great for us.
But what about the animals?
Now, guess what, their lives get better, too.
Better health, less stress, happier life.
So now you know.
We have the knowledge how to produce meat, eggs and milk without or with very low amounts of antibiotics, and I'll argue it's a small price to pay to avoid a future in which bacterial infections again become our biggest killer.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the past few years, we've been calling men out.
It had to be done.
(Applause) But lately, I've been thinking we need to do something even harder.
We need, as my good friend Tony Porter says, to find a way to call men in.
My father began to sexually abuse me when I was five years old.
He would come into my room in the middle of the night.
He appeared to be in a trance.
The abuse continued until I was 10.
When I tried to resist him, when I was finally able to say no, he began to beat me.
He called me stupid.
He said I was a liar.
The sexual abuse ended when I was 10, but actually, it never ended.
It changed who I was.
I was filled with anxiety and guilt and shame all the time, and I didn't know why.
I hated my body, I hated myself, I got sick a lot, I couldn't think, I couldn't remember things.
I was drawn to dangerous men and women who I allowed -- actually, I invited -- to treat me badly, because that is what my father taught me love was.
I waited my whole life for my father to apologize to me.
He didn't.
He wouldn't.
And then, with the recent scandals of famous men, as one after another was exposed, I realized something: I have never heard a man who has committed rape or physical violence ever publicly apologize to his victim.
I began to wonder, what would an authentic, deep apology be like?
So, something strange began to happen.
I began to write, and my father's voice began to come through me.
He began to tell me what he had done and why.
He began to apologize.
My father is dead almost 31 years, and yet, in this apology, the one I had to write for him, I discovered the power of an apology and how it actually might be the way to move forward in the crisis we now face with men and all the women they abuse.
Apology is a sacred commitment.
It requires complete honesty.
It demands deep self-interrogation and time.
It cannot be rushed.
I discovered an apology has four steps, and, if you would, I'd like to take you through them.
The first is you have to say what, in detail, you did.
Your accounting cannot be vague.
"I'm sorry if I hurt you" or "I'm sorry if I sexually abused you" doesn't cut it.
You have to say what actually happened.
"I came into the room in the middle of the night, and I pulled your underpants down."
"I belittled you because I was jealous of you and I wanted you to feel less."
The liberation is in the details.
An apology is a remembering.
It connects the past with the present.
It says that what occurred actually did occur.
The second step is you have to ask yourself why.
Survivors are haunted by the why.
Why? Why would my father want to sexually abuse his eldest daughter?
Why would he take my head and smash it against a wall?
In my father's case, he was a child born long after the other children.
He was an accident that became "the miracle."
He was adored and treated as the golden boy.
But adoration, it turns out, is not love.
Adoration is a projection of someone's need for you to be perfect onto you.
My father had to live up to this impossible ideal, and so he was never allowed to be himself.
He was never allowed to express tenderness or vulnerability, curiosity, doubt.
He was never allowed to cry.
And so he was forced to push all those feelings underground, and they eventually metastasized.
Those suppressed feelings later became Shadowman, and he was out of control, and he eventually unleashed his torrent on me.
The third step is you have to open your heart and feel what your victim felt as you were abusing her.
You have to let your heart break.
You have to feel the horror and betrayal and the long-term impacts of your abuse on your victim.
You have to sit with the suffering you have caused.
And, of course, the fourth step is taking responsibility for what you have done and making amends.
So, why would anyone want to go through such a grueling and humbling process?
Why would you want to rip yourself open?
Because it is the only thing that will set yourself free.
It is the only thing that will set your victim free.
You didn't just destroy your victim.
There is no one who enacts violence on another person who doesn't suffer from the effects themselves.
It creates an incredibly dark and contaminating spirit, and it spreads throughout your entire life.
The apology I wrote -- I learned something about a different lens we have to look through to understand the problem of men's violence that I and one billion other women have survived.
We often turn to punishment first.
It's our first instinct, but actually, although punishment sometimes is effective, on its own, it is not enough.
My father punished me.
I was shut down, and I was broken.
I think punishment hardens us, but it doesn't teach us.
Humiliation is not revelation.
We actually need to create a process that may involve punishment, whereby we open a doorway where men can actually become something and someone else.
For so many years, I hated my father.
I wanted him dead. I wanted him in prison.
But actually, that rage kept me connected to my father's story.
What I really wanted wasn't just for my father to be stopped.
I wanted him to change.
I wanted him to apologize.
That's what we want.
We don't want men to be destroyed, we don't want them to only be punished.
We want them to see us, the victims that they have harmed, and we want them to repent and change.
And I actually believe this is possible.
And I really believe it's our way forward.
But we need men to join us.
We need men now to be brave and be part of this transformation.
I have spent most of my life calling men out, and I am here now, right now, to call you in.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you, thank you.
(Applause)
Ethic, Hedge, and Adila, the leader of the revolution, plot out how they can steal an artifact called the Node of Power.
Its being used to run a heavily fortified train that runs all around the country, providing supplies to settlements and facilities.
This armored behemoth undergoes a complex and unpredictable unloading procedure a procedure which is displayed, in detail, on a screen within the engine car.
Right means the train will go one car length forward, and left means the train will go the same distance backwards.
While unloading, the train frequently moves back and forth, so a typical sequence might look like this.
Also within the engine car is a button that can only be pressed once.
When pressed, it lets down the force field over the artifact for 10 seconds.
The engine car is tiny and designed for a robot.
Of your team, only Hedge can fit.
The members of the resistance have positioned a crane over the train tracks that can pluck the artifact once its exposed.
Theyll know when to lower the crane by sight.
But the only way Hedge can determine the trains position and know when to lower the force field is by analyzing the unloading procedure, because hell be inside the windowless engine car.
Hedge cant program himself though, so its up to Ethic to tell him what to do.
The artifact is in the car 10 positions behind the one thats directly under the crane at the start.
What instructions can Ethic give Hedge so that he hits the button at just the right moment?
Heres a hint to get you started.
The key to this problem, as with many programming challenges, is to reframe the information in a way that a computer can work with.
A computer doesnt know what a train is, nor does it need to.
It can, however, work with variables.
Try making a variable that tracks the trains position.
How will it change as the train moves?
Lets start by breaking this problem into two objectives.
The first is to know where the train will be as it carries out its instructions.
The second is to hit the button when the train is in just the right position.
For the first objective itll help to think of the train as a big number line.
Lets make 0 the car with the node, 1 the car in front of it, and so on.
That means car 10 is under the crane at the start.
When the train moves one car right, car 9 is under the crane.
So a right arrow can be thought of as subtract 1. And when the train moves left from there, 10 is back under the crane, making a left arrow the same as add 1."
Lets set our train position variable to 10, since thats where we start.
We can now use a loop to read the instructions one at a time, adding or subtracting as we go, to track which car is under the crane.
The nice thing about setting up the variable this way is that it tells us how far the node is from the crane.
So as soon as the variable hits 0, Hedge should hit the button.
And heres what happens.
Ethic gets into position on the crane while Hedge rushes off and slips into the engine car unnoticed, just before the train lurches to life.
It rolls 3 cars back. 1 forward, another 4 back.
Then so far forward Ethic loses track before it reverses once more.
When the artifact finally rolls into position, Adila lowers the crane, hoping Ethic and Hedge got it right.
At the last possible moment, the force field sputters and falls.
Ethic swoops in, and lifts the Node of Power to freedom.
When Ethic gives the node to Hedge for safe keeping, something incredible happens.
The artifact shimmers to life with a vision of the past: When the crystal was unearthed, no one could make the console inside work.
The government put out a call for people to try their luck with it, one at a time.
Ethic loved to figure out what made things tick, so she signed up.
Within moments at the console, something clicked into place, and she created her first robot.
The government hired Ethic as chief robotics engineer on the spot.
Within a year her creations ran almost every aspect of society, and the nation and its people thrived, no longer needing to toil in the fields and factories.
The vision ends, and Hedge detects the second artifact in the 198forest, to the southeast.
Luckily, the train is going there next, and has just enough reserve fuel for the trip.
Ethic and Hedge smuggle themselves aboard and find a hiding spot for the long journey ahead.
 I think I'm ready to do my thing   I think I'm ready to take my chances   I've been dining out and all stressed out   Due to the circumstances. See?   I gotta get up, get up, get up, get up   Wake up, wake up, wake up, wake up   I see what you're saying   We sent a demo to the world, they said it sounds like Take 6   I said "Hold on, wait a minute, I'll be back with the remix"   They looking at us funny, we can't make any money   It took us years to figure out that we was dealing with dummies   They didn't understand the sound from the Bronx, that's the boogie down   to Huntsville, Alabama, there's no circles in my planner, so   It was time to make the product, so we hooked up with Townsend   Made a deal with John Neal, on the road sold ten thousand   WBA, that means a trip to Nashville   Festplatte showed up and said them boys are naturals   Can you hear what they were hearing? See what they were seeing?   From Bronx to Berlin, we took the tour European   All vocal yeah, we widit, call the album "What is it?"   With Sarah Connor, set the goal for number one and we hit it   But now it's Kev, Sim, Drew, Stew, time for a new day   Ring the alarm, hit 'em on Skype or a two-way   Sung by the words, we ready to fly!   Fly baby! Time to leave that nest   Fly baby! This ain't no time to rest   Come on fly baby, we got work to do   Here we go, spread my wings and ...   Fly baby! Time to leave that nest   Fly baby! This ain't no time to rest. Come on   Fly baby! We got work to do   Here we go. Spread my wings and fly. One more time   Fly baby! Time to leave that nest   Fly baby! This ain't no time to rest   Fly baby! We got work to do   Here we go, spread my wings and ...   Fly baby! Fly baby fly   Fly baby! Fly baby high   Fly baby! Up to the sky   Spread my wings and fly  Instrumental!
 We're ready to fly!  (Applause) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Let me talk about India through the evolution of ideas.
Now I believe this is an interesting way of looking at it because in every society, especially an open democratic society, it's only when ideas take root that things change.
Slowly ideas lead to ideology, lead to policies that lead to actions.
In 1930 this country went through a Great Depression, which led to all the ideas of the state and social security, and all the other things that happened in Roosevelt's time.
In the 1980s we had the Reagan revolution, which lead to deregulation.
And today, after the global economic crisis, there was a whole new set of rules about how the state should intervene.
So ideas change states.
And I looked at India and said, really there are four kinds of ideas which really make an impact on India.
The first, to my mind, is what I call as "the ideas that have arrived."
These ideas have brought together something which has made India happen the way it is today.
The second set of ideas I call "ideas in progress."
Those are ideas which have been accepted but not implemented yet.
The third set of ideas are what I call as "ideas that we argue about" -- those are ideas where we have a fight, an ideological battle about how to do things.
And the fourth thing, which I believe is most important, is "the ideas that we need to anticipate."
Because when you are a developing country in the world where you can see the problems that other countries are having, you can actually anticipate what that did and do things very differently.
Now in India's case I believe there are six ideas which are responsible for where it has come today.
The first is really the notion of people.
In the '60s and '70s we thought of people as a burden.
We thought of people as a liability.
Today we talk of people as an asset.
We talk of people as human capital.
And I believe this change in the mindset, of looking at people as something of a burden to human capital, has been one of the fundamental changes in the Indian mindset.
And this change in thinking of human capital is linked to the fact that India is going through a demographic dividend.
As healthcare improves, as infant mortality goes down, fertility rates start dropping. And India is experiencing that.
India is going to have a lot of young people with a demographic dividend for the next 30 years.
What is unique about this demographic dividend is that India will be the only country in the world to have this demographic dividend.
In other words, it will be the only young country in an aging world.
And this is very important. At the same time if you peel away the demographic dividend in India, there are actually two demographic curves.
One is in the south and in the west of India, which is already going to be fully expensed by 2015, because in that part of the country, the fertility rate is almost equal to that of a West European country.
Then there is the whole northern India, which is going to be the bulk of the future demographic dividend.
But a demographic dividend is only as good as the investment in your human capital.
Only if the people have education, they have good health, they have infrastructure, they have roads to go to work, they have lights to study at night -- only in those cases can you really get the benefit of a demographic dividend.
In other words, if you don't really invest in the human capital, the same demographic dividend can be a demographic disaster.
Therefore India is at a critical point where either it can leverage its demographic dividend or it can lead to a demographic disaster.
The second thing in India has been the change in the role of entrepreneurs.
When India got independence entrepreneurs were seen as a bad lot, as people who would exploit.
But today, after 60 years, because of the rise of entrepreneurship, entrepreneurs have become role models, and they are contributing hugely to the society.
This change has contributed to the vitality and the whole economy.
The third big thing I believe that has changed India is our attitude towards the English language.
English language was seen as a language of the imperialists.
But today, with globalization, with outsourcing, English has become a language of aspiration.
This has made it something that everybody wants to learn.
And the fact that we have English is now becoming a huge strategic asset.
The next thing is technology.
Forty years back, computers were seen as something which was forbidding, something which was intimidating, something that reduced jobs.
Today we live in a country which sells eight million mobile phones a month, of which 90 percent of those mobile phones are prepaid phones because people don't have credit history.
Forty percent of those prepaid phones are recharged at less than 20 cents at each recharge.
That is the scale at which technology has liberated and made it accessible.
And therefore technology has gone from being seen as something forbidding and intimidating to something that is empowering.
Twenty years back, when there was a report on bank computerization, they didn't name the report as a report on computers, they call them as "ledger posting machines."
They didn't want the unions to believe that they were actually computers.
And when they wanted to have more advanced, more powerful computers they called them "advanced ledger posting machines."
So we have come a long way from those days where the telephone has become an instrument of empowerment, and really has changed the way Indians think of technology.
And then I think the other point is that Indians today are far more comfortable with globalization.
Again, after having lived for more than 200 years under the East India Company and under imperial rule, Indians had a very natural reaction towards globalization believing it was a form of imperialism.
But today, as Indian companies go abroad, as Indians come and work all over the world, Indians have gained a lot more confidence and have realized that globalization is something they can participate in.
And the fact that the demographics are in our favor, because we are the only young country in an aging world, makes globalization all the more attractive to Indians.
And finally, India has had the deepening of its democracy.
When democracy came to India 60 years back it was an elite concept.
It was a bunch of people who wanted to bring in democracy because they wanted to bring in the idea of universal voting and parliament and constitution and so forth.
But today democracy has become a bottom-up process where everybody has realized the benefits of having a voice, the benefits of being in an open society.
And therefore democracy has become embedded.
I believe these six factors -- the rise of the notion of population as human capital, the rise of Indian entrepreneurs, the rise of English as a language of aspiration, technology as something empowering, globalization as a positive factor, and the deepening of democracy -- has contributed to why India is today growing at rates it has never seen before.
But having said that, then we come to what I call as ideas in progress.
Those are the ideas where there is no argument in a society, but you are not able to implement those things.
And really there are four things here.
One is the question of education.
For some reason, whatever reason -- lack of money, lack of priorities, because of religion having an older culture -- primary education was never given the focus it required.
But now I believe it's reached a point where it has become very important.
Unfortunately the government schools don't function, so children are going to private schools today.
Even in the slums of India more than 50 percent of urban kids are going into private schools.
So there is a big challenge in getting the schools to work.
But having said that, there is an enormous desire among everybody, including the poor, to educate their children.
So I believe primary education is an idea which is arrived but not yet implemented.
Similarly, infrastructure -- for a long time, infrastructure was not a priority.
Those of you who have been to India have seen that.
It's certainly not like China.
But today I believe finally infrastructure is something which is agreed upon and which people want to implement.
It is reflected in the political statements.
20 years back the political slogan was, "Roti, kapada, makaan," which meant, "Food, clothing and shelter."
And today's political slogan is, "Bijli, sadak, pani," which means "Electricity, water and roads."
And that is a change in the mindset where infrastructure is now accepted.
So I do believe this is an idea which has arrived, but simply not implemented.
The third thing is again cities.
It's because Gandhi believed in villages and because the British ruled from the cities, therefore Nehru thought of New Delhi as an un-Indian city.
For a long time we have neglected our cities.
And that is reflected in the kinds of situations that you see.
But today, finally, after economic reforms, and economic growth, I think the notion that cities are engines of economic growth, cities are engines of creativity, cities are engines of innovation, have finally been accepted.
And I think now you're seeing the move towards improving our cities.
Again, an idea which is arrived, but not yet implemented.
The final thing is the notion of India as a single market -- because when you didn't think of India as a market, you didn't really bother about a single market, because it didn't really matter.
And therefore you had a situation where every state had its own market for products.
Every province had its own market for agriculture.
Increasingly now the policies of taxation and infrastructure and all that, are moving towards creating India as a single market.
So there is a form of internal globalization which is happening, which is as important as external globalization.
These four factors I believe -- the ones of primary education, infrastructure, urbanization, and single market -- in my view are ideas in India which have been accepted, but not implemented.
Then we have what I believe are the ideas in conflict.
The ideas that we argue about.
These are the arguments we have which cause gridlock.
What are those ideas? One is, I think, are ideological issues.
Because of the historical Indian background, in the caste system, and because of the fact that there have been many people who have been left out in the cold, a lot of the politics is about how to make sure that we'll address that.
And it leads to reservations and other techniques.
It's also related to the way that we subsidize our people, and all the left and right arguments that we have.
A lot of the Indian problems are related to the ideology of caste and other things.
This policy is causing gridlock.
This is one of the factors which needs to be resolved.
The second one is the labor policies that we have, which make it so difficult for entrepreneurs to create standardized jobs in companies, that 93 percent of Indian labor is in the unorganized sector.
They have no benefits: they don't have social security; they don't have pension; they don't have healthcare; none of those things.
This needs to be fixed because unless you can bring these people into the formal workforce, you will end up creating a whole lot of people who are completely disenfranchised.
Therefore we need to create a new set of labor laws, which are not as onerous as they are today.
At the same time give a policy for a lot more people to be in the formal sector, and create the jobs for the millions of people that we need to create jobs for.
The third thing is our higher education.
Indian higher education is completely regulated.
It's very difficult to start a private university.
It's very difficult for a foreign university to come to India.
As a result of that our higher education is simply not keeping pace with India's demands.
That is leading to a lot of problems which we need to address.
But most important I believe are the ideas we need to anticipate.
Here India can look at what is happening in the west and elsewhere, and look at what needs to be done.
The first thing is, we're very fortunate that technology is at a point where it is much more advanced than when other countries had the development.
So we can use technology for governance.
We can use technology for direct benefits.
We can use technology for transparency, and many other things.
The second thing is, the health issue.
India has equally horrible health problems of the higher state of cardiac issue, the higher state of diabetes, the higher state of obesity.
So there is no point in replacing a set of poor country diseases with a set of rich country diseases.
Therefore we're to rethink the whole way we look at health.
We really need to put in place a strategy so that we don't go to the other extreme of health.
Similarly today in the West you're seeing the problem of entitlement -- the cost of social security, the cost of Medicare, the cost of Medicaid.
Therefore when you are a young country, again you have a chance to put in place a modern pension system so that you don't create entitlement problems as you grow old.
And then again, India does not have the luxury of making its environment dirty, because it has to marry environment and development.
Just to give an idea, the world has to stabilize at something like 20 gigatons per year.
On a population of nine billion our average carbon emission will have to be about two tons per year.
India is already at two tons per year.
But if India grows at something like eight percent, income per year per person will go to 16 times by 2050.
So we're saying: income growing at 16 times and no growth in carbon.
Therefore we will fundamentally rethink the way we look at the environment, the way we look at energy, the way we create whole new paradigms of development.
Now why does this matter to you?
Why does what's happening 10 thousand miles away matter to all of you?
Number one, this matters because this represents more than a billion people.
A billion people, 1/6th of the world population.
It matters because this is a democracy.
And it is important to prove that growth and democracy are not incompatible, that you can have a democracy, that you can have an open society, and you can have growth.
It's important because if you solve these problems, you can solve the problems of poverty in the world.
It's important because you need it to solve the world's environment problems.
If we really want to come to a point, we really want to put a cap on our carbon emission, we want to really lower the use of energy -- it has to be solved in countries like India.
You know if you look at the development in the West over 200 years, the average growth may have been about two percent.
Here we are talking about countries growing at eight to nine percent.
And that makes a huge difference.
When India was growing at about three, 3.5 percent and the population was growing at two percent, its per capita income was doubling every 45 years.
When the economic growth goes to eight percent and population growth drops to 1.5 percent, then per capita income is doubling every nine years.
In other words, you're certainly fast-forwarding this whole process of a billion people going to prosperity.
And you must have a clear strategy which is important for India and important for the world.
That is why I think all of you should be equally concerned with it as I am.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In 1884, a patients luck seemed to go from bad to worse.
This patient had a rapidly growing cancer in his neck, and then came down with an unrelated bacterial skin infection.
But soon, something unexpected happened: as he recovered from the infection, the cancer also began to recede.
When a physician named William Coley tracked the patient down 7 years later, no visible signs of the cancer remained.
Coley believed something remarkable was happening: that the bacterial infection had stimulated the patients immune system to fight off the cancer.
Coleys fortunate discovery led him to pioneer the intentional injection of bacteria to successfully treat cancer.
Over a century later, synthetic biologists have found an even better way to use these once unlikely allies by programming them to safely deliver drugs directly to tumors.
Cancer occurs when normal functions of cells are altered, causing them to rapidly multiply and form growths called tumors.
Treatments like radiation, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy attempt to kill malignant cells, but can affect the entire body and disrupt healthy tissues in the process.
However, some bacteria like E. coli have the unique advantage of being able to selectively grow inside tumors.
In fact, the core of a tumor forms an ideal environment where they can safely multiply, hidden from immune cells.
Instead of causing infection, bacteria can be reprogrammed to carry cancer-fighting drugs, acting as Trojan Horses that target the tumor from within.
This idea of programming bacteria to sense and respond in novel ways is a major focus of a field called Synthetic Biology.
But how can bacteria be programmed?
The key lies in manipulating their DNA.
By inserting particular genetic sequences into bacteria, they can be instructed to synthesize different molecules, including those that disrupt cancer growth.
They can also be made to behave in very specific ways with the help of biological circuits.
These program different behaviors depending on the presence, absence, or combination of certain factors.
For example, tumors have low oxygen and pH levels and over-produce specific molecules.
Synthetic biologists can program bacteria to sense those conditions, and by doing so, respond to tumors while avoiding healthy tissue.
One type of biological circuit, known as a synchronized lysis circuit, or SLC, allows bacteria to not only deliver medicine, but to do so on a set schedule.
First, to avoid harming healthy tissue, production of anti-cancer drugs begins as bacteria grow, which only happens within the tumor itself.
Next, after theyve produced the drugs, a kill-switch causes the bacteria to burst when they reach a critical population threshold.
This both releases the medicine and decreases the bacterias population.
However, a certain percentage of the bacteria remain alive to replenish the colony.
Eventually their numbers grow large enough to trigger the kill switch again, and the cycle continues.
This circuit can be fine-tuned to deliver drugs on whatever periodic schedule is best to fight the cancer.
This approach has proven promising in scientific trials using mice.
Not only were scientists able to successfully eliminate lymphoma tumors injected with bacteria, but the injection also stimulated the immune system, priming immune cells to identify and attack untreated lymphomas elsewhere in the mouse.
Unlike many other therapies, bacteria dont target a specific type of cancer, but rather the general characteristics shared by all solid tumors.
Nor are programmable bacteria limited to simply fighting cancer.
Instead, they can serve as sophisticated sensors that monitor sites of future disease.
Safe probiotic bacteria could perhaps lie dormant within our guts, where theyd detect, prevent, and treat disorders before they have the chance to cause symptoms.
Advances in technology have created excitement around a future of personalized medicine driven by mechanical nanobots.
But thanks to billions of years of evolution we may already have a starting point in the unexpectedly biological form of bacteria.
Add synthetic biology to the mix, and who knows what might soon be possible.
William Golding was losing his faith in humanity.
Serving aboard a British destroyer in World War II, the philosophy teacher turned Royal Navy lieutenant was constantly confronted by the atrocities of his fellow man.
And when he returned to England to find Cold War superpowers threatening one another with nuclear annihilation, he was forced to interrogate the very roots of human nature.
These musings on the inevitability of violence would inspire his first and most famous novel: "Lord of the Flies."
After being rejected by 21 publishers, the novel was finally published in 1954.
It takes its title from Beelzebub, a demon associated with pride and war two themes very much at the heart of Goldings book.
The novel was a bleak satire of a classic island adventure story, a popular genre where young boys get shipwrecked in exotic locations.
The protagonists in these stories are able to master nature while evading the dangers posed by their new environments.
The genre also endorsed the problematic colonialist narrative found in many British works at the time, in which the boys teach the islands native inhabitants their allegedly superior British values.
Goldings satire even goes so far as to explicitly use the setting and character names from R.M. Ballantynes "Coral Island" one of the most beloved island adventure novels.
But while Ballantynes book promised readers "pleasure... profit... and unbounded amusement, Goldings had darker things in store.
"Lord of the Flies" opens with the boys already on the island, but snippets of conversation hint at their terrifying journey their plane had been shot down in the midst of an unspecified nuclear war.
The boys, ranging in age from 6 to 13, are strangers to each other.
All except for a choir, clad in black uniforms and led by a boy named Jack.
Just as in Ballantynes "Coral Island," the boys new home appears to be a paradise with fresh water, shelter, and abundant food sources.
But even from the novels opening pages, a macabre darkness hangs over this seemingly tranquil situation.
The boys shadows are compared to black, bat-like creatures while the choir itself first appears as something dark... fumbling along the beach.
Within hours of their arrival, the boys are already trading terrifying rumors of a vicious beastie lurking in the woods.
From these ominous beginnings, Goldings narrative reveals how quickly cooperation unravels without the presence of an adult authority.
Initially, the survivors try to establish some sense of order.
A boy named Ralph blows into a conch shell to assemble the group, and delegate tasks.
But as Jack vies for leadership with Ralph, the group splinters and the boys submit to their darker urges.
The mob of children soon forgets their plans for rescue, silences the few voices of reason, and blindly follows Jack to the edge of the island, and the edge of sanity.
The novels universal themes of morality, civility, and society have made it a literary classic, satirizing both conventions of its time and long held beliefs about humanity.
While island adventure stories often support colonialism, "Lord of the Flies" turns this trope on its head.
Rather than cruelly casting native populations as stereotypical savages, Golding transforms his angelic British schoolboys into savage caricatures.
And as the boys fight their own battle on the island, the far more destructive war that brought them there continues off the page.
Even if the boys were to be rescued from themselves, what kind of world would they be returning to?
With so few references to anchor the characters in a specific place or period, the novel feels truly timeless an examination of human nature at its most bare.
And though not all readers may agree with Goldings grim view, "Lord of the Flies" is unsettling enough to challenge even the most determined optimist.
Believe me or not, I come offering a solution to a very important part of this larger problem, with the requisite focus on climate.
And the solution I offer is to the biggest culprit in this massive mistreatment of the earth by humankind, and the resulting decline of the biosphere.
That culprit is business and industry, which happens to be where I have spent the last 52 years since my graduation from Georgia Tech in 1956.
As an industrial engineer, cum aspiring and then successful entrepreneur.
After founding my company, Interface, from scratch in 1973, 36 years ago, to produce carpet tiles in America for the business and institution markets, and shepherding it through start-up and survival to prosperity and global dominance in its field, I read Paul Hawken's book, "The Ecology of Commerce," the summer of 1994.
In his book, Paul charges business and industry as, one, the major culprit in causing the decline of the biosphere, and, two, the only institution that is large enough, and pervasive enough, and powerful enough, to really lead humankind out of this mess.
And by the way he convicted me as a plunderer of the earth.
And I then challenged the people of Interface, my company, to lead our company and the entire industrial world to sustainability, which we defined as eventually operating our petroleum-intensive company in such a way as to take from the earth only what can be renewed by the earth, naturally and rapidly -- not another fresh drop of oil -- and to do no harm to the biosphere.
Take nothing: do no harm.
I simply said, "If Hawken is right and business and industry must lead, who will lead business and industry?
Unless somebody leads, nobody will."
It's axiomatic. Why not us?
And thanks to the people of Interface, I have become a recovering plunderer.
(Laughter) (Applause) I once told a Fortune Magazine writer that someday people like me would go to jail.
And that became the headline of a Fortune article.
They went on to describe me as America's greenest CEO.
From plunderer to recovering plunderer, to America's greenest CEO in five years -- that, frankly, was a pretty sad commentary on American CEOs in 1999.
Asked later in the Canadian documentary, "The Corporation," what I meant by the "go to jail" remark, I offered that theft is a crime.
And theft of our children's future would someday be a crime.
But I realized, for that to be true -- for theft of our children's future to be a crime -- there must be a clear, demonstrable alternative to the take-make-waste industrial system that so dominates our civilization, and is the major culprit, stealing our children's future, by digging up the earth and converting it to products that quickly become waste in a landfill or an incinerator -- in short, digging up the earth and converting it to pollution.
According to Paul and Anne Ehrlich and a well-known environmental impact equation, impact -- a bad thing -- is the product of population, affluence and technology.
That is, impact is generated by people, what they consume in their affluence, and how it is produced.
And though the equation is largely subjective, you can perhaps quantify people, and perhaps quantify affluence, but technology is abusive in too many ways to quantify.
So the equation is conceptual.
Still it works to help us understand the problem.
So we set out at Interface, in 1994, to create an example: to transform the way we made carpet, a petroleum-intensive product for materials as well as energy, and to transform our technologies so they diminished environmental impact, rather than multiplied it.
Paul and Anne Ehrlich's environmental impact equation: I is equal to P times A times T: population, affluence and technology.
I wanted Interface to rewrite that equation so that it read I equals P times A divided by T.
Now, the mathematically-minded will see immediately that T in the numerator increases impact -- a bad thing -- but T in the denominator decreases impact.
So I ask, "What would move T, technology, from the numerator -- call it T1 -- where it increases impact, to the denominator -- call it T2 -- where it reduces impact?
I thought about the characteristics of first industrial revolution, T1, as we practiced it at Interface, and it had the following characteristics.
Extractive: taking raw materials from the earth.
Linear: take, make, waste.
Powered by fossil fuel-derived energy.
Wasteful: abusive and focused on labor productivity.
More carpet per man-hour.
Thinking it through, I realized that all those attributes must be changed to move T to the denominator.
In the new industrial revolution extractive must be replaced by renewable; linear by cyclical; fossil fuel energy by renewable energy, sunlight; wasteful by waste-free; and abusive by benign; and labor productivity by resource productivity.
And I reasoned that if we could make those transformative changes, and get rid of T1 altogether, we could reduce our impact to zero, including our impact on the climate.
And that became the Interface plan in 1995, and has been the plan ever since.
We have measured our progress very rigorously.
So I can tell you how far we have come in the ensuing 12 years.
Net greenhouse gas emissions down 82 percent in absolute tonnage.
(Applause) Over the same span of time sales have increased by two-thirds and profits have doubled.
So an 82 percent absolute reduction translates into a 90 percent reduction in greenhouse gas intensity relative to sales.
This is the magnitude of the reduction the entire global technosphere must realize by 2050 to avoid catastrophic climate disruption -- so the scientists are telling us.
Fossil fuel usage is down 60 percent per unit of production, due to efficiencies in renewables.
The cheapest, most secure barrel of oil there is is the one not used through efficiencies.
Water usage is down 75 percent in our worldwide carpet tile business.
Down 40 percent in our broadloom carpet business, which we acquired in 1993 right here in California, City of Industry, where water is so precious.
Renewable or recyclable materials are 25 percent of the total, and growing rapidly.
Renewable energy is 27 percent of our total, going for 100 percent.
We have diverted 148 million pounds -- that's 74,000 tons -- of used carpet from landfills, closing the loop on material flows through reverse logistics and post-consumer recycling technologies that did not exist when we started 14 years ago.
Those new cyclical technologies have contributed mightily to the fact that we have produced and sold 85 million square yards of climate-neutral carpet since 2004, meaning no net contribution to global climate disruption in producing the carpet throughout the supply chain, from mine and well head clear to end-of-life reclamation -- independent third-party certified.
We call it Cool Carpet.
And it has been a powerful marketplace differentiator, increasing sales and profits.
Three years ago we launched carpet tile for the home, under the brand Flor, misspelled F-L-O-R.
You can point and click today at Flor.com and have Cool Carpet delivered to your front door in five days.
It is practical, and pretty too.
(Laughter) (Applause) We reckon that we are a bit over halfway to our goal: zero impact, zero footprint.
We've set 2020 as our target year for zero, for reaching the top, the summit of Mount Sustainability.
We call this Mission Zero.
And this is perhaps the most important facet: we have found Mission Zero to be incredibly good for business.
A better business model, a better way to bigger profits.
Here is the business case for sustainability.
From real life experience, costs are down, not up, reflecting some 400 million dollars of avoided costs in pursuit of zero waste -- the first face of Mount Sustainability.
This has paid all the costs for the transformation of Interface.
And this dispels a myth too, this false choice between the environment and the economy.
Our products are the best they've ever been, inspired by design for sustainability, an unexpected wellspring of innovation.
Our people are galvanized around this shared higher purpose.
You cannot beat it for attracting the best people and bringing them together.
And the goodwill of the marketplace is astonishing.
No amount of advertising, no clever marketing campaign, at any price, could have produced or created this much goodwill.
Costs, products, people, marketplaces -- what else is there?
It is a better business model.
And here is our 14-year record of sales and profits.
There is a dip there, from 2001 to 2003: a dip when our sales, over a three-year period, were down 17 percent.
But the marketplace was down 36 percent.
We literally gained market share.
We might not have survived that recession but for the advantages of sustainability.
If every business were pursuing Interface plans, would that solve all our problems?
I don't think so.
I remain troubled by the revised Ehrlich equation, I equals P times A divided by T2.
That A is a capital A, suggesting that affluence is an end in itself.
But what if we reframed Ehrlich further?
And what if we made A a lowercase 'a,' suggesting that it is a means to an end, and that end is happiness -- more happiness with less stuff.
You know that would reframe civilization itself -- (Applause) -- and our whole system of economics, if not for our species, then perhaps for the one that succeeds us: the sustainable species, living on a finite earth, ethically, happily and ecologically in balance with nature and all her natural systems for a thousand generations, or 10,000 generations -- that is to say, into the indefinite future.
But does the earth have to wait for our extinction as a species?
Well maybe so. But I don't think so.
At Interface we really intend to bring this prototypical sustainable, zero-footprint industrial company fully into existence by 2020.
We can see our way now, clear to the top of that mountain.
And now the challenge is in execution.
And as my good friend and adviser Amory Lovins says, "If something exists, it must be possible."
(Laughter) If we can actually do it, it must be possible.
If we, a petro-intensive company can do it, anybody can.
And if anybody can, it follows that everybody can.
Hawken fulfilled business and industry, leading humankind away from the abyss because, with continued unchecked decline of the biosphere, a very dear person is at risk here -- frankly, an unacceptable risk.
Who is that person?
Not you. Not I.
But let me introduce you to the one who is most at risk here.
And I myself met this person in the early days of this mountain climb.
On a Tuesday morning in March of 1996, I was talking to people, as I did at every opportunity back then, bringing them along and often not knowing whether I was connecting.
But about five days later back in Atlanta, I received an email from Glenn Thomas, one of my people in the California meeting.
He was sending me an original poem that he had composed after our Tuesday morning together.
And when I read it it was one of the most uplifting moments of my life.
Because it told me, by God, one person got it.
Here is what Glenn wrote. And here is that person, most at risk.
Please meet "Tomorrow's Child."
"Without a name, an unseen face, and knowing not your time or place, Tomorrow's child, though yet unborn, I met you first last Tuesday morn.
A wise friend introduced us two.
And through his sobering point of view I saw a day that you would see, a day for you but not for me.
Knowing you has changed my thinking.
For I never had an inkling that perhaps the things I do might someday, somehow threaten you.
Tomorrow's child, my daughter, son, I'm afraid I've just begun to think of you and of your good, though always having known I should.
Begin, I will.
The way the cost of what I squander, what is lost, if ever I forget that you will someday come and live here too."
Well, every day of my life since, "Tomorrow's Child" has spoken to me with one simple but profound message, which I presume to share with you.
We are, each and every one, a part of the web of life.
The continuum of humanity, sure, but in a larger sense, the web of life itself.
And we have a choice to make during our brief, brief visit to this beautiful blue and green living planet: to hurt it or to help it.
For you, it's your call.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'll tell you a little bit about irrational behavior.
Not yours, of course -- other people's.
(Laughter) So after being at MIT for a few years, I realized that writing academic papers is not that exciting.
You know, I don't know how many of those you read, but it's not fun to read and often not fun to write -- even worse to write.
So I decided to try and write something more fun.
And I came up with an idea that I would write a cookbook.
And the title for my cookbook was going to be, "Dining Without Crumbs: The Art of Eating Over the Sink."
(Laughter) And it was going to be a look at life through the kitchen.
I was quite excited about this.
I was going to talk a little bit about research, a little bit about the kitchen.
I wrote a couple of chapters, and took it to MIT Press and they said, "Cute, but not for us. Go and find somebody else."
I tried other people, and everybody said the same thing, "Cute. Not for us."
Until somebody said, "Look, if you're serious about this, you have to write about your research first; you have to publish something, then you'll get the opportunity to write something else.
If you really want to do it, you have to do it."
I do it all day long, I want to write something a bit more free, less constrained."
And this person was very forceful and said, "Look, that's the only way you'll ever do it."
So I said, "Okay, if I have to do it --" I had a sabbatical.
And then I'll get to do my cookbook."
And it turned out to be quite fun in two ways.
First of all, I enjoyed writing.
But the more interesting thing was that I started learning from people.
It's a fantastic time to write, because there's so much feedback you can get from people.
People write to me about their personal experience, and about their examples, and where they disagree, and their nuances.
And even being here -- I mean, the last few days, I've known heights of obsessive behavior I never thought about.
(Laughter) Which I think is just fascinating.
I will tell you a little bit about irrational behavior, and I want to start by giving you some examples of visual illusion as a metaphor for rationality.
So think about these two tables.
And you must have seen this illusion.
If I asked you what's longer, the vertical line on the table on the left, or the horizontal line on the table on the right, which one seems longer?
Can anybody see anything but the left one being longer?
No, right? It's impossible.
But the nice thing about visual illusion is we can easily demonstrate mistakes.
So I can put some lines on; it doesn't help.
I can animate the lines.
And to the extent you believe I didn't shrink the lines, which I didn't, I've proven to you that your eyes were deceiving you.
Now, the interesting thing about this is when I take the lines away, it's as if you haven't learned anything in the last minute.
(Laughter) You can't look at this and say, "Now I see reality as it is."
Right? It's impossible to overcome this sense that this is indeed longer.
Our intuition is really fooling us in a repeatable, predictable, consistent way.
and there is almost nothing we can do about it, aside from taking a ruler and starting to measure it.
Here's another one. It's one of my favorite illusions.
What color is the top arrow pointing to?
Audience: Brown. Dan Ariely: Brown. Thank you.
The bottom one? Yellow.
Can anybody see them as identical?
Very, very hard.
I can cover the rest of the cube up.
If I cover the rest of the cube, you can see that they are identical.
If you don't believe me, you can get the slide later and do some arts and crafts and see that they're identical.
But again, it's the same story, that if we take the background away, the illusion comes back.
There is no way for us not to see this illusion.
I guess maybe if you're colorblind, I don't think you can see that.
I want you to think about illusion as a metaphor.
Vision is one of the best things we do.
We have a huge part of our brain dedicated to vision -- bigger than dedicated to anything else.
We use our vision more hours of the day than anything else.
We're evolutionarily designed to use vision.
And if we have these predictable repeatable mistakes in vision, which we're so good at, what are the chances we won't make even more mistakes in something we're not as good at, for example, financial decision-making.
(Laughter) Something we don't have an evolutionary reason to do, we don't have a specialized part of the brain for, and we don't do that many hours of the day.
The argument is in those cases, it might be that we actually make many more mistakes.
And worse -- not having an easy way to see them, because in visual illusions, we can easily demonstrate the mistakes; in cognitive illusion it's much, much harder to demonstrate the mistakes to people.
So I want to show you some cognitive illusions, or decision-making illusions, in the same way.
And this is one of my favorite plots in social sciences.
It's from a paper by Johnson and Goldstein.
It basically shows the percentage of people who indicated they would be interested in donating their organs.
These are different countries in Europe.
You basically see two types of countries: countries on the right, that seem to be giving a lot; and countries on the left that seem to giving very little, or much less.
The question is, why?
Why do some countries give a lot and some countries give a little?
When you ask people this question, they usually think that it has to be about culture.
How much do you care about people?
Giving organs to somebody else is probably about how much you care about society, how linked you are.
Or maybe it's about religion.
But if you look at this plot, you can see that countries that we think about as very similar, actually exhibit very different behavior.
For example, Sweden is all the way on the right, and Denmark, which we think is culturally very similar, is all the way on the left.
Germany is on the left, and Austria is on the right.
The Netherlands is on the left, and Belgium is on the right.
And finally, depending on your particular version of European similarity, you can think about the U.K. and France as either similar culturally or not, but it turns out that with organ donation, they are very different.
By the way, the Netherlands is an interesting story.
You see, the Netherlands is kind of the biggest of the small group.
It turns out that they got to 28 percent after mailing every household in the country a letter, begging people to join this organ donation program.
You know the expression, "Begging only gets you so far."
It's 28 percent in organ donation.
(Laughter) But whatever the countries on the right are doing, they're doing a much better job than begging.
So what are they doing?
Turns out the secret has to do with a form at the DMV.
And here is the story.
The countries on the left have a form at the DMV that looks something like this.
"Check the box below if you want to participate in the organ donor program."
And what happens?
People don't check, and they don't join.
The countries on the right, the ones that give a lot, have a slightly different form.
It says, "Check the box below if you don't want to participate ..."
Interestingly enough, when people get this, they again don't check, but now they join.
(Laughter) Now, think about what this means.
You know, we wake up in the morning and we feel we make decisions.
We wake up in the morning and we open the closet; we feel that we decide what to wear.
we open the refrigerator and we feel that we decide what to eat.
What this is actually saying, is that many of these decisions are not residing within us.
They are residing in the person who is designing that form.
When you walk into the DMV, the person who designed the form will have a huge influence on what you'll end up doing.
Now, it's also very hard to intuit these results.
Think about it for yourself.
How many of you believe that if you went to renew your license tomorrow, and you went to the DMV, and you encountered one of these forms, that it would actually change your own behavior?
Very hard to think that it would influence us.
We can say, "Oh, these funny Europeans, of course it would influence them."
But when it comes to us, we have such a feeling that we're in the driver's seat, such a feeling that we're in control and we are making the decision, that it's very hard to even accept the idea that we actually have an illusion of making a decision, rather than an actual decision.
Now, you might say, "These are decisions we don't care about."
In fact, by definition, these are decisions about something that will happen to us after we die.
How could we care about something less than about something that happens after we die?
So a standard economist, somebody who believes in rationality, would say, "You know what?
The cost of lifting the pencil and marking a "V" is higher than the possible benefit of the decision, so that's why we get this effect."
(Laughter) But, in fact, it's not because it's easy.
It's not because it's trivial. It's not because we don't care.
It's the opposite. It's because we care.
It's difficult and it's complex.
And it's so complex that we don't know what to do.
And because we have no idea what to do, we just pick whatever it was that was chosen for us.
I'll give you one more example.
This is from a paper by Redelmeier and Shafir.
And they said, "Would this effect also happens to experts?
People who are well-paid, experts in their decisions, and who make a lot of them?"
And they took a group of physicians.
They presented to them a case study of a patient.
They said, "Here is a patient. He is a 67-year-old farmer.
He's been suffering from right hip pain for a while."
And then, they said to the physicians, "You decided a few weeks ago that nothing is working for this patient.
All these medications, nothing seems to be working.
So you refer the patient for hip replacement therapy.
Hip replacement. Okay?"
So the patient is on a path to have his hip replaced.
Then they said to half of the physicians, "Yesterday, you reviewed the patient's case, and you realized that you forgot to try one medication.
You did not try ibuprofen.
What do you do? Do you pull the patient back and try ibuprofen?
Or do you let him go and have hip replacement?"
Well, the good news is that most physicians in this case decided to pull the patient and try ibuprofen.
Very good for the physicians.
To the other group of physicians, they said, "Yesterday when you reviewed the case, you discovered there were two medications you didn't try out yet -- ibuprofen and piroxicam."
You have two medications you didn't try out yet.
What do you do? You let him go, or you pull him back?
And if you pull him back, do you try ibuprofen or piroxicam? Which one?"
Now, think of it: This decision makes it as easy to let the patient continue with hip replacement, but pulling him back, all of the sudden it becomes more complex.
There is one more decision.
What happens now?
The majority of the physicians now choose to let the patient go for a hip replacement.
I hope this worries you, by the way -- (Laughter) when you go to see your physician.
The thing is that no physician would ever say, "Piroxicam, ibuprofen, hip replacement. Let's go for hip replacement."
But the moment you set this as the default, it has a huge power over whatever people end up doing.
I'll give you a couple of more examples on irrational decision-making.
Imagine I give you a choice: Do you want to go for a weekend to Rome, all expenses paid -- hotel, transportation, food, a continental breakfast, everything -- or a weekend in Paris?
Now, weekend in Paris, weekend in Rome -- these are different things.
They have different food, different culture, different art.
Imagine I added a choice to the set that nobody wanted.
Imagine I said, "A weekend in Rome, a weekend in Paris, or having your car stolen?"
(Laughter) It's a funny idea, because why would having your car stolen, in this set, influence anything?
(Laughter) But what if the option to have your car stolen was not exactly like this?
What if it was a trip to Rome, all expenses paid, transportation, breakfast, but it doesn't include coffee in the morning?
If you want coffee, you have to pay for it yourself, it's two euros 50.
(Laughter) Now in some ways, given that you can have Rome with coffee, why would you possibly want Rome without coffee?
It's like having your car stolen. It's an inferior option.
But guess what happened?
The moment you add Rome without coffee, Rome with coffee becomes more popular, and people choose it.
The fact that you have Rome without coffee makes Rome with coffee look superior, and not just to Rome without coffee -- even superior to Paris.
(Laughter) Here are two examples of this principle.
This was an ad in The Economist a few years ago that gave us three choices: an online subscription for 59 dollars, a print subscription for 125 dollars, or you could get both for 125.
(Laughter) Now I looked at this, and I called up The Economist, and I tried to figure out what they were thinking.
And they passed me from one person to another to another, until eventually I got to the person who was in charge of the website, and I called them up, and they went to check what was going on.
The next thing I know, the ad is gone, no explanation.
So I decided to do the experiment that I would have loved The Economist to do with me.
I took this and I gave it to 100 MIT students.
I said, "What would you choose?"
These are the market shares -- most people wanted the combo deal.
Thankfully, nobody wanted the dominant option.
That means our students can read.
(Laughter) But now, if you have an option that nobody wants, you can take it off, right?
So I printed another version of this, where I eliminated the middle option.
I gave it to another 100 students. Here is what happened: Now the most popular option became the least popular, and the least popular became the most popular.
What was happening was the option that was useless, in the middle, was useless in the sense that nobody wanted it.
But it wasn't useless in the sense that it helped people figure out what they wanted.
In fact, relative to the option in the middle, which was get only the print for 125, the print and web for 125 looked like a fantastic deal.
And as a consequence, people chose it.
The general idea here, by the way, is that we actually don't know our preferences that well.
And because we don't know our preferences that well, we're susceptible to all of these influences from the external forces: the defaults, the particular options that are presented to us, and so on.
One more example of this.
People believe that when we deal with physical attraction, we see somebody, and we know immediately whether we like them or not, if we're attracted or not.
This is why we have these four-minute dates.
So I decided to do this experiment with people.
I'll show you images here, no real people, but the experiment was with people.
I showed some people a picture of Tom, and a picture of Jerry.
and I said, "Who do you want to date?
But for half the people, I added an ugly version of Jerry.
I took Photoshop and I made Jerry slightly less attractive.
(Laughter) For the other people, I added an ugly version of Tom.
And the question was, will ugly Jerry and ugly Tom help their respective, more attractive brothers?
The answer was absolutely yes.
When ugly Jerry was around, Jerry was popular.
When ugly Tom was around, Tom was popular.
(Laughter) This of course has two very clear implications for life in general.
If you ever go bar-hopping, who do you want to take with you?
(Laughter) You want a slightly uglier version of yourself.
(Laughter) Similar, but slightly uglier.
(Laughter) The second point, or course, is that if somebody invites you to bar hop, you know what they think about you.
(Laughter) Now you get it.
What is the general point?
The general point is that, when we think about economics, we have this beautiful view of human nature.
"What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason!"
We have this view of ourselves, of others.
The behavioral economics perspective is slightly less "generous" to people; in fact, in medical terms, that's our view.
(Laughter) But there is a silver lining.
The silver lining is, I think, kind of the reason that behavioral economics is interesting and exciting.
Are we Superman, or are we Homer Simpson?
When it comes to building the physical world, we kind of understand our limitations.
We build steps.
And we build these things that not everybody can use, obviously.
(Laughter) We understand our limitations, and we build around them.
But for some reason, when it comes to the mental world, when we design things like healthcare and retirement and stock markets, we somehow forget the idea that we are limited.
I think that if we understood our cognitive limitations in the same way we understand our physical limitations, even though they don't stare us in the face the same way, we could design a better world, and that, I think, is the hope of this thing.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In her Auntie An-meis home, Jing-Mei reluctantly takes her seat at the eastern corner of the mahjong table.
At the north, south, and west corners are her aunties, long-time members of the Joy Luck Club.
This group of immigrant families comes together weekly to trade gossip, feast on wonton and sweet chaswei, and play mahjong.
However, the clubs founder, Jing-Meis mother Suyuan, has recently passed away.
At first, Jing-Mei struggles to fill her place at the table.
But when her aunties reveal a deeply buried secret about Suyuans life, Jing-Mei realizes she still has a lot to learn about her mother, and herself.
In Amy Tans 1989 debut novel, "The Joy Luck Club," this gathering at the mahjong table is the point of departure for a series of interconnected vignettes.
The book itself is loosely structured to imitate the format of the Chinese game.
Just as mahjong is played over four rounds with at least four hands each, the book is divided into four parts, each with four chapters.
Alternately set in China or San Francisco, each chapter narrates a single story from one of the four matriarchs of the Joy Luck Club or their American-born daughters.
These stories take the reader through war zones and villages of rural China, and into modern marriages and tense gatherings around the dinner table.
They touch upon themes of survival and loss, love and the lack of it, ambitions and their unsatisfied reality.
In one, Auntie Lin plots an escape from the hostile family of her promised husband, ultimately leading to her arrival in America.
In another, the Hsu familys all-American day at the beach turns dire when Rose is overwhelmed by the responsibility her mother assigns to her.
The resulting tragedy traumatizes the family for years to come.
These tales illustrate the common divides that can form between generations and cultures, especially in immigrant families.
The mothers have all experienced great hardships during their lives in China, and theyve worked tirelessly to give their children better opportunities in America.
But their daughters feel weighed down by their parents unfulfilled hopes and high expectations.
Jing-Mei feels this pressure as she plays mahjong with her mothers friends.
She worries, In me, they see their own daughters, just as ignorant, just as unmindful of all the truths and hopes they have brought to America. Time and again, the mothers strive to remind their daughters of their history and heritage.
Meanwhile, their daughters struggle to reconcile their mothers perception of them with who they really are.
"Does my daughter know me?" some of the stories ask.
"Why doesnt my mother understand?" others respond.
In her interrogation of these questions, Tan speaks to anxieties that plague many immigrants, who often feel both alienated from their homeland and disconnected from their adopted country.
But by weaving the tales of these four mothers and daughters together, Tan makes it clear that Jing-Mei and her peers find strength to tackle their present-day problems through the values their mothers passed on to them.
When "The Joy Luck Club" was first published, Tan expected minimal success.
But against her predictions, the book was a massive critical and commercial achievement.
Today, these characters still captivate readers worldwide.
Not only for the way they speak to Chinese American and immigrant experiences, but also for uncovering a deeper truth: the need to be seen and understood by the ones you love.
Alright.
I'm going to show you a couple of images from a very diverting paper in The Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine.
I'm going to go way out on a limb and say that it is the most diverting paper ever published in The Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine.
The title is "Observations of In-Utero Masturbation."
(Laughter) Okay. Now on the left you can see the hand -- that's the big arrow -- and the penis on the right. The hand hovering.
And over here we have, in the words of radiologist Israel Meisner, "The hand grasping the penis in a fashion resembling masturbation movements."
Bear in mind this was an ultrasound, so it would have been moving images.
Orgasm is a reflex of the autonomic nervous system.
Now, this is the part of the nervous system that deals with the things that we don't consciously control, like digestion, heart rate and sexual arousal.
And the orgasm reflex can be triggered by a surprisingly broad range of input.
Genital stimulation. Duh.
But also, Kinsey interviewed a woman who could be brought to orgasm by having someone stroke her eyebrow.
People with spinal cord injuries, like paraplegias, quadriplegias, will often develop a very, very sensitive area right above the level of their injury, wherever that is.
There is such a thing as a knee orgasm in the literature.
I think the most curious one that I came across was a case report of a woman who had an orgasm every time she brushed her teeth.
(Laughter) Something in the complex sensory-motor action of brushing her teeth was triggering orgasm.
And she went to a neurologist, who was fascinated.
He checked to see if it was something in the toothpaste, but no -- it happened with any brand.
They stimulated her gums with a toothpick, to see if that was doing it.
No. It was the whole, you know, motion.
And the amazing thing to me is that you would think this woman would have excellent oral hygiene.
(Laughter) Sadly -- this is what it said in the journal paper -- "She believed that she was possessed by demons and switched to mouthwash for her oral care."
It's so sad.
(Laughter) When I was working on the book, I interviewed a woman who can think herself to orgasm.
She was part of a study at Rutgers University.
You've got to love that. Rutgers.
So I interviewed her in Oakland, in a sushi restaurant.
And I said, "So, could you do it right here?"
And she said, "Yeah, but you know I'd rather finish my meal if you don't mind."
(Laughter) But afterwards, she was kind enough to demonstrate on a bench outside.
It was remarkable. It took about one minute.
And I said to her, "Are you just doing this all the time?"
(Laughter) She said, "No. Honestly, when I get home, I'm usually too tired."
(Laughter) She said that the last time she had done it was on the Disneyland tram.
(Laughter) The headquarters for orgasm, along the spinal nerve, is something called the sacral nerve root, which is back here.
And if you trigger, if you stimulate with an electrode, the precise spot, you will trigger an orgasm.
And it is a fact that you can trigger spinal reflexes in dead people -- a certain kind of dead person, a beating-heart cadaver.
Now this is somebody who is brain-dead, legally dead, definitely checked out, but is being kept alive on a respirator, so that their organs will be oxygenated for transplantation.
Now in one of these brain-dead people, if you trigger the right spot, you will see something every now and then.
There is a reflex called the Lazarus reflex.
And this is -- I'll demonstrate as best I can, not being dead.
It's like this. You trigger the spot.
The dead guy, or gal, goes... like that.
Very unsettling for people working in pathology labs.
(Laughter) Now, if you can trigger the Lazarus reflex in a dead person, why not the orgasm reflex?
I asked this question to a brain death expert, Stephanie Mann, who was foolish enough to return my emails.
(Laughter) I said, "So, could you conceivably trigger an orgasm in a dead person?"
She said, "Yes, if the sacral nerve is being oxygenated, you conceivably could."
Obviously it wouldn't be as much fun for the person.
But it would be an orgasm -- (Laughter) nonetheless.
There is a researcher at the University of Alabama who does orgasm research.
I said to her, "You should do an experiment.
You know? You can get cadavers if you work at a university."
I said, "You should actually do this."
She said, "You get the human subjects review board approval for this one."
(Laughter) According to 1930s marriage manual author, Theodoor van De Velde, a slight seminal odor can be detected on the breath of a woman within about an hour after sexual intercourse.
Theodoor van De Velde was something of a semen connoisseur.
(Laughter) This is a guy writing a book, "Ideal Marriage," you know.
Very heavy hetero guy.
But he wrote in this book, "Ideal Marriage" -- he said that he could differentiate between the semen of a young man, which he said had a fresh, exhilarating smell, and the semen of mature men, whose semen smelled, quote, "Remarkably like that of the flowers of the Spanish chestnut.
Sometimes quite freshly floral, and then again sometimes extremely pungent."
(Laughter) Okay. In 1999, in the state of Israel, a man began hiccupping.
And this was one of those cases that went on and on.
He tried everything his friends suggested.
Nothing seemed to help.
Days went by.
At a certain point, the man, still hiccupping, had sex with his wife.
And lo and behold, the hiccups went away.
He told his doctor, who published a case report in a Canadian medical journal under the title, "Sexual Intercourse as a Potential Treatment for Intractable Hiccups."
I love this article because at a certain point they suggested that unattached hiccuppers could try masturbation.
(Laughter) I love that because there is like a whole demographic: unattached hiccuppers.
(Laughter) Married, single, unattached hiccupper.
In the 1900s, early 1900s, a lot of gynecologists believed that when a woman has an orgasm, the contractions serve to suck the semen up through the cervix and sort of deliver it really quickly to the egg, thereby upping the odds of conception.
It was called the "upsuck" theory.
(Laughter) If you go all the way back to Hippocrates, physicians believed that orgasm in women was not just helpful for conception, but necessary.
Doctors back then were routinely telling men the importance of pleasuring their wives.
Marriage-manual author and semen-sniffer Theodoor van De Velde -- (Laughter) has a line in his book.
I loved this guy.
He had this line in his book that supposedly comes from the Habsburg Monarchy, where there was an empress Maria Theresa, who was having trouble conceiving.
And apparently the royal court physician said to her, "I am of the opinion that the vulva of your most sacred majesty be titillated for some time prior to intercourse."
(Laughter) It's apparently, I don't know, on the record somewhere.
Masters and Johnson: now we're moving forward to the 1950s.
Masters and Johnson were upsuck skeptics, which is also really fun to say.
They didn't buy it.
And they decided, being Masters and Johnson, that they would get to the bottom of it.
They brought women into the lab -- I think it was five women -- and outfitted them with cervical caps containing artificial semen.
And in the artificial semen was a radio-opaque substance, such that it would show up on an X-ray.
This is the 1950s.
Anyway, these women sat in front of an X-ray device.
And they masturbated.
And Masters and Johnson looked to see if the semen was being sucked up.
Did not find any evidence of upsuck.
You may be wondering, "How do you make artificial semen?"
(Laughter) I have an answer for you. I have two answers.
You can use flour and water, or cornstarch and water.
I actually found three separate recipes in the literature.
(Laughter) My favorite being the one that says -- you know, they have the ingredients listed, and then in a recipe it will say, for example, "Yield: two dozen cupcakes."
This one said, "Yield: one ejaculate."
(Laughter) There's another way that orgasm might boost fertility.
This one involves men.
Sperm that sit around in the body for a week or more start to develop abnormalities that make them less effective at head-banging their way into the egg.
British sexologist Roy Levin has speculated that this is perhaps why men evolved to be such enthusiastic and frequent masturbators.
He said, "If I keep tossing myself off I get fresh sperm being made."
Which I thought was an interesting idea, theory.
So now you have an evolutionary excuse.
(Laughter) Okay.
(Laughter) All righty. There is considerable evidence for upsuck in the animal kingdom -- pigs, for instance.
In Denmark, the Danish National Committee for Pig Production found out that if you sexually stimulate a sow while you artificially inseminate her, you will see a six-percent increase in the farrowing rate, which is the number of piglets produced.
So they came up with this five-point stimulation plan for the sows.
There is posters they put in the barn, and they have a DVD.
And I got a copy of this DVD.
(Laughter) This is my unveiling, because I am going to show you a clip.
(Laughter) So, okay.
Now, here we go, la la la, off to work.
It all looks very innocent.
He's going to be doing things with his hands that the boar would use his snout, lacking hands. Okay.
(Laughter) This is it.
(Laughter) This is to mimic the weight of the boar.
(Laughter) You should know, the clitoris of the pig is inside the vagina.
So this may be sort of titillating for her.
(Laughter) And the happy result.
(Applause) I love this video.
There is a point in this video, towards the beginning, where they zoom in for a close up of his hand with his wedding ring, as if to say, "It's okay, it's just his job.
(Laughter) Okay. When I was in Denmark, my host was named Anne Marie.
Why don't you have the farmers do that?
That's not one of your five steps."
I have to read you what she said, because I love it.
She said, "It was a big hurdle just to get farmers to touch underneath the vulva.
So we thought, let's not mention the clitoris right now."
(Laughter) Shy but ambitious pig farmers, however, can purchase a -- this is true -- a sow vibrator, that hangs on the sperm feeder tube to vibrate.
Because, as I mentioned, the clitoris is inside the vagina.
So possibly, you know, a little more arousing than it looks.
And I also said to her, "Now, these sows. I mean, you may have noticed there.
The sow doesn't look to be in the throes of ecstasy."
And she said, you can't make that conclusion, because animals don't register pain or pleasure on their faces in the same way that we do.
They use the upper half of the face; the ears are very expressive.
So you're not really sure what's going on with the pig.
Primates, on the other hand, we use our mouths more.
This is the ejaculation face of the stump-tailed macaque.
(Laughter) And, interestingly, this has been observed in female macaques, but only when mounting another female.
(Laughter) Masters and Johnson.
In the 1950s, they decided, okay, we're going to figure out the entire human sexual response cycle, from arousal, all the way through orgasm, in men and women -- everything that happens in the human body.
Okay, with women, a lot of this is happening inside.
This did not stop Masters and Johnson.
They developed an artificial coition machine.
This is basically a penis camera on a motor.
There is a phallus, clear acrylic phallus, with a camera and a light source, attached to a motor that is kind of going like this.
And the woman would have sex with it.
That is what they would do. Pretty amazing.
Sadly, this device has been dismantled.
This just kills me, not because I wanted to use it -- I wanted to see it.
(Laughter) One fine day, Alfred Kinsey decided to calculate the average distance traveled by ejaculated semen.
This was not idle curiosity.
Doctor Kinsey had heard -- and there was a theory going around at the time, this being the 1940s -- that the force with which semen is thrown against the cervix was a factor in fertility.
Kinsey thought it was bunk, so he got to work.
He got together in his lab 300 men, a measuring tape, and a movie camera.
(Laughter) And in fact, he found that in three quarters of the men the stuff just kind of slopped out.
It wasn't spurted or thrown or ejected under great force.
However, the record holder landed just shy of the eight-foot mark, which is impressive.
(Laughter) (Applause) Yes. Exactly.
(Laughter) Sadly, he's anonymous. His name is not mentioned.
(Laughter) In his write-up of this experiment in his book, Kinsey wrote, "Two sheets were laid down to protect the oriental carpets."
(Laughter) Which is my second favorite line in the entire oeuvre of Alfred Kinsey.
My favorite being, "Cheese crumbs spread before a pair of copulating rats will distract the female, but not the male."
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thanks!
Shah Rukh Khan: Be it Mumbai or Delhi, Chennai or Kolkata, all our big cities have one great thing in common, they happily welcome people from smaller places arriving in search of work.
What is also true is that this warm welcome leads to consequences.
Problems like housing in these cities are born.
Today we have with us a human settlement expert and researcher: Dr. Gautam Bhan, who is re-imagining a solution to this increasing problem.
He will share with us the new picture of urban India that he can see.
TED Talks India New Thoughts welcomes Dr. Gautam Bhan.
Dr. Gautam Bhan, everyone.
(Applause) Gautam Bhan: In this country, until a few years ago, if you asked someone: "Where are you from?"
the answer would be Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata.
You'd immediately ask again: "Where do you belong?"
Until recently in India, nobody was from a city; people only migrated to the city.
This is changing.
Urbanization is changing India, but are our cities prepared?
Let's assume you were born somewhere else.
Your parents worked as laborers all day.
Then you too would have come to a city for progress.
Or maybe, like it happens today, you were born in the city itself.
One day you go out looking for an accommodation in the city, to buy or maybe just to rent.
Will you be able find an affordable home?
The government says we are falling short of at least 20 million homes.
20 million homes, that's 100 million people.
And this is not the shortage of <i>3 BHKs</i> (bedroom hall kitchen).
95 percent of the shortage is for people earning 10 to 15,000 rupees per month.
Will you be able to find an affordable home in this budget?
If this happened with you, what would you do?
Home is not a car or some sort of jewellery.
Home is food and clothes.
Nobody can live without it.
If you couldn't find a home in a city to either buy or rent, you too would be driven to do what most people end up doing.
Make a home wherever possible.
You too would make a <i>settlement.</i> The government may keep calling it a <i>slum,</i> but like the people living there, I too will call it a settlement.
One hundred million are not homeless.
They have homes.
Homes they built on their own.
But most of these homes are in settlements.
This is the truth of an affordable home in India.
The homes in settlements are cheap, but not sturdy.
The homes outside are sturdy, but not cheap.
(Applause) We will have to lay the foundation of a new thought from here itself.
A settlement is not a problem; it is a solution.
We just have to make it secure and sturdy.
To fulfill the shortage of 20 million homes you cannot make 20 million 25 square foot flats, and neither should you be making them.
For example take the Karnataka government.
They have a very good record in this.
By 2020, Karnataka needs 2.6 million homes.
In the last ten years they have managed to make 350,000 homes.
Even if a government tries with complete sincerity, it cannot fulfill this need in the next couple of lifetimes.
If we do not make new homes, then what is the next solution?
How to make a settlement secure?
Firstly, eviction needs to be stopped.
Bulldozing needs to be stopped.
Never has that resulted in progress in the past, nor will it in the future.
(Applause) We have to start believing that the laborers who build and run the city have a right over the land of that city.
(Applause) I know you are thinking that settlements are made on illegally captured land, but capturing of land never happens in the dead of the night.
Whether the land belongs to the government or not, a settlement is never formed secretly.
It is inhabited over time.
The government also agrees that the settlements in our cities have been there for over 10, 20, 30, even 40 years.
What kind of illegally captured land is this, which was ignored for 30 years and suddenly a day before eviction is declared illegal?
A settlement can easily accommodate 15 to 60 percent of a city's population by using just one, two or maximum ten percent of the land.
Can such a huge number of people not have a right over this small bit of land?
A city's progress is often measured by the cost of its land.
How do you ascribe a cost to the life of a person living on a piece of land?
A settlement is not asking you for shiny homes; all it's asking for is basic necessities: electricity, roads, water, toilets and drainage.
We call this <i>upgradation.</i> Here's an example of upgradation.
In Ahmedabad, they started a program where for ten years, 44 settlements were promised there wouldn't be any eviction.
Only a promise.
Nothing written, no documents.
And basic necessities were provided to them.
In ten years that slum changed into a locality, a place, a world of its own.
The government didn't have to build even a single new home.
(Applause) Thailand launched this program at national scale, benefiting 100,000 people in 137 cities.
And every person was given the right to live over that land.
But pay attention here.
Not the right to sell, but the right to live there, use it, settle on it.
The whole world knows now that to move forward, we cannot remove settlements.
We can only advance when we think of ways to make settlements secure and sturdy.
But just one thing.
If we know it, then why doesn't it happen?
To apply this new thinking to settlements, we, that is you and me, need to look deep within and get rid of the disgust, disrespect and apprehensions that we have.
Actually I should not be standing here in front of you today.
A person from the settlement who lives there should be standing here.
But if someone like that came here, you wouldn't have listened to him.
You are listening to me, because you think I am not from a settlement.
This is the very thought that needs to be changed.
Thank you.
(Applause) SRK: Thank you very much. Thank you, Dr. Gautam Bhan.
Thanks a lot.
Please tell me, you just gave an example of Thailand and the big thing there is the homes are for people to settle in, not to sell.
They cannot be used for sale.
Is there a similar thought process or program in our country too, inspired by your talks and those of people around you?
GB: I wouldn't say by me, but by the people movement who are fighting for rights in the city.
That is making a difference.
For instance, in Odisha the Chief Minister, Mr. Patnaik, announced the same scheme: that all the people in settlements will have rights over that land.
(Applause) And I think this scheme shouldn't be called populism; it should be called an economic development strategy.
Because economic development does not happen from the top, but from the bottom.
(Applause) SRK: I too promise I will only say settlements, and not slums, ever again. 100 percent.
(Applause) Dr. Bhan you came here and said such wonderful things.
There is a song. I will not sing it, as I am a terrible singer.
GB: I too am a terrible singer.
SRK: But we can't keep shut also, because we are saying wonderful things.
(laughter) So we will just say it.
Slowly the heart will find settlement.
GB: Slowly the heart will find settlement.
SRK: Only then will life be filled with love and fun times.
(Applause) Ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Gautam Bhan. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I can't help but this wish: to think about when you're a little kid, and all your friends ask you, "If a genie could give you one wish in the world, what would it be?"
And I always answered, "Well, I'd want the wish to have the wisdom to know exactly what to wish for."
Well, then you'd be screwed, because you'd know what to wish for, and you'd use up your wish, and now, since we only have one wish -- unlike last year they had three wishes -- I'm not going to wish for that.
So let's get to what I would like, which is world peace.
And I know what you're thinking: You're thinking, "The poor girl up there, she thinks she's at a beauty pageant.
She's not. She's at the TED Prize."
(Laughter) But I really do think it makes sense.
And I think that the first step to world peace is for people to meet each other.
I've met a lot of different people over the years, and I've filmed some of them, from a dotcom executive in New York who wanted to take over the world, to a military press officer in Qatar, who would rather not take over the world.
If you've seen the film "Control Room" that was sent out, you'd understand a little bit why.
(Applause) Thank you.
Wow! Some of you watched it. That's great. That's great.
So basically what I'd like to talk about today is a way for people to travel, to meet people in a different way than -- because you can't travel all over the world at the same time.
And a long time ago -- well, about 40 years ago -- my mom had an exchange student.
And I'm going to show you slides of the exchange student.
This is Donna.
This is Donna at the Statue of Liberty.
This is my mother and aunt teaching Donna how to ride a bike.
This is Donna eating ice cream.
And this is Donna teaching my aunt how to do a Filipino dance.
I really think as the world is getting smaller, it becomes more and more important that we learn each other's dance moves, that we meet each other, we get to know each other, we are able to figure out a way to cross borders, to understand each other, to understand people's hopes and dreams, what makes them laugh and cry.
And I know that we can't all do exchange programs, and I can't force everybody to travel; I've already talked about that to Chris and Amy, and they said that there's a problem with this: You can't force people, free will.
And I totally support that, so we're not forcing people to travel.
But I'd like to talk about another way to travel that doesn't require a ship or an airplane, and just requires a movie camera, a projector and a screen.
And that's what I'm going to talk to you about today.
I was asked that I speak a little bit about where I personally come from, and Cameron, I don't know how you managed to get out of that one, but I think that building bridges is important to me because of where I come from.
I'm the daughter of an American mother and an Egyptian-Lebanese-Syrian father.
So I'm the living product of two cultures coming together.
No pun intended.
(Laughter) And I've also been called, as an Egyptian-Lebanese-Syrian American with a Persian name, the "Middle East Peace Crisis."
So maybe me starting to take pictures was some kind of way to bring both sides of my family together -- a way to take the worlds with me, a way to tell stories visually.
It all kind of started that way, but I think that I really realized the power of the image when I first went to the garbage-collecting village in Egypt, when I was about 16.
She's somebody who believes strongly in community service, and decided that this was something that I needed to do.
There was a center there, where they were teaching people how to read and write, and get vaccinations against the many diseases you can get from sorting through garbage.
And I began teaching there.
I taught English, and I met some incredible women there.
I met people that live seven people to a room, barely can afford their evening meal, yet lived with this strength of spirit and sense of humor and just incredible qualities.
I got drawn into this community and I began to take pictures there.
I took pictures of weddings and older family members -- things that they wanted memories of.
About two years after I started taking these pictures, the UN Conference on Population and Development asked me to show them at the conference.
So I was 18; I was very excited.
It was my first exhibit of photographs and they were all put up there, and after about two days, they all came down except for three.
People were very upset, very angry that I was showing these dirty sides of Cairo, and why didn't I cut the dead donkey out of the frame?
And as I sat there, I got very depressed.
I looked at this big empty wall with three lonely photographs that were, you know, very pretty photographs and I was like, "I failed at this."
But I was looking at this intense emotion and intense feeling that had come out of people just seeing these photographs.
Here I was, this 18-year-old pipsqueak that nobody listened to, and all of a sudden, I put these photographs on the wall, and there were arguments, and they had to be taken down.
And I saw the power of the image, and it was incredible.
And I think the most important reaction that I saw there was actually from people that would never have gone to the garbage village themselves, that would never have seen that the human spirit could thrive in such difficult circumstances.
And I think it was at that point that I decided I wanted to use photography and film to somehow bridge gaps, to bridge cultures, bring people together, cross borders.
Did a stint at MTV, made a film called "Startup.com," and I've done a couple of music films.
But in 2003, when the war in Iraq was about to start, it was a very surreal feeling for me, because before the war started, there was kind of this media war that was going on.
And I was watching television in New York, and there seemed to be just one point of view that was coming across, and the coverage went from the US State Department to embedded troops.
And what was coming across on the news was that there was going to be this clean war and precision bombings, and the Iraqis would be greeting the Americans as liberators, and throwing flowers at their feet in the streets of Baghdad.
And I knew that there was a completely other story that was taking place in the Middle East, where my parents were.
I knew that there was a completely other story being told, and I was thinking, "How are people supposed to communicate with each other when they're getting completely different messages, and nobody knows what the other's being told?
How are people supposed to have any kind of common understanding or know how to move together into the future?
So I knew that I had to go there.
I just wanted to be in the center.
I had no plan. I had no funding.
I didn't even have a camera at the time -- I had somebody bring it there, because I wanted to get access to Al Jazeera, George Bush's favorite channel, and a place which I was very curious about because it's disliked by many governments across the Arab world, and also called the mouthpiece of Osama Bin Laden by some people in the US government.
So I was thinking, this station that's hated by so many people has to be doing something right.
I've got to go see what this is all about.
And I also wanted to go see Central Command, which was 10 minutes away.
And that way, I could get access to how this news was being created -- on the Arab side, reaching the Arab world, and on the US and Western side, reaching the US.
And when I went there and sat there, and met these people that were in the center of it, and sat with these characters, I met some surprising, very complex people.
And I'd like to share with you a little bit of that experience of when you sit with somebody and you film them, and you listen to them, and you allow them more than a five-second sound bite.
The amazing complexity of people emerges.
Samir Khader: Business as usual.
Iraq, and then Iraq, and then Iraq.
But between us, if I'm offered a job with Fox, I'll take it.
To change the Arab nightmare into the American dream.
I still have that dream.
Maybe I will never be able to do it, but I have plans for my children.
When they finish high school, I will send them to America to study there.
And they will stay there.
Josh Rushing: The night they showed the POWs and the dead soldiers -- Al Jazeera showed them -- it was powerful, because America doesn't show those kinds of images.
Most of the news in America won't show really gory images and this showed American soldiers in uniform, strewn about a floor, a cold tile floor.
And it was revolting.
It was absolutely revolting.
It made me sick at my stomach.
And then what hit me was, the night before, there had been some kind of bombing in Basra, and Al Jazeera had shown images of the people.
And they were equally, if not more, horrifying -- the images were.
And I remember having seen it in the Al Jazeera office, and thought to myself, "Wow, that's gross.
That's bad."
And then going away, and probably eating dinner or something.
So, the impact that had on me -- me realizing that I just saw people on the other side, and those people in the Al Jazeera office must have felt the way I was feeling that night, and it upset me on a profound level that I wasn't as bothered as much the night before.
It makes me hate war.
But it doesn't make me believe that we're in a world that can live without war yet.
We didn't know whether it would be able to get out there.
We had no funding for it.
And when we showed the film in both the United States and the Arab world, we had such incredible reactions.
It was amazing to see how people were moved by this film.
In the Arab world -- and it's not really by the film, it's by the characters -- I mean, Josh Rushing was this incredibly complex person who was thinking about things.
And when I showed the film in the Middle East, people wanted to meet Josh.
He kind of redefined us as an American population.
People started to ask me, "Where is this guy now?"
Al Jazeera offered him a job.
(Laughter) And Samir, on the other hand, was also quite an interesting character for the Arab world to see, because it brought out the complexities of this love-hate relationship that the Arab world has with the West.
In the United States, I was blown away by the motivations, the positive motivations of the American people when they'd see this film.
You know, we're criticized abroad for believing we're the saviors of the world in some way, but the flip side of it is that, actually, when people do see what is happening abroad and people's reactions to some of our policy abroad, we feel this power, that we need to -- we feel like we have to get the power to change things.
And I saw this with audiences.
This woman came up to me after the screening and said, "You know, I know this is crazy.
I saw the bombs being loaded on the planes, I saw the military going out to war, but you don't understand people's anger towards us until you see the people in the hospitals and the victims of the war, and how do we get out of this bubble?
How do we understand what the other person is thinking?"
Now, I don't know whether a film can change the world.
But I know the power of it, I know that it starts people thinking about how to change the world.
Now, I'm not a philosopher, so I feel like I shouldn't go into great depth on this, but let film speak for itself and take you to this other world.
Because I believe that film has the ability to take you across borders, I'd like you to just sit back and experience for a couple of minutes being taken into another world.
And these couple clips take you inside of two of the most difficult conflicts that we're faced with today.
[The last 48 hours of two Palestinian suicide bombers.] [Paradise Now] [Man: As long as there is injustice, someone must make a sacrifice!] [Woman: That's no sacrifice, that's revenge!] [If you kill, there's no difference between victim and occupier.] [Man: If we had airplanes, we wouldn't need martyrs, that's the difference.] [Woman: The difference is that the Israeli military is still stronger.] [Man: Then let us be equal in death.] [We still have Paradise.] [Woman: There is no Paradise! It only exists in your head!] [Man: God forbid!] [May God forgive you.] [If you were not Abu Azzam's daughter ...] [Anyway, I'd rather have Paradise in my head than live in this hell!] [In this life, we're dead anyway.] [One only chooses bitterness when the alternative is even bitterer.] [Woman: And what about us? The ones who remain?] [Will we win that way?] [Don't you see what you're doing is destroying us?] [And that you give Israel an alibi to carry on?] [Man: So with no alibi, Israel will stop?] [Woman: Perhaps. We have to turn it into a moral war.] [Man: How, if Israel has no morals?] [Woman: Be careful!] [And the real people building peace through non-violence] [Encounter Point] Video: (Ambulance siren) [Tel Aviv, Israel 1996] [Tzvika: My wife Ayelet called me and said, ] ["There was a suicide bombing in Tel Aviv."] [Ayelet: What do you know about the casualties?] [Tzvika off-screen: We're looking for three girls.] [We have no information.] [Ayelet: One is wounded here, but we haven't heard from the other three.] [Tzvika: I said, "OK, that's Bat-Chen, that's my daughter.] [Are you sure she is dead?"] [They said yes.] Video: (Police siren and shouting over megaphone) [Bethlehem, Occupied Palestinian Territories, 2003] [George: On that day, at around 6:30] [I was driving with my wife and daughters to the supermarket.] [When we got to here ...] [we saw three Israeli military jeeps parked on the side of the road.] [When we passed by the first jeep ...] [they opened fire on us.] [And my 12-year-old daughter Christine] [was killed in the shooting.] [Bereaved Families Forum, Jerusalem] [Tzvika: I'm the headmaster for all parts.] [George: But there is a teacher that is in charge?] [Tzvika: Yes, I have assistants.] [I deal with children all the time.] [One year after their daughters' deaths both Tzvika and George join the forum] [George: At first, I thought it was a strange idea.] [But after thinking logically about it, ] [I didn't find any reason why not to meet them] [and let them know of our suffering.] [Tzvika: There were many things that touched me.] [We see that there are Palestinians who suffered a lot, who lost children,] [and still believe in the peace process and in reconciliation.] [If we who lost what is most precious can talk to each other,] [and look forward to a better future,] [then everyone else must do so, too.] [From South Africa: A Revolution Through Music] [Amandla] (Music) (Video) Man: Song is something that we communicated with people who otherwise would not have understood where we're coming from.
You could give them a long political speech, they would still not understand.
But I tell you, when you finish that song, people will be like, "Damn, I know where you niggas are coming from.
I know where you guys are coming from.
Narrator: It's about the liberation struggle.
It's about those children who took to the streets -- fighting, screaming, "Free Nelson Mandela!"
It's about those unions who put down their tools and demanded freedom.
Yes. Yes!
(Music and singing) (Singing) Freedom!
(Applause) Jehane Noujaim: I think everybody's had that feeling of sitting in a theater, in a dark room, with other strangers, watching a very powerful film, and they felt that feeling of transformation.
And what I'd like to talk about is how can we use that feeling to actually create a movement through film?
I've been listening to the talks in the conference, and Robert Wright said yesterday that if we have an appreciation for another person's humanity, then they will have an appreciation for ours.
And that's what this is about.
It's about connecting people through film, getting these independent voices out there.
Now, Josh Rushing actually ended up leaving the military and taking a job with Al Jazeera.
(Laughter) So his feeling is that he's at Al Jazeera International because he feels like he can actually use media to bridge the gap between East and West.
And that's an amazing thing.
But I've been trying to think about ways to give power to these independent voices, to give power to the filmmakers, to give power to people who are trying to use film for change.
And there are incredible organizations that are out there doing this already.
There's Witness, that you heard from earlier.
There's Just Vision, that are working with Palestinians and Israelis who are working together for peace, and documenting that process and getting interviews out there and using this film to take to Congress to show that it's a powerful tool, to show that this is a woman who's had her daughter killed in an attack, and she believes that there are peaceful ways to solve this.
There's Working Films and there's Current TV, which is an incredible platform for people around the world to be able to put their -- (Applause) Yeah, it's amazing.
I've watched it and I'm blown away by it and its potential to bring voices from around the world -- independent voices from around the world -- and create a truly democratic, global television.
So what can we do to create a platform for these organizations, to create some momentum, to get everybody in the world involved in this movement?
I'd like for us to imagine for a second.
Imagine a day when you have everyone coming together from around the world.
You have towns and villages and theaters -- all from around the world, getting together, and sitting in the dark, and sharing a communal experience of watching a film, or a couple of films, together.
Watching a film which maybe highlights a character that is fighting to live, or just a character that defies stereotypes, makes a joke, sings a song.
Comedies, documentaries, shorts.
This amazing power can be used to change people and to bond people together; to cross borders, and have people feel like they're having a communal experience.
So if you imagine this day when all around the world, you have theaters and places where we project films.
If you imagine projecting from Times Square to Tahrir Square in Cairo, the same film in Ramallah, the same film in Jerusalem.
You know, we've been talking to a friend of mine about using the side of the Great Pyramid and the Great Wall of China.
It's endless what you can imagine, in terms of where you can project films and where you can have this communal experience.
And I believe that this one day, if we can create it, this one day can create momentum for all of these independent voices.
There isn't an organization which is connecting the independent voices of the world to get out there, and yet I'm hearing throughout this conference that the biggest challenge in our future is understanding the other, and having mutual respect for the other and crossing borders.
And if film can do that, and if we can get all of these different locations in the world to watch these films together -- this could be an incredible day.
So we've already made a partnership, set up through somebody from the TED community, John Camen, who introduced me to Steven Apkon, from the Jacob Burns Film Center.
And we started calling up everybody.
And in the last week, there have been so many people that have responded to us, from as close as Palo Alto, to Mongolia and to India.
There are people that want to be a part of this global day of film; to be able to provide a platform for independent voices and independent films to get out there.
Now, we've thought about a name for this day, and I'd like to share this with you.
Now, the most amazing part of this whole process has been sharing ideas and wishes, and so I invite you to give brainstorms onto how does this day echo into the future?
How do we use technology to make this day echo into the future, so that we can build community and have these communities working together, through the Internet?
There was a time, many, many years ago, when all of the continents were stuck together.
And we call that landmass Pangea.
So what we'd like to call this day of film is Pangea Cinema Day.
And if you just imagine that all of these people in these towns would be watching, then I think that we can actually really make a movement towards people understanding each other better.
I know that it's very intangible, touching people's hearts and souls, but the only way that I know how to do it, the only way that I know how to reach out to somebody's heart and soul all across the world, is by showing them a film.
And I know that there are independent filmmakers and films out there that can really make this happen.
And that's my wish.
I guess I'm supposed to give you my one-sentence wish, but we're way out of time.
Chris Anderson: That is an incredible wish.
Pangea Cinema: The day the world comes together.
JN: It's more tangible than world peace, and it's certainly more immediate.
But it would be the day that the world comes together through film, the power of film.
CA: Ladies and gentlemen, Jehane Noujaim.
A mother and her son trek across an endless desert.
Wearing special skin-tight suits to dissipate heat and recycle moisture, the travelers arent worried about dying of thirst.
Their fears are much greater.
The pair try to walk without rhythm, letting the vibrations of their footsteps blend into the shifting sands.
But soon, the sound of the desert is drowned out by a louder hissing.
As a mound of sand races towards them, the pairs unnatural gait turns into a sprint.
The two clamber into a nearby rock face, as a sandworm 400 meters long bursts from the desert floor.
This is the world of "Dune."
Written by Frank Herbert and published in 1965, "Dune" takes place in a far-flung future, where humanity rules the stars in a giant feudal empire.
This medieval motif goes beyond just the government.
Unlike most interstellar sci-fi, Herbert's humans conquered the stars without any computers.
Following an ancient war with robots, humanity has forbidden the construction of any machine in the likeness of a human mind. But rather than stifling their expansion, this edict forced humans to evolve in startling ways becoming biological computers, psychic witches, and prescient space pilots.
Members of these super-powered factions are regularly employed by various noble houses, all competing for power and new planets to add to their kingdoms.
But almost all these superhuman skills rely on the same precious resource: the spice.
This mystical crop also known as melange is essential for all space travel, making it the cornerstone of the galactic economy.
And it only grows on the desert planet Arrakis, a dangerous and inhospitable world whose native inhabitants have long rebelled against the empire.
Arrakis, also called Dune, is the setting for Herberts novel, which follows Paul of the noble House Atreides.
The book begins with Pauls family being assigned control of Dune as part of an elaborate plot by their sworn enemies: the sadistic slave drivers of House Harkonnen.
The conflict between these houses upends the delicate political balance on Arrakis.
Soon, Paul is catapulted into the middle of a planetary revolution, where he must prove himself capable of leading and surviving on this hostile desert world.
But Arrakis is not simply an endless sea of sand.
Herbert was an avid environmentalist, who spent over five years creating Dunes complex ecosystem.
The planet is checkered with climate belts and wind tunnels that have shaped its rocky topography.
Different temperate zones produce varying desert flora.
And almost every element of Dunes ecosystem works together to produce the planets essential export.
Herberts world building also includes a rich web of philosophy and religion.
Pauls mother Jessica, is a member of the Bene Gesserit, an ancient cult of spice-assisted psychics.
Sometimes called witches for their mysterious powers, the Bene Gesserit have operated as a shadow government for millennia in an effort to guide society towards enlightenment.
Similarly ancient are the Mentats human computers capable of processing incredible amounts of data.
While the Mentats are bastions of logic and reason, their results are not mere calculations, but rather, streams of constantly shifting possibilities.
However, no group is more central to "Dune" than the Fremen.
Natives of Arrakis, they are the keepers of the planets many secrets.
Pauls journey takes him deep into the Fremens exclusive brotherhood, where he must prove himself trustworthy in a series of increasingly deadly challenges.
All these factions have deep histories that pervade the text, and Herbert also incorporates that sense of scale into the books structure.
Each chapter begins with a quote from a future history book, recalling elements of the events that are about to unfold.
The book also contains in-universe appendices that further explore the Empires history; alongside a glossary of words like Gom jabbar and Shai-Hulud."
Dunes epic story continues to unfold over a six-book saga that spans millennia.
But every story of Arrakis future begins here: as Paul pursues a path that is dangerous, demanding, and always on the verge of being consumed by the oncoming storm.
Two years ago here at TED I reported that we had discovered at Saturn, with the Cassini Spacecraft, an anomalously warm and geologically active region at the southern tip of the small Saturnine moon Enceladus, seen here.
This region seen here for the first time in the Cassini image taken in 2005. This is the south polar region, with the famous tiger-stripe fractures crossing the south pole.
And seen just recently in late 2008, here is that region again, now half in darkness because the southern hemisphere is experiencing the onset of August and eventually winter.
And I also reported that we'd made this mind-blowing discovery -- this once-in-a-lifetime discovery of towering jets erupting from those fractures at the south pole, consisting of tiny water ice crystals accompanied by water vapor and simple organic compounds like carbon dioxide and methane.
And at that time two years ago I mentioned that we were speculating that these jets might in fact be geysers, and erupting from pockets or chambers of liquid water underneath the surface, but we weren't really sure.
However, the implications of those results -- of a possible environment within this moon that could support prebiotic chemistry, and perhaps life itself -- were so exciting that, in the intervening two years, we have focused more on Enceladus.
We've flown the Cassini Spacecraft by this moon now several times, flying closer and deeper into these jets, into the denser regions of these jets, so that now we have come away with some very precise compositional measurements.
And we have found that the organic compounds coming from this moon are in fact more complex than we previously reported.
While they're not amino acids, we're now finding things like propane and benzene, hydrogen cyanide, and formaldehyde.
And the tiny water crystals here now look for all the world like they are frozen droplets of salty water, which is a discovery that suggests that not only do the jets come from pockets of liquid water, but that that liquid water is in contact with rock.
And that is a circumstance that could supply the chemical energy and the chemical compounds needed to sustain life.
So we are very encouraged by these results.
And we are much more confident now than we were two years ago that we might indeed have on this moon, under the south pole, an environment or a zone that is hospitable to living organisms.
Whether or not there are living organisms there, of course, is an entirely different matter.
And that will have to await the arrival, back at Enceladus, of the spacecrafts, hopefully some time in the near future, specifically equipped to address that particular question.
But in the meantime I invite you to imagine the day when we might journey to the Saturnine system, and visit the Enceladus interplanetary geyser park, just because we can.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the 4th century BCE, a bankers son threw the city of Sinope into scandal by counterfeiting coins.
When the dust finally settled, the young man, Diogenes of Sinope, had been stripped of his citizenship, his money, and all his possessions.
At least, thats how the story goes.
While many of the details of Diogenes life are shadowy, the philosophical ideas born out of his disgrace survive today.
In exile, Diogenes decided that by rejecting the opinions of others and societal measures of success, he could be truly free.
He would live self-sufficiently, close to nature, without materialism, vanity, or conformity.
In practice, this meant he spent years wandering around Greek cities with nothing but a cloak, staff, and knapsack outdoors year-round, forgoing technology, baths, and cooked food.
He didnt go about this new existence quietly, but is said to have teased passers-by and mocked the powerful, eating, urinating and even masturbating in public.
The citizens called him a kyn a barking dog.
Though meant as an insult, dogs were actually a good symbol for his philosophy theyre happy creatures, free from abstractions like wealth or reputation.
Diogenes and his growing number of followers became known as dog philosophers, or kynikoi, a designation that eventually became the word Cynic. These early Cynics were a carefree bunch, drawn to the freedom of a wandering lifestyle.
As Diogenes reputation grew, others tried to challenge his commitment.
Alexander the Great offered him anything he desired.
But instead of asking for material goods, Diogenes only asked Alexander to get out of his sunshine.
After Diogenes death, adherents to his philosophy continued to call themselves Cynics for about 900 years, until 500 CE.
Some Greek philosophers, like the Stoics, thought everyone should follow Diogenes example.
They also attempted to tone down his philosophy to be more acceptable to conventional society which, of course, was fundamentally at odds with his approach.
Others viewed the Cynics less charitably.
In the Roman province of Syria in the 2nd century CE, the satirist Lucian described the Cynics of his own time as unprincipled, materialistic, self-promoting hypocrites, who only preached what Diogenes had once actually practiced.
Reading Lucians texts centuries later, Renaissance and Reformation writers called their rivals cynics as an insult meaning people who criticized others without having anything worthwhile to say.
This usage eventually laid the groundwork for the modern meaning of the word cynic:" a person who thinks everyone else is acting out of pure self-interest, even if they claim a higher motive.
Still, the philosophy of cynicism had admirers, especially among those who wished to question the state of society.
The 18th-century French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau was called the new Diogenes when he argued that the arts, sciences, and technology, corrupt people.
In 1882, Friedrich Nietzsche reimagined a story in which Diogenes went into the Athenian marketplace with a lantern, searching in vain for a single honest person.
In Nietszches version, a so-called madman rushes into a town square to proclaim that God is dead. This was Nietzsches way of calling for a revaluation of values, and rejecting the dominant Christian and Platonic idea of universal, spiritual insights beyond the physical world.
Nietzsche admired Diogenes for sticking stubbornly to the here-and-now.
More recently, the hippies of the 1960s have been compared with Diogenes as counter-cultural rebels.
Diogenes ideas have been adopted and reimagined over and over again.
The original cynics might not have approved of these fresh takes: they believed that their values of rejecting custom and living closely with nature were the only true values.
Whether or not you agree with that, or with any of the later incarnations, all have one thing in common: they questioned the status quo.
And thats an example we can still follow: not to blindly follow conventional or majority views, but to think hard about what is truly valuable.
Forrest North: The beginning of any collaboration starts with a conversation.
And I would like to share with you some of the bits of the conversation that we started with.
I grew up in a log cabin in Washington state with too much time on my hands.
Yves Behar: And in scenic Switzerland for me.
FN: I always had a passion for alternative vehicles.
This is a land yacht racing across the desert in Nevada.
YB: Combination of windsurfing and skiing into this invention there.
FN: And I also had an interest in dangerous inventions.
This is a 100,000-volt Tesla coil that I built in my bedroom, much to the dismay of my mother.
YB: To the dismay of my mother, this is dangerous teenage fashion right there.
(Laughter) FN: And I brought this all together, this passion with alternative energy and raced a solar car across Australia -- also the U.S. and Japan.
YB: So, wind power, solar power -- we had a lot to talk about.
We had a lot that got us excited.
So we decided to do a special project together.
To combine engineering and design and ...
FN: Really make a fully integrated product, something beautiful.
YB: And we made a baby.
(Laughter) FN: Can you bring out our baby?
(Applause) This baby is fully electric.
It goes 150 miles an hour.
It's twice the range of any electric motorcycle.
Really the exciting thing about a motorcycle is just the beautiful integration of engineering and design.
It's got an amazing user experience.
It was wonderful working with Yves Behar.
He came up with our name and logo. We're Mission Motors.
And we've only got three minutes, but we could talk about it for hours.
YB: Thank you.
FN: Thank you TED. And thank you Chris, for having us.
(Applause)
This chimpanzee stumbles across a windfall of overripe plums.
Many of them have split open, drawing him to their intoxicating fruity odor.
He gorges himself and begins to experience some strange effects.
This unwitting ape has stumbled on a process that humans will eventually harness to create beer, wine, and other alcoholic drinks.
The sugars in overripe fruit attract microscopic organisms known as yeasts.
As the yeasts feed on the fruit sugars they produce a compound called ethanol the type of alcohol in alcoholic beverages.
This process is called fermentation.
Nobody knows exactly when humans began to create fermented beverages.
The earliest known evidence comes from 7,000 BCE in China, where residue in clay pots has revealed that people were making an alcoholic beverage from fermented rice, millet, grapes, and honey.
Within a few thousand years, cultures all over the world were fermenting their own drinks.
Ancient Mesopotamians and Egyptians made beer throughout the year from stored cereal grains.
This beer was available to all social classes, and workers even received it in their daily rations.
They also made wine, but because the climate wasnt ideal for growing grapes, it was a rare and expensive delicacy.
By contrast, in Greece and Rome, where grapes grew more easily, wine was as readily available as beer was in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
Because yeasts will ferment basically any plant sugars, ancient peoples made alcohol from whatever crops and plants grew where they lived.
In South America, people made chicha from grains, sometimes adding hallucinogenic herbs.
In whats now Mexico, pulque, made from cactus sap, was the drink of choice, while East Africans made banana and palm beer.
And in the area thats now Japan, people made sake from rice.
Almost every region of the globe had its own fermented drinks.
As alcohol consumption became part of everyday life, some authorities latched onto effects they perceived as positive Greek physicians considered wine to be good for health, and poets testified to its creative qualities.
Others were more concerned about alcohols potential for abuse.
Greek philosophers promoted temperance.
Early Jewish and Christian writers in Europe integrated wine into rituals but considered excessive intoxication a sin.
And in the middle east, Africa, and Spain, an Islamic rule against praying while drunk gradually solidified into a general ban on alcohol.
Ancient fermented beverages had relatively low alcohol content.
At about 13% alcohol, the by-products wild yeasts generate during fermentation become toxic and kill them.
When the yeasts die, fermentation stops and the alcohol content levels off.
So for thousands of years, alcohol content was limited.
That changed with the invention of a process called distillation.
9th century Arabic writings describe boiling fermented liquids to vaporize the alcohol in them.
Alcohol boils at a lower temperature than water, so it vaporizes first.
Capture this vapor, cool it down, and whats left is liquid alcohol much more concentrated than any fermented beverage.
At first, these stronger spirits were used for medicinal purposes.
Then, spirits became an important trade commodity because, unlike beer and wine, they didnt spoil.
Rum made from sugar harvested in European colonies in the Caribbean became a staple for sailors and was traded to North America.
Europeans brought brandy and gin to Africa and traded it for enslaved people, land, and goods like palm oil and rubber.
Spirits became a form of money in these regions.
During the Age of Exploration, spirits played a crucial role in long distance sea voyages.
Sailing from Europe to east Asia and the Americas could take months, and keeping water fresh for the crews was a challenge.
Adding a bucket of brandy to a water barrel kept water fresh longer because alcohol is a preservative that kills harmful microbes.
So by the 1600s, alcohol had gone from simply giving animals a buzz to fueling global trade and exploration along with all their consequences.
As time went on, its role in human society would only get more complicated.
I'm here because I have a very important message: I think we have found the most important factor for success.
And it was found close to here, Stanford.
Psychology professor took kids that were four years old and put them in a room all by themselves.
And he would tell the child, a four-year-old kid, "Johnny, I am going to leave you here with a marshmallow for 15 minutes.
If, after I come back, this marshmallow is here, you will get another one. So you will have two."
To tell a four-year-old kid to wait 15 minutes for something that they like, is equivalent to telling us, "We'll bring you coffee in two hours."
(Laughter) Exact equivalent.
So what happened when the professor left the room?
As soon as the door closed...
two out of three ate the marshmallow.
Five seconds, 10 seconds, 40 seconds, 50 seconds, two minutes, four minutes, eight minutes.
Some lasted 14-and-a-half minutes.
(Laughter) Couldn't do it. Could not wait.
What's interesting is that one out of three would look at the marshmallow and go like this ...
Would look at it.
Put it back.
They would walk around. They would play with their skirts and pants.
That child already, at four, understood the most important principle for success, which is the ability to delay gratification.
Self-discipline: the most important factor for success.
15 years later, 14 or 15 years later, follow-up study.
What did they find?
They went to look for these kids who were now 18 and 19.
And they found that 100 percent of the children that had not eaten the marshmallow were successful.
They had good grades. They were doing wonderful.
They were happy. They had their plans.
They had good relationships with the teachers, students.
They were doing fine.
A great percentage of the kids that ate the marshmallow, they were in trouble.
They did not make it to university.
They had bad grades. Some of them dropped out.
A few were still there with bad grades.
A few had good grades.
I had a question in my mind: Would Hispanic kids react the same way as the American kids?
So I went to Colombia. And I reproduced the experiment.
And it was very funny. I used four, five and six years old kids.
And let me show you what happened.
(Spanish) (Laughter) So what happened in Colombia?
Hispanic kids, two out of three ate the marshmallow; one out of three did not.
This little girl was interesting; she ate the inside of the marshmallow.
(Laughter) In other words, she wanted us to think that she had not eaten it, so she would get two.
But she ate it.
So we know she'll be successful. But we have to watch her.
(Laughter) She should not go into banking, for example, or work at a cash register.
But she will be successful.
And this applies for everything. Even in sales.
The sales person that -- the customer says, "I want that." And the person says, "Okay, here you are."
That person ate the marshmallow.
If the sales person says, "Wait a second.
Let me ask you a few questions to see if this is a good choice."
Then you sell a lot more.
So this has applications in all walks of life.
I end with -- the Koreans did this.
You know what? This is so good that we want a marshmallow book for children.
We did one for children. And now it is all over Korea.
They are teaching these kids exactly this principle.
And we need to learn that principle here in the States, because we have a big debt.
We are eating more marshmallows than we are producing.
Thank you so much.
Let's talk about manias.
Let's start with Beatlemania.
(Recording of crowd roaring) Hysterical teenagers, crying, screaming, pandemonium.
(Recording of crowd roaring) Sports mania: deafening crowds, all for one idea -- get the ball in the net.
Okay, religious mania: there's rapture, there's weeping, there's visions.
Manias can be good.
Manias can be alarming.
Or manias can be deadly.
(Recording of crowd cheering) The world has a new mania.
A mania for learning English.
Listen as Chinese students practice their English, by screaming it: Teacher: ... change my life!
Students: I want to change my life!
T: I don't want to let my parents down!
S: I don't want to let my parents down!
T: I don't ever want to let my country down!
S: I don't ever want to let my country down!
T: Most importantly... S: Most importantly...
T: I don't want to let myself down!
S: I don't want to let myself down!
How many people are trying to learn English worldwide?
Two billion of them.
Students: A t-shirt. A dress.
Jay Walker: In Latin America, in India, in Southeast Asia, and most of all, in China.
If you're a Chinese student, you start learning English in the third grade, by law.
That's why this year, China will become the world's largest English-speaking country.
(Laughter) Why English?
Opportunity for a better life, a job, to be able to pay for school, or put better food on the table.
Imagine a student taking a giant test for three full days.
Her score on this one test literally determines her future.
She studies 12 hours a day for three years to prepare.
Twenty-five percent of her grade is based on English.
It's called the gaokao, and 80 million high school Chinese students have already taken this grueling test.
The intensity to learn English is almost unimaginable, unless you witness it.
Teacher: Perfect! Students: Perfect!
T: Perfect! S: Perfect!
T: I want to speak perfect English!
S: I want to speak perfect English!
T: I want to speak ... S: I want to speak ...
T: ... perfect English! S: ... perfect English!
T (yelling more loudly): I want to change my life!
S (yelling more loudly): I want to change my life!
JW: So is English mania good or bad?
Is English a tsunami, washing away other languages?
Not likely.
Your native language is your life.
But with English you can become part of a wider conversation -- a global conversation about global problems, like climate change or poverty, or hunger or disease.
The world has other universal languages.
Mathematics is the language of science.
Music is the language of emotions.
And now English is becoming the language of problem-solving.
Not because America is pushing it, but because the world is pulling it.
So English mania is a turning point.
Like the harnessing of electricity in our cities, or the fall of the Berlin Wall, English represents hope for a better future -- a future where the world has a common language to solve its common problems.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
This is my first trip, my first foreign trip as a first lady.
Can you believe that?
(Applause) And while this is not my first visit to the U.K., I have to say that I am glad that this is my first official visit.
The special relationship between the United States and the U.K.
is based not only on the relationship between governments, but the common language and the values that we share, and I'm reminded of that by watching you all today.
During my visit I've been especially honored to meet some of Britain's most extraordinary women -- women who are paving the way for all of you.
And I'm honored to meet you, the future leaders of Great Britain and this world.
And although the circumstances of our lives may seem very distant, with me standing here as the First Lady of the United States of America, and you, just getting through school, I want you to know that we have very much in common.
For nothing in my life's path would have predicted that I'd be standing here as the first African-American First Lady of the United States of America.
There is nothing in my story that would land me here.
I wasn't raised with wealth or resources or any social standing to speak of.
I was raised on the South Side of Chicago.
That's the real part of Chicago.
And I was the product of a working-class community.
My father was a city worker all of his life, and my mother was a stay-at-home mom.
And she stayed at home to take care of me and my older brother.
Neither of them attended university.
My dad was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in the prime of his life.
But even as it got harder for him to walk and get dressed in the morning -- I saw him struggle more and more -- my father never complained about his struggle.
He was grateful for what he had.
He just woke up a little earlier and worked a little harder.
And my brother and I were raised with all that you really need: love, strong values and a belief that with a good education and a whole lot of hard work, that there was nothing that we could not do.
I am an example of what's possible when girls from the very beginning of their lives are loved and nurtured by the people around them.
I was surrounded by extraordinary women in my life: grandmothers, teachers, aunts, cousins, neighbors, who taught me about quiet strength and dignity.
And my mother, the most important role model in my life, who lives with us at the White House and helps to care for our two little daughters, Malia and Sasha.
She's an active presence in their lives, as well as mine, and is instilling in them the same values that she taught me and my brother: things like compassion, and integrity, and confidence, and perseverance -- all of that wrapped up in an unconditional love that only a grandmother can give.
I was also fortunate enough to be cherished and encouraged by some strong male role models as well, including my father, my brother, uncles and grandfathers.
The men in my life taught me some important things, as well.
They taught me about what a respectful relationship should look like between men and women.
They taught me about what a strong marriage feels like: that it's built on faith and commitment and an admiration for each other's unique gifts.
They taught me about what it means to be a father and to raise a family.
And not only to invest in your own home but to reach out and help raise kids in the broader community.
And these were the same qualities that I looked for in my own husband, Barack Obama.
And when we first met, one of the things that I remember is that he took me out on a date.
And his date was to go with him to a community meeting.
(Laughter) I know, how romantic.
(Laughter) But when we met, Barack was a community organizer.
He worked, helping people to find jobs and to try to bring resources into struggling neighborhoods.
As he talked to the residents in that community center, he talked about two concepts.
He talked about "the world as it is" and "the world as it should be."
And I talked about this throughout the entire campaign.
What he said, that all too often, is that we accept the distance between those two ideas.
And sometimes we settle for the world as it is, even when it doesn't reflect our values and aspirations.
But Barack reminded us on that day, all of us in that room, that we all know what our world should look like.
We know what fairness and justice and opportunity look like.
We all know.
And he urged the people in that meeting, in that community, to devote themselves to closing the gap between those two ideas, to work together to try to make the world as it is and the world as it should be, one and the same.
And I think about that today because I am reminded and convinced that all of you in this school are very important parts of closing that gap.
You are the women who will build the world as it should be.
You're going to write the next chapter in history.
Not just for yourselves, but for your generation and generations to come.
And that's why getting a good education is so important.
That's why all of this that you're going through -- the ups and the downs, the teachers that you love and the teachers that you don't -- why it's so important.
Because communities and countries and ultimately the world are only as strong as the health of their women.
And that's important to keep in mind.
Part of that health includes an outstanding education.
The difference between a struggling family and a healthy one is often the presence of an empowered woman or women at the center of that family.
The difference between a broken community and a thriving one is often the healthy respect between men and women who appreciate the contributions each other makes to society.
The difference between a languishing nation and one that will flourish is the recognition that we need equal access to education for both boys and girls.
And this school, named after the U.K.'s first female doctor, and the surrounding buildings named for Mexican artist Frida Kahlo, Mary Seacole, the Jamaican nurse known as the "black Florence Nightingale," and the English author, Emily Bronte, honor women who fought sexism, racism and ignorance, to pursue their passions to feed their own souls.
They allowed for no obstacles.
As the sign said back there, "without limitations."
They knew no other way to live than to follow their dreams.
And having done so, these women moved many obstacles.
And they opened many new doors for millions of female doctors and nurses and artists and authors, all of whom have followed them.
And by getting a good education, you too can control your own destiny.
Please remember that.
If you want to know the reason why I'm standing here, it's because of education.
I never cut class. Sorry, I don't know if anybody is cutting class.
I never did it.
I loved getting As.
I liked being smart.
I liked being on time. I liked getting my work done.
I thought being smart was cooler than anything in the world.
And you too, with these same values, can control your own destiny.
You too can pave the way.
You too can realize your dreams, and then your job is to reach back and to help someone just like you do the same thing.
History proves that it doesn't matter whether you come from a council estate or a country estate.
Your success will be determined by your own fortitude, your own confidence, your own individual hard work.
That is true. That is the reality of the world that we live in.
You now have control over your own destiny.
And it won't be easy -- that's for sure.
But you have everything you need.
Everything you need to succeed, you already have, right here.
My husband works in this big office.
They call it the Oval Office.
In the White House, there's the desk that he sits at -- it's called the Resolute desk.
It was built by the timber of Her Majesty's Ship Resolute and given by Queen Victoria.
It's an enduring symbol of the friendship between our two nations.
And its name, Resolute, is a reminder of the strength of character that's required not only to lead a country, but to live a life of purpose, as well.
And I hope in pursuing your dreams, you all remain resolute, that you go forward without limits, and that you use your talents -- because there are many; we've seen them; it's there -- that you use them to create the world as it should be.
Because we are counting on you.
We are counting on every single one of you to be the very best that you can be.
Because the world is big.
And it's full of challenges.
And we need strong, smart, confident young women to stand up and take the reins.
We know you can do it. We love you. Thank you so much.
(Applause)
On a cold winter night in 1916, Felix Yusupov anxiously prepared to pick up his dinner guest.
If all went as planned, his guest would be dead by morning, though four others had already tried and failed to finish him off.
The Russian monarchy was on the brink of collapse, and to Yusupov and his fellow aristocrats, the holy man theyd invited to dinner was the single cause of it all.
But who was he, and how could a single monk be to blame for the fate of an empire?
Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin began his life in Siberia, born in 1869 to a peasant family.
He might have lived a life of obscurity in his small village, if not for his conversion to the Russian Orthodox Church in the 1890s.
Inspired by the humbled monks that wandered endlessly from holy site to holy site, he spent years on pilgrimages across Russia.
On his travels, strangers were captivated by Rasputins magnetic presence.
Some even believed he had mystical gifts of prediction and healing.
Despite Rasputins heavy drinking, petty theft, and promiscuity, his reputation as a monk quickly spread beyond Siberia and attracted both laypeople and powerful Orthodox clergymen.
When he finally reached the capital, St. Petersburg, Rasputin used his charisma and connections to win favor with the imperial familys spiritual advisor.
In November 1905, Rasputin was finally introduced to Russian Tsar Nicholas II.
Nicholas and his wife Alexandra devoutly believed in the Orthodox Church, as well as in mysticism and supernatural powers, and this Siberian holy man had them transfixed.
It was a particularly tumultuous period for Russia and their family.
The monarchy was barely clinging to control after the Revolution of 1905.
Their political struggles were only intensified by personal turmoil: Alexei, the heir to the throne, had a life-threatening blood disease called hemophilia.
When Alexei suffered a severe medical crisis in 1912, Rasputin advised his parents to reject treatment from doctors.
Alexeis health improved, cementing the royal familys belief that Rasputin had magical healing powers, and guaranteeing his privileged place on the royal court.
Today, we know that the doctors had prescribed aspirin, a drug that worsens hemophilia.
After this incident, Rasputin made a prophecy: if he died, or the royal family deserted him, both their son and their crown would soon be gone.
Outside the royal family, people had mixed views on Rasputin.
On one hand, peasants regarded him as one of their own, amplifying their often-unheard voice to the monarchy.
But nobles and clergymen came to despise his presence.
Rasputin never ceased his scandalous behavior, and they were skeptical of his so-called powers and thought he was corrupting the royal family.
By the end of World War I, they were convinced the only way to maintain order was to eliminate this sham of a holy man.
With this conviction, Yusupov began to plot Rasputins assassination.
Though the exact details remain mysterious, our best guess at how it all unfolded comes from Yusupovs memoirs.
He served Rasputin a number of pastries, believing they contained cyanide.
But unbeknownst to Yusupov, one of his co-conspirators had a change of heart, and substituted the poison with a harmless substance.
To Yusupovs shock, Rasputin ate them without ill effect.
In desperation, he shot Rasputin at point-blank range.
But Rasputin recovered, punched his attacker, and fled.
Yusupov and his accomplices pursued him, finally killing Rasputin with a bullet to the forehead and dumping his body in the Malaya Nevka river.
But far from stabilizing the monarchys authority, Rasputins death enraged the peasantry.
Just as Rasputin prophesied, his murder was swiftly followed by that of the royal family.
Whether the downfall of the Russian monarchy was a product of the monks curse, or the result of political tensions decades in the making, well, we may never know.
All human life, all life, depends on plants.
Let me try to convince you of that in a few seconds.
Just think for a moment.
It doesn't matter whether you live in a small African village, or you live in a big city, everything comes back to plants in the end: whether it's for the food, the medicine, the fuel, the construction, the clothing, all the obvious things; or whether it's for the spiritual and recreational things that matter to us so much; or whether it's soil formation, or the effect on the atmosphere, or primary production.
Damn it, even the books here are made out of plants.
All these things, they come back to plants.
And without them we wouldn't be here.
Now plants are under threat.
They're under threat because of changing climate.
And they are also under threat because they are sharing a planet with people like us.
And people like us want to do things that destroy plants, and their habitats.
And whether that's because of food production, or because of the introduction of alien plants into places that they really oughtn't be, or because of habitats being used for other purposes -- all these things are meaning that plants have to adapt, or die, or move.
And plants sometimes find it rather difficult to move because there might be cities and other things in the way.
So if all human life depends on plants, doesn't it make sense that perhaps we should try to save them?
I think it does.
And I want to tell you about a project to save plants.
And the way that you save plants is by storing seeds.
Because seeds, in all their diverse glory, are plants' futures.
All the genetic information for future generations of plants are held in seeds.
So here is the building; it looks rather unassuming, really.
But it goes down below ground many stories.
And it's the largest seed bank in the world.
It exists not only in southern England, but distributed around the world. I'll come to that.
This is a nuclear-proof facility.
God forbid that it should have to withstand that.
So if you're going to build a seed bank, you have to decide what you're going to store in it. Right?
And we decided that what we want to store first of all, are the species that are most under threat.
And those are the dry land species.
So first of all we did deals with 50 different countries.
It means negotiating with heads of state, and with secretaries of state in 50 countries to sign treaties.
We have 120 partner institutions all over the world, in all those countries colored orange.
People come from all over the world to learn, and then they go away and plan exactly how they're going to collect these seeds.
They have thousands of people all over the world tagging places where those plants are said to exist.
They search for them. They find them in flower.
And they go back when their seeds have arrived.
And they collect the seeds. All over the world.
The seeds -- some of if is very untechnical.
You kind of shovel them all in to bags and dry them off.
You label them. You do some high-tech things here and there, some low-tech things here and there.
And the main thing is that you have to dry them very carefully, at low temperature.
And then you have to store them at about minus 20 degrees C -- that's about minus four Fahrenheit, I think -- with a very critically low moisture content.
And these seeds will be able to germinate, we believe, with many of the species, in thousands of years, and certainly in hundreds of years.
It's no good storing the seeds if you don't know they're still viable.
So every 10 years we do germination tests on every sample of seeds that we have.
And this is a distributed network.
So all around the world people are doing the same thing.
And that enables us to develop germination protocols.
That means that we know the right combination of heat and cold and the cycles that you have to get to make the seed germinate.
And that is very useful information.
And then we grow these things, and we tell people, back in the countries where these seeds have come from, "Look, actually we're not just storing this to get the seeds later, but we can give you this information about how to germinate these difficult plants."
And that's already happening.
So where have we got to?
I am pleased to unveil that our three billionth seed -- that's three thousand millionth seed -- is now stored.
Ten percent of all plant species on the planet, 24,000 species are safe; 30,000 species, if we get the funding, by next year.
Twenty-five percent of all the world's plants, by 2020.
These are not just crop plants, as you might have seen stored in Svalbard in Norway -- fantastic work there.
This is at least 100 times bigger.
We have thousands of collections that have been sent out all over the world: drought-tolerant forest species sent to Pakistan and Egypt; especially photosynthetic-efficient plants come here to the United States; salt-tolerant pasture species sent to Australia; the list goes on and on.
These seeds are used for restoration.
So in habitats that have already been damaged, like the tall grass prairie here in the USA, or in mined land in various countries, restoration is already happening because of these species -- and because of this collection.
Some of these plants, like the ones on the bottom to the left of your screen, they are down to the last few remaining members.
The one where the guy is collecting seeds there on the truck, that is down to about 30 last remaining trees.
Fantastically useful plant, both for protein and for medicine.
We have training going on in China, in the USA, and many other countries.
How much does it cost?
2,800 dollars per species is the average.
I think that's cheap, at the price.
And that gets you all the scientific data that goes with it.
The future research is "How can we find the genetic and molecular markers for the viability of seeds, without having to plant them every 10 years?"
And we're almost there.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I was thinking about my place in the universe, and about my first thought about what infinity might mean, when I was a child.
And I thought that if time could reach forwards and backwards infinitely, doesn't that mean that every point in time is really infinitely small, and therefore somewhat meaningless.
So we don't really have a place in the universe, as far as on a time line.
But nothing else does either.
Therefore every moment really is the most important moment that's ever happened, including this moment right now.
And so therefore this music you're about to hear is maybe the most important music you'll ever hear in your life.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) (Applause) For those of you who I'll be fortunate enough to meet afterwards, you could please refrain from saying, "Oh my god, you're so much shorter in real life."
(Laughter) Because it's like the stage is an optical illusion, for some reason.
(Laughter) Somewhat like the curving of the universe.
I don't know what it is. I get asked in interviews a lot, "My god, you're guitars are so gigantic!"
(Laughter) "You must get them custom made -- special, humongous guitars."
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
How is it that a breathalyzer can measure the alcohol content in someones blood, hours after they had their last drink, based on their breath alone?
Exhaled breath contains trace amounts of hundreds, even thousands, of volatile organic compounds: small molecules lightweight enough to travel easily as gases.
One of these is ethanol, which we consume in alcoholic drinks.
It travels through the bloodstream to tiny air sacs in the lungs, passing into exhaled air at a concentration 2,000 times lower, on average, than in the blood.
When someone breathes into a breathalyzer, the ethanol in their breath passes into a reaction chamber.
There, its converted to another molecule, called acetic acid, in a special type of reactor that produces an electric current during the reaction.
The strength of the current indicates the amount of ethanol in the sample of air, and by extension in the blood.
In addition to the volatile organic compounds like ethanol we consume in food and drink, the biochemical processes of our cells produce many others.
And when something disrupts those processes, like a disease, the collection of volatile organic compounds in the breath may change, too.
So could we detect disease by analyzing a persons breath, without using more invasive diagnostic tools like biopsies, blood draws, and radiation?
In theory, yes, but testing for disease is a lot more complicated than testing for alcohol.
To identify diseases, researchers need to look at a set of tens of compounds in the breath.
A given disease may cause some of these compounds to increase or decrease in concentration, while others may not change the profile is likely to be different for every disease, and could even vary for different stages of the same disease.
For example, cancers are among the most researched candidates for diagnosis through breath analysis.
One of the biochemical changes many tumors cause is a large increase in an energy-generating process called glycolysis.
Known as the Warburg Effect, this increase in glycolysis results in an increase of metabolites like lactate which in turn can affect a whole cascade of metabolic processes and ultimately result in altered breath composition, possibly including an increased concentration of volatile compounds such as dimethyl sulfide.
But the Warburg Effect is just one potential indicator of cancerous activity, and doesnt reveal anything about the particular type of cancer.
Many more indicators are needed to make a diagnosis.
To find these subtle differences, researchers compare the breath of healthy people with the breath of people who suffer from a particular disease using profiles based on hundreds of breath samples.
This complex analysis requires a fundamentally different, more versatile type of sensor from the alcohol breathalyzer.
There are a few being developed.
Some discriminate between individual compounds by observing how the compounds move through a set of electric fields.
Others use an array of resistors made of different materials that each change their resistance when exposed to a certain mix of volatile organic compounds.
There are other challenges too.
These substances are present at incredibly low concentrations typically just parts per billion, much lower than ethanol concentrations in the breath.
Compounds levels may be affected by factors other than disease, including age, gender, nutrition, and lifestyle.
Finally, theres the issue of distinguishing which compounds in the sample were produced in the patients body and which were inhaled from the environment shortly before the test.
Because of these challenges, breath analysis isnt quite ready yet.
But preliminary clinical trials on lung, colon, and other cancers have had encouraging results.
One day, catching cancer early might be as easy as breathing in and out.
College presidents are not the first people who come to mind when the subject is the uses of the creative imagination.
So I thought I'd start by telling you how I got here.
The story begins in the late '90s.
I was invited to meet with leading educators from the newly free Eastern Europe and Russia.
They were trying to figure out how to rebuild their universities.
Since education under the Soviet Union was essentially propaganda serving the purposes of a state ideology, they appreciated that it would take wholesale transformations if they were to provide an education worthy of free men and women.
Given this rare opportunity to start fresh, they chose liberal arts as the most compelling model because of its historic commitment to furthering its students' broadest intellectual, and deepest ethical potential.
Having made that decision they came to the United States, home of liberal arts education, to talk with some of us most closely identified with that kind of education.
They spoke with a passion, an urgency, an intellectual conviction that, for me, was a voice I had not heard in decades, a dream long forgotten.
For, in truth, we had moved light years from the passions that animated them.
But for me, unlike them, in my world, the slate was not clean, and what was written on it was not encouraging.
In truth, liberal arts education no longer exists -- at least genuine liberal arts education -- in this country.
We have professionalized liberal arts to the point where they no longer provide the breadth of application and the enhanced capacity for civic engagement that is their signature.
Over the past century the expert has dethroned the educated generalist to become the sole model of intellectual accomplishment. (Applause) Expertise has for sure had its moments.
But the price of its dominance is enormous.
Subject matters are broken up into smaller and smaller pieces, with increasing emphasis on the technical and the obscure.
We have even managed to make the study of literature arcane.
You may think you know what is going on in that Jane Austen novel -- that is, until your first encounter with postmodern deconstructionism.
The progression of today's college student is to jettison every interest except one.
And within that one, to continually narrow the focus, learning more and more about less and less; this, despite the evidence all around us of the interconnectedness of things.
Lest you think I exaggerate, here are the beginnings of the A-B-Cs of anthropology.
As one moves up the ladder, values other than technical competence are viewed with increasing suspicion.
Questions such as, "What kind of a world are we making?
What kind of a world should we be making?
What kind of a world can we be making?"
are treated with more and more skepticism, and move off the table.
In so doing, the guardians of secular democracy in effect yield the connection between education and values to fundamentalists, who, you can be sure, have no compunctions about using education to further their values: the absolutes of a theocracy.
Meanwhile, the values and voices of democracy are silent.
Either we have lost touch with those values or, no better, believe they need not or cannot be taught.
This aversion to social values may seem at odds with the explosion of community service programs.
But despite the attention paid to these efforts, they remain emphatically extracurricular.
In effect, civic-mindedness is treated as outside the realm of what purports to be serious thinking and adult purposes.
Simply put, when the impulse is to change the world, the academy is more likely to engender a learned helplessness than to create a sense of empowerment.
This brew -- oversimplification of civic engagement, idealization of the expert, fragmentation of knowledge, emphasis on technical mastery, neutrality as a condition of academic integrity -- is toxic when it comes to pursuing the vital connections between education and the public good, between intellectual integrity and human freedom, which were at the heart -- (Applause) -- of the challenge posed to and by my European colleagues.
When the astronomical distance between the realities of the academy and the visionary intensity of this challenge were more than enough, I can assure you, to give one pause, what was happening outside higher education made backing off unthinkable.
Whether it was threats to the environment, inequities in the distribution of wealth, lack of a sane policy or a sustainable policy with respect to the continuing uses of energy, we were in desperate straits.
And that was only the beginning.
The corrupting of our political life had become a living nightmare; nothing was exempt -- separation of powers, civil liberties, the rule of law, the relationship of church and state.
Accompanied by a squandering of the nation's material wealth that defied credulity.
A harrowing predilection for the uses of force had become commonplace, with an equal distaste for the alternative forms of influence.
At the same time, all of our firepower was impotent when it came to halting or even stemming the slaughter in Rwanda, Darfur, Myanmar.
Our public education, once a model for the world, has become most noteworthy for its failures.
Mastery of basic skills and a bare minimum of cultural literacy eludes vast numbers of our students.
Despite having a research establishment that is the envy of the world, more than half of the American public don't believe in evolution.
And don't press your luck about how much those who do believe in it actually understand it.
Incredibly, this nation, with all its material, intellectual and spiritual resources, seems utterly helpless to reverse the freefall in any of these areas.
Equally startling, from my point of view, is the fact that no one was drawing any connections between what is happening to the body politic, and what is happening in our leading educational institutions.
We may be at the top of the list when it comes to influencing access to personal wealth.
We are not even on the list when it comes to our responsibility for the health of this democracy.
We are playing with fire.
You can be sure Jefferson knew what he was talking about when he said, "If a nation expects to be ignorant and free in a state of civilization, it expects what never was, and never will be."
(Applause) On a more personal note, this betrayal of our principles, our decency, our hope, made it impossible for me to avoid the question, "What will I say, years from now, when people ask, 'Where were you?'" As president of a leading liberal arts college, famous for its innovative history, there were no excuses.
So the conversation began at Bennington.
Knowing that if we were to regain the integrity of liberal education, it would take radical rethinking of basic assumptions, beginning with our priorities.
Enhancing the public good becomes a primary objective.
The accomplishment of civic virtue is tied to the uses of intellect and imagination at their most challenging.
Our ways of approaching agency and authority turn inside out to reflect the reality that no one has the answers to the challenges facing citizens in this century, and everyone has the responsibility for trying and participating in finding them.
Bennington would continue to teach the arts and sciences as areas of immersion that acknowledge differences in personal and professional objectives.
But the balances redressed, our shared purposes assume an equal if not greater importance.
When the design emerged it was surprisingly simple and straightforward.
The idea is to make the political-social challenges themselves -- from health and education to the uses of force -- the organizers of the curriculum.
They would assume the commanding role of traditional disciplines.
But structures designed to connect, rather than divide mutually dependent circles, rather than isolating triangles.
And the point is not to treat these topics as topics of study, but as frameworks of action.
The challenge: to figure out what it will take to actually do something that makes a significant and sustainable difference.
Contrary to widely held assumptions, an emphasis on action provides a special urgency to thinking.
The importance of coming to grips with values like justice, equity, truth, becomes increasingly evident as students discover that interest alone cannot tell them what they need to know when the issue is rethinking education, our approach to health, or strategies for achieving an economics of equity.
The value of the past also comes alive; it provides a lot of company.
You are not the first to try to figure this out, just as you are unlikely to be the last.
Even more valuable, history provides a laboratory in which we see played out the actual, as well as the intended consequences of ideas.
In the language of my students, "Deep thought matters when you're contemplating what to do about things that matter."
A new liberal arts that can support this action-oriented curriculum has begun to emerge.
Rhetoric, the art of organizing the world of words to maximum effect.
Design, the art of organizing the world of things.
Mediation and improvisation also assume a special place in this new pantheon.
Quantitative reasoning attains its proper position at the heart of what it takes to manage change where measurement is crucial.
As is a capacity to discriminate systematically between what is at the core and what is at the periphery.
And when making connections is of the essence, the power of technology emerges with special intensity.
But so does the importance of content.
The more powerful our reach, the more important the question "About what?"
When improvisation, resourcefulness, imagination are key, artists, at long last, take their place at the table, when strategies of action are in the process of being designed.
In this dramatically expanded ideal of a liberal arts education where the continuum of thought and action is its life's blood, knowledge honed outside the academy becomes essential.
Social activists, business leaders, lawyers, politicians, professionals will join the faculty as active and ongoing participants in this wedding of liberal education to the advancement of the public good.
Students, in turn, continuously move outside the classroom to engage the world directly.
And of course, this new wine needs new bottles if we are to capture the liveliness and dynamism of this idea.
The most important discovery we made in our focus on public action was to appreciate that the hard choices are not between good and evil, but between competing goods.
This discovery is transforming.
It undercuts self-righteousness, radically alters the tone and character of controversy, and enriches dramatically the possibilities for finding common ground.
Ideology, zealotry, unsubstantiated opinions simply won't do.
This is a political education, to be sure.
But it is a politics of principle, not of partisanship.
So the challenge for Bennington is to do it.
On the cover of Bennington's 2008 holiday card is the architect's sketch of a building opening in 2010 that is to be a center for the advancement of public action.
The center will embody and sustain this new educational commitment.
Think of it as a kind of secular church.
The words on the card describe what will happen inside.
We intend to turn the intellectual and imaginative power, passion and boldness of our students, faculty and staff to developing strategies for acting on the critical challenges of our time.
So we are doing our job.
While these past weeks have been a time of national exhilaration in this country, it would be tragic if you thought this meant your job was done.
The glacial silence we have experienced in the face of the shredding of the constitution, the unraveling of our public institutions, the deterioration of our infrastructure is not limited to the universities.
We the people have become inured to our own irrelevance when it comes to doing anything significant about anything that matters concerning governance, beyond waiting another four years.
We persist also in being sidelined by the idea of the expert as the only one capable of coming up with answers, despite the overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
The problem is there is no such thing as a viable democracy made up of experts, zealots, politicians and spectators.
(Applause) People will continue and should continue to learn everything there is to know about something or other.
We actually do it all the time.
And there will be and should be those who spend a lifetime pursuing a very highly defined area of inquiry.
But this single-mindedness will not yield the flexibilities of mind, the multiplicity of perspectives, the capacities for collaboration and innovation this country needs.
That is where you come in.
What is certain is that the individual talent exhibited in such abundance here, needs to turn its attention to that collaborative, messy, frustrating, contentious and impossible world of politics and public policy.
President Obama and his team simply cannot do it alone.
If the question of where to start seems overwhelming you are at the beginning, not the end of this adventure.
Being overwhelmed is the first step if you are serious about trying to get at things that really matter, on a scale that makes a difference.
So what do you do when you feel overwhelmed?
Well, you have two things.
You have a mind. And you have other people.
Start with those, and change the world.
(Applause)
After centuries of war, the worlds kingdoms have come to an agreement.
Every five years, teams representing the elves, goblins, and treefolk will compete in a grand tournament of dragon jousting.
Every team will face each of the others once.
The kingdom whose team wins the most matches will rule all of Center-Realm until the next tournament.
To prevent any outside meddling, the games are to be conducted in absolute secret except for a group of wizards who will make sure nobody uses enchantments, hexes, or spells to cheat.
Youve been given the extremely important job of recording the scores for the first inaugural tournament.
But the opening celebrations get a bit out of control, and when you wake up, you realize the games are already underway.
Fortunately, no one has noticed your absence so far.
However, you need to get up to speed quickly; if your boss, the head tournament official, finds out youve been sleeping on the job, youll lose your head.
After weighing your options, you decide to offer your lifes savings to one of the regulation wizards in return for the information, giving him your blank scorecard to fill out.
But before he can finish, your boss walks into the tent.
You barely manage to hide the scorecard in time, and the wizard excuses himself.
Your boss chuckles.
Hope you didnt believe anything Gorbaks been saying hes been cursed to tell only lies, even in writing.
Anyway, can you believe how low-scoring the tournaments been?
Every team has played at least once, yet not a single match with a combined score of more than five hits!
Anyhow, Ill be back in a minute to review your scorecard. You laugh along, and when he leaves you look at the partially completed card, now knowing every single number on it is wrong.
Youve only got one chance to save yourself, so whats the real score of each match?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
The incredible thing about this riddle is that you can reach the solution despite an almost complete lack of correct information.
And thats possible because knowing that something is false is meaningful information in its own right.
The first key is to realize that no team will play more than two matches, since there are only two other teams.
So if the elves didnt actually play one match, and the goblins didnt actually play two, the truth must be that elves played two and goblins played one.
For the elves to have played two matches, they mustve faced each of the other teams once.
And since goblins have only played one match so far against the elves that means the match between goblins and treefolk has not occurred yet.
We know its false that the treefolk tied zero matches, which means their bout against the elves mustve tied.
We also know that the elves won at least one match, and since they tied against the treefolk, they must have beaten the goblins.
But can we figure out the actual scores?
Lets start with the elf-treefolk tie.
Because no more than five total hits were scored, the final tally mustve been 0-0, 1-1, or 2-2.
But the treefolk mustve scored some hits, and its false that they only had one hit scored against them.
The only option that leaves is 2-2.
In the match between elves and goblins, the goblins mustve scored at least one hit.
And the elf score must be 2 or more for them to have won the match.
This leaves only a few possibilities that add up to 5 or less.
The elves couldnt have scored three, so that eliminates these two.
And their total hits scored across both matches cant add up to six, so this ones out too.
So the score mustve been 2-1.
With one match remaining, youve managed to save your job and your neck.
Gorbak the wizard may have lied, but your deductive skills quickly evened the score.
Walk around for four months with three wishes, and all the ideas will start to percolate up.
I think everybody should do it -- think that you've got three wishes.
And what would you do? It's actually a great exercise to really drill down to the things that you feel are important, and really reflect on the world around us.
And thinking that, can an individual actually do something, or come up with something, that may actually get some traction out there and make a difference?
Inspired by nature -- that's the theme here.
And I think, quite frankly, that's where I started.
I became very interested in the landscape as a Canadian.
We have this Great North. And there was a pretty small population, and my father was an avid outdoorsman.
So I really had a chance to experience that.
And I could never really understand exactly what it was, or how it was informing me.
But what I think it was telling me is that we are this transient thing that's happening, and that the nature that you see out there -- the untouched shorelines, the untouched forest that I was able to see -- really bring in a sense of that geological time, that this has gone on for a long time, and we're experiencing it in a different way.
And that, to me, was a reference point that I think I needed to have to be able to make the work that I did.
And I did go out, and I did this picture of grasses coming through in the spring, along a roadside.
This rebirth of grass. And then I went out for years trying to photograph the pristine landscape.
But as a fine-art photographer I somehow felt that it wouldn't catch on out there, that there would be a problem with trying to make this as a fine-art career.
And I kept being sucked into this genre of the calendar picture, or something of that nature, and I couldn't get away from it.
So I started to think of, how can I rethink the landscape?
I decided to rethink the landscape as the landscape that we've transformed.
I had a bit of an epiphany being lost in Pennsylvania, and I took a left turn trying to get back to the highway.
And I ended up in a town called Frackville.
I got out of the car, and I stood up, and it was a coal-mining town. I did a 360 turnaround, and that became one of the most surreal landscapes I've ever seen.
Totally transformed by man.
And that got me to go out and look at mines like this, and go out and look at the largest industrial incursions in the landscape that I could find.
And that became the baseline of what I was doing.
And it also became the theme that I felt that I could hold onto, and not have to re-invent myself -- that this theme was large enough to become a life's work, to become something that I could sink my teeth into and just research and find out where these industries are.
And I think one of the things I also wanted to say in my thanks, which I kind of missed, was to thank all the corporations who helped me get in.
Because it took negotiation for almost every one of these photographs -- to get into that place to make those photographs, and if it wasn't for those people letting me in at the heads of those corporations, I would have never made this body of work.
So in that respect, to me, I'm not against the corporation.
I own a corporation. I work with them, and I feel that we all need them and they're important.
But I am also for sustainability.
So there's this thing that is pulling me in both directions.
And I'm not making an indictment towards what's happening here, but it is a slow progression.
So I started thinking, well, we live in all these ages of man: the Stone Age, and the Iron Age, and the Copper Age.
And these ages of man are still at work today.
But we've become totally disconnected from them.
There's something that we're not seeing there.
And it's a scary thing as well. Because when we start looking at the collective appetite for our lifestyles, and what we're doing to that landscape -- that, to me, is something that is a very sobering moment for me to contemplate.
And through my photographs, I'm hoping to be able to engage the audiences of my work, and to come up to it and not immediately be rejected by the image.
Not to say, "Oh my God, what is it?" but to be challenged by it -- to say, "Wow, this is beautiful," on one level, but on the other level, "This is scary. I shouldn't be enjoying it."
Like a forbidden pleasure. And it's that forbidden pleasure that I think is what resonates out there, and it gets people to look at these things, and it gets people to enter it. And it also, in a way, defines kind of what I feel, too -- that I'm drawn to have a good life.
I want a house, and I want a car.
But there's this consequence out there.
And how do I begin to have that attraction, repulsion?
It's even in my own conscience I'm having it, and here in my work, I'm trying to build that same toggle.
These things that I photographed -- this tire pile here had 45 million tires in it. It was the largest one.
It was only about an hour-and-a-half away from me, and it caught fire about four years ago. It's around Westley, California, around Modesto.
And I decided to start looking at something that, to me, had -- if the earlier work of looking at the landscape had a sense of lament to what we were doing to nature, in the recycling work that you're seeing here was starting to point to a direction. To me, it was our redemption.
That in the recycling work that I was doing, I'm looking for a practice, a human activity that is sustainable.
That if we keep putting things, through industrial and urban existence, back into the system -- if we keep doing that -- we can continue on.
Of course, listening at the conference, there's many, many things that are coming. Bio-mimicry, and there's many other things that are coming on stream -- nanotechnology that may also prevent us from having to go into that landscape and tear it apart.
And we all look forward to those things.
But in the meantime, these things are scaling up.
These things are continuing to happen.
What you're looking at here -- I went to Bangladesh, so I started to move away from North America; I started to look at our world globally.
These images of Bangladesh came out of a radio program I was listening to.
They were talking about Exxon Valdez, and that there was going to be a glut of oil tankers because of the insurance industries.
And that those oil tankers needed to be decommissioned, and 2004 was going to be the pinnacle.
And I thought, "My God, wouldn't that be something?"
To see the largest vessels of man being deconstructed by hand, literally, in third-world countries.
So originally I was going to go to India.
And I was shut out of India because of a Greenpeace situation there, and then I was able to get into Bangladesh, and saw for the first time a third world, a view of it, that I had never actually thought was possible.
130 million people living in an area the size of Wisconsin -- people everywhere -- the pollution was intense, and the working conditions were horrible.
Here you're looking at some oil fields in California, some of the biggest oil fields. And again, I started to think that -- there was another epiphany -- that the whole world I was living in was a result of having plentiful oil.
And that, to me, was again something that I started building on, and I continued to build on.
So this is a series I'm hoping to have ready in about two or three years, under the heading of "The Oil Party."
Because I think everything that we're involved in -- our clothing, our cars, our roads, and everything -- are directly a result.
I'm going to move to some pictures of China.
And for me China -- I started photographing it four years ago, and China truly is a question of sustainability in my mind, not to mention that China, as well, has a great effect on the industries that I grew up around.
I came out of a blue-collar town, a GM town, and my father worked at GM, so I was very familiar with that kind of industry and that also informed my work. But you know, to see China and the scale at which it's evolving, is quite something.
So what you see here is the Three Gorges Dam, and this is the largest dam by 50 percent ever attempted by man.
Most of the engineers around the world left the project because they said, "It's just too big."
In fact, when it did actually fill with water a year and a half ago, they were able to measure a wobble within the earth as it was spinning.
It took fifteen days to fill it.
So this created a reservoir 600 kilometers long, one of the largest reservoirs ever created.
And what was also one of the bigger projects around that was moving 13 full-size cities up out of the reservoir, and flattening all the buildings so they could make way for the ships.
This is a "before and after." So that was before.
And this is like 10 weeks later, demolished by hand.
I think 11 of the buildings they used dynamite, everything else was by hand. That was 10 weeks later.
And this gives you an idea.
And it was all the people who lived in those homes, were the ones that were actually taking it apart and working, and getting paid per brick to take their cities apart.
And these are some of the images from that.
So I spent about three trips to the Three Gorges Dam, looking at that massive transformation of a landscape.
And it looks like a bombed-out landscape, but it isn't.
What it is, it's a landscape that is an intentional one.
This is a need for power, and they're willing to go through this massive transformation, on this scale, to get that power.
And again, it's actually a relief for what's going on in China because I think on the table right now, there's 27 nuclear power stations to be built.
There hasn't been one built in North America for 20 years because of the "NIMBY" problem -- "Not In My BackYard."
But in China they're saying, "No, we're putting in 27 in the next 10 years."
And coal-burning furnaces are going in there for hydroelectric power literally weekly.
So coal itself is probably one of the largest problems.
And one of the other things that happened in the Three Gorges -- a lot of the agricultural land that you see there on the left was also lost; some of the most fertile agricultural land was lost in that.
And 1.2 to 2 million people were relocated, depending on whose statistics you're looking at.
And this is what they were building.
This is Wushan, one of the largest cities that was relocated.
This is the town hall for the city.
And again, the rebuilding of the city -- to me, it was sad to see that they didn't really grab a lot of, I guess, what we know here, in terms of urban planning.
There were no parks; there were no green spaces.
Very high-density living on the side of a hill.
And here they had a chance to rebuild cities from the bottom up, but somehow were not connecting with them.
Here is a sign that, translated, says, "Obey the birth control law.
Build our science, civilized and advanced idea of marriage and giving birth."
So here, if you look at this poster, it has all the trappings of Western culture.
You're seeing the tuxedos, the bouquets.
But what's really, to me, frightening about the picture and about this billboard is the refinery in the background.
So it's like marrying up all the things that we have and it's an adaptation of our way of life, full stop.
And again, when you start seeing that kind of embrace, and you start looking at them leading their rural lifestyle with a very, very small footprint and moving into an urban lifestyle with a much higher footprint, it starts to become very sobering.
This is a shot in one of the biggest squares in Guangdong -- and this is where a lot of migrant workers are coming in from the country.
And there's about 130 million people in migration trying to get into urban centers at all times, and in the next 10 to 15 years, are expecting another 400 to 500 million people to migrate into the urban centers like Shanghai and the manufacturing centers.
The manufacturers are -- the domestics are usually -- you can tell a domestic factory by the fact that they all use the same color uniforms.
So this is a pink uniform at this factory. It's a shoe factory.
And they have dorms for the workers.
So they bring them in from the country and put them up in the dorms.
This is one of the biggest shoe factories, the Yuyuan shoe factory near Shenzhen. It has 90,000 employees making shoes.
This is a shift change, one of three.
There's two factories of this scale in the same town.
This is one with 45,000, so every lunch, there's about 12,000 coming through for lunch.
They sit down; they have about 20 minutes.
The next round comes in. It's an incredible workforce that's building there. Shanghai -- I'm looking at the urban renewal in Shanghai, and this is a whole area that will be flattened and turned into skyscrapers in the next five years.
What's also happening in Shanghai is -- China is changing because this wouldn't have happened five years ago, for instance. This is a holdout.
They're called dengzahoos -- they're like pin tacks to the ground.
They won't move. They're not negotiating.
They're not getting enough, so they're not going to move.
And so they're holding off until they get a deal with them.
And they've been actually quite successful in getting better deals because most of them are getting a raw deal.
They're being put out about two hours -- the communities that have been around for literally hundreds of years, or maybe even thousands of years, are being broken up and spread across in the suburban areas outside of Shanghai. But these are a whole series of guys holding out in this reconstruction of Shanghai.
Probably the largest urban-renewal project, I think, ever attempted on the planet.
And then the embrace of the things that they're replacing it with -- again, one of my wishes, and I never ended up going there, was to somehow tell them that there were better ways to build a house.
The kinds of collisions of styles and things were quite something, and these are called the villas.
And also, like right now, they're just moving.
The scaffolding is still on, and this is an e-waste area, and if you looked in the foreground on the big print, you'd see that the industry -- their industry -- they're all recycling.
So the industry's already growing around these new developments.
This is a five-level bridge in Shanghai.
Shanghai was a very intriguing city -- it's exploding on a level that I don't think any city has experienced.
In fact, even Shenzhen, the economic zone -- one of the first ones -- 15 years ago was about 100,000 people, and today it boasts about 10 to 11 million.
So that gives you an idea of the kinds of migrations and the speed with which -- this is just the taxis being built by Volkswagen.
There's 9,000 of them here, and they're being built for most of the big cities, Beijing and Shanghai, Shenzhen.
And this isn't even the domestic car market; this is the taxi market.
And what we would see here as a suburban development -- a similar thing, but they're all high-rises.
So they'll put 20 or 40 up at a time, and they just go up in the same way as a single-family dwelling would go up here in an area.
And the density is quite incredible.
And one of the things in this picture that I wanted to point out is that when I saw these kinds of buildings, I was shocked to see that they're not using a central air-conditioning system; every window has an air conditioner in it.
And I'm sure there are people here who probably know better than I do about efficiencies, but I can't imagine that every apartment having its own air conditioner is a very efficient way to cool a building on this scale.
And when you start looking at that, and then you start factoring up into a city the size of Shanghai, it's literally a forest of skyscrapers.
It's breathtaking, in terms of the speed at which this city is transforming.
And you can see in the foreground of this picture, it's still one of the last areas that was being held up.
Right now that's all cleared out -- this was done about eight months ago -- and high-rises are now going up into that central spot.
So a skyscraper is built, literally, overnight in Shanghai.
Most recently I went in, and I started looking at some of the biggest industries in China.
And this is Baosteel, right outside of Shanghai.
This is the coal supply for the steel factory -- 18 square kilometers.
It's an incredibly massive operation, I think 15,000 workers, five cupolas, and the sixth one's coming in here.
So they're building very large blast furnaces to try to deal with the demand for steel in China.
So this is three of the visible blast furnaces within that shot.
And again, looking at these images, there's this constant, like, haze that you're seeing.
This is going to show you, real time, an assembler. It's a circuit breaker.
10 hours a day at this speed.
I think one of the issues that we here are facing with China, is that they're using a lot of the latest production technology.
In that one, there were 400 people that worked on the floor.
And I asked the manager to point out five of your fastest producers, and then I went and looked at each one of them for about 15 or 20 minutes, and picked this one woman.
And it was just lightning fast; the way she was working was almost unbelievable.
But that is the trick that they've got right now, that they're winning with, is that they're using all the latest technologies and extrusion machines, and bringing all the components into play, but the assembly is where they're actually bringing in -- the country workers are very willing to work. They want to work.
There's a massive backlog of people wanting their jobs.
That condition's going to be there for the next 10 to 15 years if they realize what they want, which is, you know, 400 to 500 million more people coming into the cities.
In this particular case -- this is the assembly line that you saw; this is a shot of it.
I had to use a very small aperture to get the depth of field.
I had to have them freeze for 10 seconds to get this shot.
It took me five fake tries because they were just going. To slow them down was literally impossible.
They were just wound up doing these things all day long, until the manager had to, with a stern voice, say, "Okay, everybody freeze."
It wasn't too bad, but they're driven to produce these things at an incredible rate.
This is a textile mill doing synthetic silk, an oil byproduct.
And what you're seeing here is, again, one of the most state-of-the-art textile mills.
There are 500 of these machines; they're worth about 200,000 dollars each.
So you have about 12 people running this, and they're just inspecting it -- and they're just walking the lines.
The machines are all running, absolutely incredible to see what the scale of industries are.
And I started getting in further and further into the factories.
And that's a diptych. I do a lot of pairings to try and get the sense of scale in these places.
This is a line where they get the threads and they wind the threads together, pre-going into the textile mills.
Here's something that's far more labor-intensive, which is the making of shoes.
This floor has about 1,500 workers on this floor.
The company itself had about 10,000 employees, and they're doing domestic shoes.
It was very hard to get into the international companies because I had to get permission from companies like Nike and Adidas, and that's very hard to get.
And they don't want to let me in.
But the domestic was much easier to do.
It just gives you a sense of, again -- and that's where, really, the whole migration of jobs started going over to China and making the shoes. Nike was one of the early ones.
It was such a high labor component to it that it made a lot of sense to go after that labor market.
This is a high-tech mobile phone: Bird mobile phone, one of the largest mobile makers in China.
I think mobile phone companies are popping up, literally, on a weekly basis, and they have an explosive growth in mobile phones.
This is a textile where they're doing shirts -- Youngor, the biggest shirt factory and clothing factory in China.
And this next shot here is one of the lunchrooms.
Everything is very efficient.
While setting up this shot, people on average would spend eight to 10 minutes having a lunch.
This was one of the biggest factories I've ever seen.
They make coffeemakers here, the biggest coffeemaker and the biggest iron makers -- they make 20 million of them in the world.
There's 21,000 employees. This one factory -- and they had several of them -- is half a kilometer long.
These are just recently shot -- I just came back about a month ago, so you're the first ones to be seeing these, these new factory pictures I've taken.
So it's taken me almost a year to gain access into these places.
The other aspect of what's happening in China is that there's a real need for materials there.
So a lot of the recycled materials that are collected here are being recycled and taken to China by ships.
That's cubed metal. This is armatures, electrical armatures, where they're getting the copper and the high-end steel from electrical motors out, and recycling them.
This is certainly connected to California and Silicon Valley.
But this is what happens to most of the computers.
Fifty percent of the world's computers end up in China to be recycled.
It's referred to as "e-waste" there.
And it is a bit of a problem. The way they recycle the boards is that they actually use the coal briquettes, which are used all through China, but they heat up the boards, and with pairs of pliers they pull off all the components.
They're trying to get all the valued metals out of those components.
But the toxic smells -- when you come into a town that's actually doing this kind of burning of the boards, you can smell it a good five or 10 kilometers before you get there.
Here's another operation. It's all cottage industries, so it's not big places -- it's all in people's front porches, in their backyards, even in their homes they're burning boards, if there's a concern for somebody coming by -- because it is considered in China to be illegal, doing it, but they can't stop the product from coming in.
This portrait -- I'm not usually known for portraits, but I couldn't resist this one, where she's been through Mao, and she's been through the Great Leap Forward, and the Cultural Revolution, and now she's sitting on her porch with this e-waste beside her. It's quite something.
This is a road where it's been shored up by computer boards in one of the biggest towns where they're recycling.
So that's the photographs that I wanted to show you.
(Applause) I want to dedicate my wishes to my two girls.
They've been sitting on my shoulder the whole time while I've been thinking.
One's Megan, the one of the right, and Katja there.
And to me the whole notion -- the things I'm photographing are out of a great concern about the scale of our progress and what we call progress.
And as much as there are great things around the corner -- and it's palpable in this room -- of all of the things that are just about to break that can solve so many problems, I'm really hoping that those things will spread around the world and will start to have a positive effect.
And it isn't something that isn't just affecting our world, but it starts to go up -- because I think we can start correcting our footprint and bring it down -- but there's a growing footprint that's happening in Asia, and is growing at a rapid, rapid rate, and so I don't think we can equalize it. So ultimately the strategy, I think, here is that we have to be very concerned about their evolution, because it is going to be connected to our evolution as well.
So part of my thinking, and part of my wishes, is sitting with these thoughts in mind, and thinking about, "How is their life going to be when they want to have children, or when they're ready to get married 20 years from now -- or whatever, 15 years from now?"
And to me that has been the core behind most of my thinking -- in my work, and also for this incredible chance to have some wishes.
Wish one: world-changing. I want to use my images to persuade millions of people to join in the global conversation on sustainability.
And it is through communications today that I believe that that is not an unreal idea.
Oh, and I went in search -- I wanted to put what I had in mind, hitch it onto something. I didn't want a wish just to start from nowhere.
One of them I'm starting from almost nothing, but the other one, I wanted to find out what's going on that's working right now.
And Worldchanging.com is a fantastic blog, and that blog is now being visited by close to half-a-million people a month.
And it just started about 14 months ago.
And the beauty of what's going on there is that the tone of the conversation is the tone that I like.
What they're doing there is that they're not -- I think the environmental movement has failed in that it's used the stick too much; it's used the apocalyptic tone too much; it hasn't sold the positive aspects of being environmentally concerned and trying to pull us out.
Whereas this conversation that is going on in this blog is about positive movements, about how to change our world in a better way, quickly.
And it's looking at technology, and it's looking at new energy-saving devices, and it's looking at how to rethink and how to re-strategize the movement towards sustainability.
And so for me, one of the things that I thought would be to put some of my work in the service of promoting the Worldchanging.com website.
Some of you might know, he's a TEDster -- Stephen Sagmeister and I are working on some layouts. And this is still in preliminary stages; these aren't the finals. But these images, with Worldchanging.com, can be placed into any kind of media.
They could be posted through the Web; they could be used as a billboard or a bus shelter, or anything of that nature.
So we're looking at this as trying to build out.
And what we ended up discussing was that in most media you get mostly an image with a lot of text, and the text is blasted all over.
What was unusual, according to Stephen, is less than five percent of ads are actually leading with image.
And so in this case, because it's about a lot of these images and what they represent, and the kinds of questions they bring up, that we thought letting the images play out and bring someone to say, "Well, what's Worldchanging.com, with these images, have to do?"
And hopefully inspire people to go to that website.
So Worldchanging.com, and building that blog, and it is a blog, and I'm hoping that it isn't -- I don't see it as the kind of blog where we're all going to follow each other to death.
This one is one that will spoke out, and will go out, and to start reaching. Because right now there's conversations in India, in China, in South America -- there's entries coming from all around the world.
I think there's a chance to have a dialogue, a conversation about sustainability at Worldchanging.com.
And anything that you can do to promote that would be fantastic.
Wish two is more of the bottom-up, ground-up one that I'm trying to work with.
And this one is: I wish to launch a groundbreaking competition that motivates kids to invest ideas on, and invent ideas on, sustainability.
And one of the things that came out -- Allison, who actually nominated me, said something earlier on in a brainstorming. She said that recycling in Canada had a fantastic entry into our psyche through kids between grade four and six.
And you think about it, you know, grade four -- my wife and I, we say age seven is the age of reason, so they're into the age of reason. And they're pre-puberty.
So it's this great window where they actually are -- you can influence them. You know what happens at puberty?
You know, we know that from earlier presentations.
So my thinking here is that we try to motivate those kids to start driving home ideas. Let them understand what sustainability is, and that they have a vested interest in it to happen.
And one of the ways I thought of doing it is to use my prize, so I would take 30,000 or 40,000 dollars of the winnings, and the rest is going to be to manage this project, but to use that as prizes for kids to get into their hands.
But the other thing that I thought would be fantastic was to create these -- call them "prize targets."
And so one could be for the best sustainable idea for an in-school project, the best one for a household project, or it could be the best community project for sustainability.
And I also thought there should be a nice prize for the best artwork for "In My World." And what would happen -- it's a scalable thing. And if we can get people to put in things -- whether it's equipment, like a media lab, or money to make the prize significant enough -- and to open it up to all the schools that are public schools, or schools that are with kids that age, and make it a wide-open competition for them to go after those prizes and to submit them.
And the prize has to be a verifiable thing, so it's not about just ideas.
The art pieces are about the ideas and how they present them and do them, but the actual things have to be verifiable.
In that way, what's happening is that we're motivating a certain age group to start thinking.
And they're going to push that up, from the bottom -- up into, I believe, into the households. And parents will be reacting to it, and trying to help them with the projects.
And I think it starts to motivate the whole idea towards sustainability in a very positive way, and starts to teach them. They know about recycling now, but they don't really, I think, get sustainability in all the things, and the energy footprint, and how that matters.
And to teach them, to me, would be a fantastic wish, and it would be something that I would certainly put my shoulder into.
And again, in "In My World," the competition -- we would use the artwork that comes in from that competition to promote it.
And I like the words, "in my world," because it gives possession of the world to the person who's doing it.
It is my world; it's not someone else's. I want to help it; I want to do something with it. So I think it has a great opportunity to engage the imaginations -- and great ideas, I think, come from kids -- and engage their imagination into a project, and do something for schools.
I think all schools could use extra equipment, extra cash -- it's going to be an incentive for them to do that.
And these are some of the ideas in terms of where we could possibly put in some promotion for "In My World."
And wish three is: Imax film. So I was told I should do one for myself, and I've always wanted to actually get involved with doing something.
And the scale of my work, and the kinds of ideas I'm playing with -- when I first saw an Imax film, I almost immediately thought, "There's a real resonance between what I'm trying to do and the scale of what I try to do as a photographer."
And I think there's a real possibility to reach new audiences if I had a chance.
So I'm looking, really, for a mentor, because I just had my birthday.
I'm 50, and I don't have time to go back to school right now -- I'm too busy. So I need somebody who can put me on a quick catch-up course on how to do something like that, and lead me through the maze of how one does something like this.
That would be fantastic. So those are my three wishes.
(Applause)
Information technology grows in an exponential manner.
It's not linear. And our intuition is linear.
When we walked through the savanna a thousand years ago we made linear predictions where that animal would be, and that worked fine. It's hardwired in our brains.
But the pace of exponential growth is really what describes information technologies.
And it's not just computation.
There is a big difference between linear and exponential growth.
If I take 30 steps linearly -- one, two, three, four, five -- I get to 30.
If I take 30 steps exponentially -- two, four, eight, 16 -- I get to a billion.
It makes a huge difference.
And that really describes information technology.
When I was a student at MIT, we all shared one computer that took up a whole building.
The computer in your cellphone today is a million times cheaper, a million times smaller, a thousand times more powerful.
That's a billion-fold increase in capability per dollar that we've actually experienced since I was a student.
And we're going to do it again in the next 25 years.
Information technology progresses through a series of S-curves where each one is a different paradigm.
So people say, "What's going to happen when Moore's Law comes to an end?"
Which will happen around 2020.
We'll then go to the next paradigm.
And Moore's Law was not the first paradigm to bring exponential growth to computing.
The exponential growth of computing started decades before Gordon Moore was even born.
And it doesn't just apply to computation.
It's really any technology where we can measure the underlying information properties.
Here we have 49 famous computers. I put them in a logarithmic graph.
The logarithmic scale hides the scale of the increase, because this represents trillions-fold increase since the 1890 census.
In 1950s they were shrinking vacuum tubes, making them smaller and smaller. They finally hit a wall; they couldn't shrink the vacuum tube any more and keep the vacuum.
And that was the end of the shrinking of vacuum tubes, but it was not the end of the exponential growth of computing.
We went to the fourth paradigm, transistors, and finally integrated circuits.
When that comes to an end we'll go to the sixth paradigm; three-dimensional self-organizing molecular circuits.
But what's even more amazing, really, than this fantastic scale of progress, is that -- look at how predictable this is.
I mean this went through thick and thin, through war and peace, through boom times and recessions.
The Great Depression made not a dent in this exponential progression.
We'll see the same thing in the economic recession we're having now.
At least the exponential growth of information technology capability will continue unabated.
And I just updated these graphs.
Because I had them through 2002 in my book, "The Singularity is Near."
So we updated them, so I could present it here, to 2007.
And I was asked, "Well aren't you nervous?
Maybe it kind of didn't stay on this exponential progression."
I was a little nervous because maybe the data wouldn't be right, but I've done this now for 30 years, and it has stayed on this exponential progression.
Look at this graph here.You could buy one transistor for a dollar in 1968.
You can buy half a billion today, and they are actually better, because they are faster.
But look at how predictable this is.
And I'd say this knowledge is over-fitting to past data.
I've been making these forward-looking predictions for about 30 years.
And the cost of a transistor cycle, which is a measure of the price performance of electronics, comes down about every year.
That's a 50 percent deflation rate.
And it's also true of other examples, like DNA data or brain data.
But we more than make up for that.
We actually ship more than twice as much of every form of information technology.
We've had 18 percent growth in constant dollars in every form of information technology for the last half-century, despite the fact that you can get twice as much of it each year.
This is a completely different example.
This is not Moore's Law.
The amount of DNA data we've sequenced has doubled every year.
The cost has come down by half every year.
And this has been a smooth progression since the beginning of the genome project.
And halfway through the project, skeptics said, "Well, this is not working out. You're halfway through the genome project and you've finished one percent of the project."
But that was really right on schedule.
Because if you double one percent seven more times, which is exactly what happened, you get 100 percent. And the project was finished on time.
Communication technologies: 50 different ways to measure this, the number of bits being moved around, the size of the Internet.
But this has progressed at an exponential pace.
This is deeply democratizing.
I wrote, over 20 years ago in "The Age of Intelligent Machines," when the Soviet Union was going strong, that it would be swept away by this growth of decentralized communication.
And we will have plenty of computation as we go through the 21st century to do things like simulate regions of the human brain.
But where will we get the software?
Some critics say, "Oh, well software is stuck in the mud."
But we are learning more and more about the human brain.
Spatial resolution of brain scanning is doubling every year.
The amount of data we're getting about the brain is doubling every year.
And we're showing that we can actually turn this data into working models and simulations of brain regions.
There is about 20 regions of the brain that have been modeled, simulated and tested: the auditory cortex, regions of the visual cortex; cerebellum, where we do our skill formation; slices of the cerebral cortex, where we do our rational thinking.
And all of this has fueled an increase, very smooth and predictable, of productivity.
We've gone from 30 dollars to 130 dollars in constant dollars in the value of an average hour of human labor, fueled by this information technology.
And we're all concerned about energy and the environment.
Well this is a logarithmic graph.
This represents a smooth doubling, every two years, of the amount of solar energy we're creating, particularly as we're now applying nanotechnology, a form of information technology, to solar panels.
And we're only eight doublings away from it meeting 100 percent of our energy needs.
And there is 10 thousand times more sunlight than we need.
We ultimately will merge with this technology. It's already very close to us.
When I was a student it was across campus, now it's in our pockets.
What used to take up a building now fits in our pockets.
What now fits in our pockets would fit in a blood cell in 25 years.
And we will begin to actually deeply influence our health and our intelligence, as we get closer and closer to this technology.
Based on that we are announcing, here at TED, in true TED tradition, Singularity University.
It's a new university that's founded by Peter Diamandis, who is here in the audience, and myself.
It's backed by NASA and Google, and other leaders in the high-tech and science community.
And our goal was to assemble the leaders, both teachers and students, in these exponentially growing information technologies, and their application.
But Larry Page made an impassioned speech at our organizing meeting, saying we should devote this study to actually addressing some of the major challenges facing humanity.
And if we did that, then Google would back this.
And so that's what we've done.
The last third of the nine-week intensive summer session will be devoted to a group project to address some major challenge of humanity.
Like for example, applying the Internet, which is now ubiquitous, in the rural areas of China or in Africa, to bringing health information to developing areas of the world.
And these projects will continue past these sessions, using collaborative interactive communication.
All the intellectual property that is created and taught will be online and available, and developed online in a collaborative fashion.
Here is our founding meeting.
But this is being announced today.
It will be permanently headquartered in Silicon Valley, at the NASA Ames research center.
There are different programs for graduate students, for executives at different companies.
The first six tracks here -- artificial intelligence, advanced computing technologies, biotechnology, nanotechnology -- are the different core areas of information technology.
Then we are going to apply them to the other areas, like energy, ecology, policy law and ethics, entrepreneurship, so that people can bring these new technologies to the world.
So we're very appreciative of the support we've gotten from both the intellectual leaders, the high-tech leaders, particularly Google and NASA.
This is an exciting new venture.
And we invite you to participate. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I have a big impact on the planet to travel here by plane.
I emitted, in the atmosphere, nine tons of CO2; that is the weight of two elephants.
I came here to speak about ecology, and I emitted as much CO2 as a Frenchman in one year.
So what do I have to do?
I have to kill a Frenchman when I come back at home?
(Laughter) I have to do my carbon offset in another way, like I do every time.
(Laughter) In fact my work is to show our impact on our planet.
I'm going to show you some examples of the last pictures I've done in the last year.
Alberta sand oil, a lot of pollution.
You know the problem; we don't want to believe what we know.
In Alberta people work nonstop, 24 hours by seven to extract as much oil as they can.
We know about the end of oil.
Oil sand is not a long-term solution.
But we use three times more oil than we find every year.
We don't want to believe what we know.
Deny.
Coral reef in New Caledonia.
100 percent of the coral may be wiped out before 2050 because of global warming.
And you know how coral are very sensitive to temperature, and are very important for the biodiversity of the sea.
North Pole. I've done this picture last summer.
It was impossible to do this picture 15 years ago.
Now there is a new way open between Atlantic and Pacific.
The thickness of the Arctic decreased more than 40 percent since 1960.
There is a new face of Kilimanjaro without ice.
Sad picture.
It lost 80 percent of its ice.
According to scientists, in 100 years all the mountain glacier will be gone.
Glaciers are very important for the life on earth.
Like Al Gore told you, two billion people live on the water from the glacier of Himalaya.
Return of fish men.
One fifth of human kind depend on fish to live.
Today now 70 percent of the fish stock are over-exploited.
According to FAO, if we don't change our system of fishing the main sea resources will be gone in 2050.
We don't want to believe what we know.
The beautiful picture, by [unclear] in Africa.
One human of six have not enough to eat in the world.
One billion people have not enough to eat.
In Africa, corn is one of the main foods in many places.
Here in America, 90 percent of the corn cultivated is used to feed animals or to do oil.
Palm tree plantation in Borneo.
Every year we lose 50 thousand square miles in deforestation.
Refugee camp in Darfur.
Today we have 20 million refugees in the world.
According to the U.N., we speak about 250 million refugees in 2050.
I always show my pictures in the street.
We have done already 100 exhibitions in the cities.
But how to understand the world without the voice of people?
Landscape was not enough.
It was obvious to me to do another work.
I launched a project named Six Billion Others.
I sent around the world six cameramen asking the same question, the same crucial question, about life.
We have done five thousand interviews.
I'm going to show you this.
Man: The most beautiful thing that has happened to me in life?
It's when my dad told me, "Here, I give you this girl as your fiance."
Woman: Love? Love is nice if you can have it.
Second Man: Romeo and Juliet, Sassi and Panno, Dodi and Diana, Heer and Ranjha, this is love! Third Man: My greatest fear is ...
Woman: You're asking me a hard question.
Fourth Man: I live happily because what else should I do?
Fifth Man: The first thing I remember ... (Sixth Man: That's how I learned, by my mother,) Fifth Man: ... from my childhood, (Sixth Man: that you should respect humans.) Fifth Man: we were having fun, biking. (Sixth Man: I will never forget those words.) Seventh Man: We invented stories, we flew around the world, while remaining in our attic.
Eighth Man: I had a big laugh today.
Ninth Man: You see, family is ... it's awful.
10th Man: In the word life, you have the life.
11th Man: Who am I? Isn't that the biggest question?
12th Man: If I was to go back to Iraq and speak to the people, I'd have to bow down and kiss their feet.
Just as that woman tried to kiss my feet when we were taking her sons.
I feel ashamed.
And I feel humbled by their strength.
And I will forever feel a need to make reparations to Iraq.
Second Woman: Dad, Mom, I grew up.
You shouldn't worry about me. Dad doesn't need to go to work.
My family ... What can I say?
At the moment, my family is very poor, my life here in Shenzhen is just about showing myself that I can earn more and to let my parents stay and have something to live on.
I don't want them to spend their whole lives in poverty.
If someday I can achieve something, I would like to say thank you daddy and mommy.
Thank you.
Thank you for having fed me and raised me, and for making my life of today. Thank you.
13th Man: After seven years now of being in a wheelchair, I've done more in life being in a chair than out of a chair.
I still surf. I sail the world. I freedive.
After many people said I couldn't do that.
And I think that comes from connecting with nature, connecting with the energy of life, because we're all disabled in some way on the planet -- spiritually, mentally or physically.
I got the easy part.
14th Man: Let's say that you and me like each other.
You come from elsewhere.
You don't know me. I don't know you.
We talk without lying.
If I do like you, I give you one cow and many other things and we become friends.
How can we make it all by ourselves?
(Applause) YAB: You can also go to the website, answer -- respond to the questions also.
Forty crucial questions.
Now I am going to speak to you about my movie.
For the last three years, I was shooting the earth for the movie.
The name of the movie is "Home" -- "Maison."
It is about the state of the planet.
It's a fantastic story of life on the earth.
I'm very proud to show you the teaser.
Video: This Earth is four and a half billion years old.
These plants, several hundred million years old.
And we humans have been walking upright for only 200 thousand years.
We've managed to adapt, and have conquered the whole planet.
For generations, we've been raising our children, not unlike millions of other species living beside us.
For the past 30 years I've been closely watching the earth and its dwellers from high up in the sky.
Our life is tied to the well-being of our planet.
We depend on water, forests, deserts, oceans.
Fishing, breeding, farming are still the world's foremost human occupations.
And what binds us together is far greater than what divides us.
We all share the same need for the earth's gifts -- the same wish to rise above ourselves, and become better.
And yet we carry on raising walls to keep us apart.
Today our greatest battle is to protect the natural offerings of our planet.
In less than 50 years we've altered it more thoroughly than in the entire history of mankind.
Half of the world's forests have vanished.
Water resources are running low.
Intensive farming is depleting soils.
Our energy sources are not sustainable.
The climate is changing.
We are endangering ourselves.
We're only trying to improve our lives.
But the wealth gaps are growing wider.
We haven't yet understood that we're going at a much faster pace than the planet can sustain.
We know that solutions are available today.
We all have the power to change this trend for the better.
So what are we waiting for?
(Applause) YAB: Luc Besson is the producer of the movie.
But it is not a normal movie.
The film is going to be distributed free.
This film has no copyright.
On the five of June, the environment day, everybody can download the movie on Internet.
The film is given for free to the distributor for TV and theater to show it the fifth of June.
There is no business on this movie.
It is also available for school, cities, NGOs and you.
We have to believe what we know.
Let me tell you something.
It's too late to be pessimistic -- really too late.
We have all a part of the solutions.
To finish, I would like to welcome the 4,700th baby born since the beginning of this talk.
Merci beaucoup. I love you.
(Applause)
"The Better Man."
I was the better at getting and keeping.
You were the better at spend and spend; I was the better at grubbing and heaping, But who was the better man in the end?
Yes, who was the better man, my friend?
You were the better with lords and ladies, I was the better at pillaging Troy; You were the better at kissing the babies, I was the better at search and destroy.
But who was the better man, old boy?
Who was the better man?
I was the better at improvisation, You were the better at spinning the plates; I was the better at procrastination, You were the better at quiet debate.
But who was the better man, old mate?
Who was the better man?
You were the better at rolling a reefer, I was the better at coke and rum; Remember that night on the beach in Ibiza?
The Maori twins with the tattooed bum?
But who was the better man, old chum?
Who was the better man?
Now we come down to it, relatives grieving.
Out in the hall with their crocodile tears; Now that you're out of it, now that you're leaving, Now that they've sealed your arse and your ears, What I've been meaning to tell you for years, And years, and years, and years, old friend ...
Is that you were the better man, in the end; You were the better man, My friend.
(Applause) I wrote this next poem for my mother.
Every one of us had a mother, only one -- probably the most important person in your life, if you're lucky enough to know them.
My mother was certainly the most important in mine.
Let me try and describe her to you.
She's 86 years old. She's frail.
White, platinum hair.
Why do they do that? Why do old ladies go to those hair shops, and make those helmets?
(Laughter) Bright as a button. All the ducks in a row.
Looks like a much prettier version of Margaret Thatcher, (Laughter) but without any of the soft bits in Margaret's character.
(Laughter) I wrote this poem for her. These are not my beliefs.
But my mother has lived by this creed all her life.
"Never Go Back."
Never go back. Never go back.
Never return to the haunts of your youth.
Keep to the track, to the beaten track; Memory holds all you need of the truth.
Never look back. Never look back.
Never succumb to the gorgon's stare.
Keep to the track, to the beaten track; No-one is waiting and nothing is there.
Never go back. Never go back.
Never surrender the future you earned.
Keep to the track, to the beaten track; Never return to the bridges you've burned.
Never look back. Never look back.
Never retreat to the 'glorious past.' Keep to the track, to the beaten track; Treat every day of your life as your last.
Never go back. Never go back.
Never acknowledge the ghost on the stair.
Keep to the track, to the beaten track; No-one is waiting and nothing is there.
(Applause) Now ladies and gentlemen, I'm up on me hobbyhorse.
If every commercially minded cosmetic surgeon were tied end to end along a railroad track, that would be me, stoking the train without a qualm in the world.
Ladies, don't do it.
Don't do it.
You think we want you to do it, but we don't want you to do it.
Stop it.
Tell them to go to hell.
You bodies are wonderful as they are.
Just leave them alone.
"To a Beautiful Lady of a Certain Age."
Lady lady, do not weep.
What is gone is gone. Now sleep.
Turn your pillow. Dry your tears.
Count thy sheep and not thy years.
Nothing good can come of this.
Time rules all, my dearest.
'Tis but folly to be waging war On one who never lost before.
Lady, this is all in vain.
Youth can never come again; We have drunk the summer wine.
None can make a stitch in time.
Nip and tuck till crack of doom.
What is foretold in the womb May not be foresworn with gold.
Nor may time be bought or sold.
Dearest, do I love thee less?
Do I shrink from thy caress?
Think you I could cease to care?
Never was there one so fair!
Lady lady, do not weep -- What is gone is gone. Now sleep.
Lean against me, calm your fears, Count thy blessings, not thy years.
(Applause) America, ladies and gentlemen, has done more for me financially than Britain ever has, or ever could have done.
I was born in Britain, as you have probably guessed.
Even when on its worst behavior, I find myself automatically defending the USA from the sneers of green-eyed Europhiles playing their Greek card to Roman trumps.
America is an empire.
I hope you know that now.
All empires, by definition, are bumbling, shambolic, bullying, bureaucratic affairs, as certain of the rightness of their cause in infancy, as they are corrupted by power in their dotage.
I am no historian, ladies and gentlemen.
But it seems to be that the USA's sins, compared to those of many previous empires, are of a more moderate, if more pervasive, kind.
Let me put this bluntly.
If Americans are so fat, stupid and ignorant, my dear friends from Birmingham, how come they rule the world?
"Hail to the Gods of America."
Hail to the Gods of America!
Hail to the gods of the dream.
Invictus E Pluribus Unum.
But which of them reigns supreme?
Which is America's Jupiter?
The Brahmins of Capital Hill?
A sorcerer's profit on Wall Street?
They eye of a dollar bill?
Or is it celebrity status?
The worship of those we hate.
Or the cult of living forever, If only we'd watch our weight.
What of the titans of media?
Or Hollywood's siren call?
What of the temples of justice, Whose servants enslave us all?
What of the Brand and the Label?
What of the upstart Sport?
And what of the Constitution, That bully of last resort?
Hail to the God of America, Whose power the masses extol -- Convenience rules America; Convenience owns our soul.
Aye, that it does.
(Applause) And if you would like to know why I am not a father -- I, who by a miracle have 22 godchildren -- the answer is in this poem, which upsets me every time I read it.
"Love Came to Visit Me."
Love came to visit me, shy as a fawn.
But finding me busy, she fled, with the dawn.
At 20 the torch of resentment was lit.
My rage at injustice waxed hot as the pits.
The flux of its lava cleared all in its path.
Comrades and enemies fled from its wrath.
Yet lovers grew wary, once novelty waned To lie with a bloody man, his terror unfeigned.
At 30 my powers seemed mighty to me.
The fruits of my rivals, I shook from the tree.
By guile and by bluster, by night and by day, I battered and scattered the fools from my way.
And women grew willing to sham and to bluff.
Their trinkets and baubles cost little enough.
From 40 to 50, grown easy and sly, I wined them and dined them, like pigs in a sty.
We feasted and reveled and rutted in muck, Forgetting our peril, forgetting to duck, Forgetting times arrows are sharper than knives.
Grown sick to our stomachs, and sick of our lives.
Love came to visit me, shy as a fawn.
But finding me busy, she fled with the dawn.
(Applause) Um, there are -- I've got far too much money and I have far too much fun in my businesses.
So poetry came as a complete shock to me, ladies and gentlemen.
A complete shock. I was a little ill.
Okay, I was ill.
Okay, I had a life-threatening illness, you know.
I was in a clinic. I wasn't allowed to make telephone calls.
I wasn't allowed to see any of my -- you know, whatever.
So, in the end I begged a pack of Post-it notes off a nurse.
And from another nurse, I begged a pencil, pen.
And I didn't know what else to do. So I started to write poetry.
That was in October of 2000.
I'm not an evil man.
But sometimes I try to put myself in an evil man's position.
I'm not a glorious and fantastic-looking woman, who men fall down, you know, when she walks in a room.
But sometimes I try to put myself in that position.
(Laughter) Not with much success.
But it's interesting to me. I love to write historical verse.
I love to think what they thought, what it was like.
Because although many of the speakers and many of the people who are in the audience, although you guys can not only go to the moon, you know, you're going to totally transform everything.
Cloning will transform everything. Voice navigation will transform everything.
I don't know. You can do anything you want.
All you guys are so clever, and women, you can do it all!
But human nature doesn't change, mate.
My friends, human nature is exactly the same as it was when my ancestor -- probably it was my ancestor -- got his hands around the neck of the last Neanderthal, and battered the bastard to death.
You think we didn't do that?
Oh, we did.
We killed every single one of them.
Inch by inch we killed them.
We hunted them down wherever they were.
Rivals for meat. Rivals for berries.
We're still doing it, with all of the genius assembled in this room.
Our natures haven't changed a single iota.
And they never will.
Even when we've got off this little planet, and have put some of our eggs in some other baskets.
And I am as bad as you.
I spent eight years running one of the most successful publishing businesses in the world.
And at seven o'clock every night, I took me some more girls, already corrupted.
I never did anything to anyone that wasn't.
And I took crack cocaine, every single night for seven years.
It was like Dante's "Inferno."
It was unbelievable.
One of the offshoots of crack cocaine is that you keep an erection for about four hours.
And you stay up for 12.
It was absolutely unbelievable.
Twenty-two godchildren I've got.
What do I say to them?
I only stopped because I thought if I got caught, what would happen to my mother.
If you're a woman, remember that.
The love of your son can utterly transform anything he does.
"Our Lady in White."
Pale she was, listless; And soft to the touch.
A generous mistress Whom many loved much.
Shoulder to shoulder, Night after night, We hoarded and sold her -- Our Lady in White.
We breathed but to savor her crystal caress.
We craved but to favor the hem of her dress.
We dabbled and babbled, Denying our thirsts.
But always we scrabbled to lie with her first.
Absent, we missed her, grew haggard and limp.
Toyed with her sister, or threatened her pimp.
Came word out of Babel, the lady returns!
And there on the table we took her, in turns.
Sensing the power that tyranny craves, There in that hour, she made us her slaves.
Many there were, to covet her kiss.
My shame as a spur, I fled the abyss.
But only just.
(Applause)
I used to be a Malthusian.
This was my mental model of the world: exploding population, small planet; it's going to lead to ugly things.
But I'm moving past Malthus, because I think that we just might be about 150 years from a kind of new enlightenment.
Here's why.
This is the U.N.'s population data, you may have seen, for the world.
And the world's population expected to top out at something hopefully a bit less than 10 billion, late this century.
And after that, most likely it's going to begin to decline.
So what then?
Most of the economic models are built around scarcity and growth.
So a lot of economists look at declining population and expect to see stagnation, maybe depression.
But a declining population is going to have at least two very beneficial economic effects.
One: fewer people on a fixed amount of land make investing in property a bad bet.
In the cities, a lot of the cost of property is actually wrapped up in its speculative value.
Take away land speculation, price of land drops.
And that begins to lift a heavy burden off the world's poor.
Number two: a declining population means scarce labor.
Scarce labor drives wages.
As wages increase that also lifts the burden on the poor and the working class.
Now I'm not talking about a radical drop in population like we saw in the Black Death.
But look what happened in Europe after the plague: rising wages, land reform, technological innovation, birth of the middle class; and after that, forward-looking social movements like the Renaissance, and later the Enlightenment.
Most of our cultural heritage has tended to look backward, romanticizing the past.
All of the Western religions begin with the notion of Eden, and descend through a kind of profligate present to a very ugly future.
So human history is viewed as sort of this downhill slide from the good old days.
But I think we're in for another change, about two generations after the top of that curve, once the effects of a declining population start to settle in.
At that point, we'll start romanticizing the future again, instead of the nasty, brutish past.
So why does this matter?
Why talk about social-economic movements that may be more than a century away?
Because transitions are dangerous times.
When land owners start to lose money, and labor demands more pay, there are some powerful interests that are going to fear for the future.
Fear for the future leads to some rash decisions.
If we have a positive view about the future then we may be able to accelerate through that turn, instead of careening off a cliff.
If we can make it through the next 150 years, I think that your great great grandchildren will forget all about Malthus.
And instead, they'll be planning for the future and starting to build the 22nd Century Enlightenment.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What's happening to the climate?
It is unbelievably bad.
This is, obviously, that famous view now of the Arctic, which is likely to be gone at this point in the next three or four or five years. Very, very, very scary.
So we all look at what we can do.
And when you look at the worldwide sources of CO2, 52 percent are tied to buildings.
Only nine percent is passenger cars, interestingly enough.
So we ran off to a sushi bar.
And at that sushi bar we came up with a great idea.
And it was something called EcoRock.
And we said we could redesign the 115-year-old gypsum drywall process that generates 20 billion pounds of CO2 a year.
So it was a big idea. We wanted to reduce that by 80 percent, which is exactly what we've done.
We started R&amp;D in 2006.
Decided to use recycled content from cement and steel manufacturing.
There is the inside of our lab. We haven't shown this before.
But our people had to do some 5,000 different mixes to get this right, to hit our targets.
And they worked absolutely very, very, very hard.
So then we went forward and built our production line in China.
We don't build this production equipment any longer in the U.S., unfortunately.
We did the line install over the summer.
We started right there, with absolutely nothing.
You're seeing for the first time, a brand new drywall production line, not made using gypsum at all.
That's the finished production line there.
We got our first panel out on December third.
That is the slurry being poured onto paper, basically. That's the line running.
The exciting thing is, look at the faces of the people.
These are people who worked this project for two to three years.
And they are so excited. That's the first board off the line.
Our Vice President of Operation kissing the board. Obviously very, very excited.
But this has a huge, huge impact on the environment.
We signed the first panel just a few weeks after that, had a great signing ceremony, leading to people hopefully using these products across the world.
And we've got Cradle-to-Cradle Gold on this thing.
We happened to win, just recently, the Green Product of the Year for "The Re-Invention of Drywall," from Popular Science.
Thank you. Thank you.
So here is what we learned: 8,000 gallons of gas equivalent to build one house.
You probably had no idea. It's like driving around the world six times.
We must change everything.
Look around the room: chairs, wood, everything around us has to change or we're not going to lick this problem.
Don't listen to the people who say you can't do this, because anyone can.
And these job losses, we can fix them with green-collar jobs.
We've got four plants. We're building this stuff around the country.
We're going as fast as we can.
Two and a half million cars worth of gypsum, you know, CO2 generated. Right?
So what will you do? I'll tell you what I did and why I did it. And I know my time's up.
Those are my kids, Natalie and David.
When they have their kids, 2050, they'd better look back at Grandpa and say, "Hey, you gave it a good shot. You did the best you could with the team that you had."
So my hope is that when you leave TED, you will look at reducing your carbon footprint in however you can do it.
And if you don't know how, please find me -- I will help you.
Last but not least, Bill Gates, I know you invented Windows.
Wait till you see, maybe next year, what kind of windows we've invented.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Dawn and the train are both breaking when Ethic and Hedge arrive in the woods.
The adventurers have recovered the first artifact the Node of Power and have come to the 198forest in search of the second.
Here theyre welcomed by the director of the colony, Octavia.
She established this treehouse sanctuary after the robots freed everyone from having to work.
It was meant to be a haven where people could follow their passions, take up crafts, and find fulfillment.
Which they did at first.
Some years ago everyone forgot the point.
They abandoned arts and crafts and instead just painted and exhibited pictures of themselves over, and over, and over.
The location of the second artifact is no secret; its in a tower, guarded by a garrison of bots, a bottomless ravine, and who knows what other traps.
As soon as the tower went up with the node inside, human communication across the land went dark.
Octavias been after it for years, but try as she might, the defenses thwart her.
In order to even get to the tower, the team will need a distraction.
Octavia has an idea: stir up the people through some well-intentioned vandalism.
The residents paintings are all squares that come in different sizes, all an odd number of pixels across.
Helper-bots pick up the finished portraits and hang them in public places for everyone to admire.
Theres a slim margin of time when Hedge can access the paintings.
If he were to deface each one with an X, the people would blame the helper-bots, creating just the distraction the team needs.
If only it were so easy.
Hedge cant just paint an X his painting processor requires very specific instructions.
Treating the paintings as square grids, he can fill in one pixel, or little square, at a time.
He can move forwards and make 90 degree turns over the canvas, but cant move diagonally.
How does Ethic program Hedge to paint an X over each portrait?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Heres a hint.
Try drawing a square grid like this, and simulating Hedges path over it.
What patterns can you find to guide him?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
The challenge here is to craft a set of instructions that will work for any square grid.
Fortunately, one of the strengths of programming is the flexibility to solve not just one problem, but a whole class of them all at once.
It often helps to start with one case, and work towards the general.
Lets say we had this square.
Hedge can measure the length of its sides and store that number as a variable.
Now, what we need is a plan for how Hedge will paint an X, pixel by pixel.
Theres more than one right answer for how to do this; lets look at two.
First, what if Hedge went row by row, like a typewriter?
If its a 9 pixel by 9 pixel painting, in the first row hed paint, skip 7, and then paint again.
In the second row hed skip the first, paint, skip 5, and paint.
And so on.
The pattern here is that for each row the pixels skipped at the beginning go up by one, and the pixels skipped in the middle go down by 2.
Things get more complicated when Hedge reaches the center.
Here theres a row with just one pixel painted.
Then the whole thing reverses the number of pixels skipped goes down by one each time on the left, and up by two each time in the middle.
Instructing Hedge to do this with a series of loops will work and is a perfectly fine solution.
The main drawback is that this requires quite a bit of logic knowing what to do in the middle, when to reverse the process, and exactly how to reverse it.
So how might we approach this so that the logic remains consistent from start to finish?
The key insight is to look at a grid as a series of concentric squares.
Each square follows the same pattern painted pixels in the corners, and unaltered pixels in between.
So if we can figure out a way to paint one nested square, transition to the next, and repeat, we can paint them all.
Painting the outermost one is easy.
Start in a corner and paint that pixel.
If we call the length of the painting n, fly forward n minus 1 spaces.
Paint another pixel, and turn right.
Now do the whole thing again and again.
Now move forward one less space, turn right, fly forward once, and Hedge will be in the next concentric square and ready to repeat the whole process.
Each square is n minus 2 pixels smaller than the last in length and width, and we can follow this spiral pattern all the way to the center with a loop and a variable that tracks how far Hedge should fly.
Is one of these methods better than the other?
It really depends on what you value.
The strength of the spiral is the simplicity of finding a pattern and reusing the same logic from start to finish.
The advantage of the typewriter approach is that its a more generalized solution, meaning it can be adapted much more simply to fill in any pattern.
For Ethics sake, either will do just fine.
So heres what happens.
Hedge rapidly defaces all of the portraits.
And within moments cries of anguish break out all over the forest.
The garrison guarding the tower abandon their posts to calm the agitated people, and Ethic, Hedge, and Octavia slip through and nearly slip into the depths of the gorge standing between them and the tower.
This is a world-changing invention.
The smoke alarm has saved perhaps hundreds of thousands of lives, worldwide.
But smoke alarms don't prevent fires.
Every year in the USA, over 20,000 are killed or injured with 350,000 home fires.
And one of the main causes of all these fires is electricity.
What if we could prevent electrical fires before they start?
Well, a couple of friends and I figured out how to do this.
So how does electricity ignite residential fires?
Well it turns out that the main causes are faulty and misused appliances and electrical wiring.
Our invention had to address all of these issues.
So what about circuit breakers?
Well, Thomas Edison invented the circuit breaker in 1879.
This is 130-year-old technology, and this is a problem, because over 80 percent of all home electrical fires start below the safety threshold of circuit breakers.
Hmmm ...
So we considered all of this. And we realized that electrical appliances must be able to communicate directly with the power receptacle itself.
Any electrical device -- an appliance, an extension cord, whatever -- must be able to tell the power outlet, "Hey, power outlet, I'm drawing too much current. Shut me off now, before I start a fire."
And the power outlet needs to be smart enough to do it.
So here is what we did. We put a 10-cent digital transponder, a data tag, in the appliance plug.
And we put an inexpensive, wireless data reader inside the receptacle so they could communicate.
Now, every home electrical system becomes an intelligent network.
The appliance's safe operating parameters are embedded into its plug.
If too much current is flowing, the intelligent receptacle turns itself off, and prevents another fire from starting.
We call this technology EFCI, Electrical Fault Circuit Interrupter.
Okay, two more points. Every year in the USA, roughly 2,500 children are admitted to emergency rooms for shock and burn injuries related to electrical receptacles. And this is crazy.
An intelligent receptacle prevents injuries because the power is always off, until an intelligent plug is detected. Simple.
Now, besides saving lives, perhaps the greatest benefit of intelligent power is in its energy savings.
This invention will reduce global energy consumption by allowing remote control and automation of every outlet in every home and business.
Now you can choose to reduce your home energy bill by automatically cycling heavy loads like air conditioners and heaters.
Hotels and businesses can shut down unused rooms from a central location, or even a cell phone.
There are 10 billion electrical outlets in North America alone.
The potential energy savings is very, very significant.
So far we've applied for 414 patent claims.
Of those, 186 have been granted: 228 are in process.
And I'm pleased to announce that just three weeks ago we received our first international recognition, the 2009 CES Innovation Award.
So, to conclude, intelligent power can, globally, save thousands of lives, prevent tens of thousands of injuries, and eliminate tens of billions of dollars in property damage every single year, while significantly reducing global energy consumption.
In the spirit of this year's TED Conference, we think this is a powerful, world-changing invention.
And I'd like to thank Chris for this opportunity to unveil our technology with you, and soon the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Its June, just after a heavy rainfall, and the sky is filling with creatures we wouldnt normally expect to find there.
At first glance, this might be a disturbing sight.
But for the lucky males and females of Solenopsis invicta, otherwise known as fire ants, its a day of romance.
This is the nuptial flight, when thousands of reproduction-capable male and female ants, called alates, take wing for the first and last time.
But even for successful males who manage to avoid winged predators, this mating frenzy will prove lethal.
And for a successfully mated female, her work is only beginning.
Having secured a lifetime supply of sperm from her departed mate, our new queen must now single-handedly start an entire colony.
Descending to the ground, she searches for a suitable spot to build her nest.
Ideally, she can find somewhere with loose, easy-to-dig soil like farmland already disturbed by human activity.
Once she finds the perfect spot, she breaks off her wings creating the stubs that establish her royal status.
Then, she starts digging a descending tunnel ending in a chamber.
Here the queen begins laying her eggs, about ten per day, and the first larvae hatch within a week.
Over the next three weeks, the new queen relies on a separate batch of unfertilized eggs to nourish both herself and her brood, losing half her body weight in the process.
Thankfully, after about 20 days, these larvae grow into the first generation of workers, ready to forage for food and sustain their shrunken queen.
Her daughters will have to work quickly though returning their mother to good health is urgent.
In the surrounding area, dozens of neighboring queens are building their own ant armies.
These colonies have peacefully coexisted so far, but once workers appear, a phenomenon known as brood-raiding begins.
Workers from nests up to several meters away begin to steal offspring from our queen.
Our colony retaliates, but new waves of raiders from even further away overwhelm the workers.
Within hours, the raiders have taken our queens entire brood supply to the largest nearby nest and the queens surviving daughters abandon her.
Chasing her last chance of survival, the queen follows the raiding trail to the winning nest.
She fends off other losing queens and the defending nests workers, fighting her way to the top of the brood pile.
Her daughters help their mother succeed where other queens fail defeating the reigning monarch, and usurping the brood pile.
Eventually, all the remaining challengers fail, until only one queen and one brood pile remains.
Now presiding over several hundred workers in the neighborhoods largest nest, our victorious queen begins aiding her colony in its primary goal: reproduction.
For the next several years, the colony only produces sterile workers.
But once their population exceeds about 23,000, it changes course.
From now on, every spring, the colony will produce fertile alate males and females.
The colony spawns these larger ants throughout the early summer, and returns to worker production in the fall.
After heavy rainfalls, these alates take to the skies, and spread their queens genes up to a couple hundred meters downwind.
But to contribute to this annual mating frenzy, the colony must continue to thrive as one massive super-organism.
Every day, younger ants feed the queen and tend to the brood, while older workers forage for food and defend the nest.
When intruders strike, these older warriors fend them off using poisonous venom.
After rainfalls, the colony comes together, using the wet dirt to expand their nest.
And when a disastrous flood drowns their home, the sisters band together into a massive living raft carrying their queen to safety.
But no matter how resilient, the life of a colony must come to an end.
After about 8 years, our queen runs out of sperm and can no longer replace dying workers.
The nests population dwindles, and eventually, theyre taken over by a neighboring colony.
Our queens reign is over, but her genetic legacy lives on.
I'm going to discuss with you three of my inventions that can have an effect on 10 to a 100 million people, which we will hope to see happen.
We discussed, in the prior film, some of the old things that we did, like stents and insulin pumps for the diabetic.
And I'd like to talk very briefly about three new inventions that will change the lives of many people.
At the present time, it takes an average of three hours after the first symptoms of a heart attack are recognized by the patient, before that patient arrives at an emergency room.
And people with silent ischemia -- which, translated into English, means they don't have any symptoms -- it takes even longer for them to get to the hospital.
The AMI, Acute Myocardial Infarction, which is a doctor's big word so they can charge you more money -- (Laughter) -- means a heart attack. Annual incidence: 1.2 million Americans.
Mortality: 300,000 people dying each year.
About half of them, 600,000, have permanent damage to their heart that will cause them to have very bad problems later on.
Thus 900,000 people either have died or have significant damage to their heart muscle.
Symptoms are often denied by the patient, particularly us men, because we are very brave. We are very brave, and we don't want to admit that I'm having a hell of a chest pain.
Then, approximately 25 percent of all patients never have any symptoms.
What are we going to do about them? How can we save their lives?
It's particularly true of diabetics and elderly women.
Well, what is needed for the earliest possible warning of a heart attack?
A means to determine if there's a complete blockage of a coronary artery.
That, ladies and gentlemen, is a heart attack.
The means consist of noting something a little technical, ST segment elevation of the electrogram -- translated into English, that means that if there's an electrical signal in the heart, and one part of the ECG -- which we call the ST segment -- elevates, that is a sure sign of a heart attack.
And if we had a computer put into the body of a person who's at risk, we could know, before they even have symptoms, that they're having a heart attack, to save their life.
Well, the doctor can program a level of this ST elevation voltage that will trigger an emergency alarm, vibration like your cell phone, but right by your clavicle bone.
And when it goes beep, beep, beep, you better do something about it, because if you want to live you have to get to some medical treatment.
So we have to try these devices out because the FDA won't just let us use them on people unless we try it out first, and the best model for this happens to be pigs.
And what we tried with the pig was external electrodes on the skin, like you see in an emergency room, and I'm going to show you why they don't work very well.
And then we put a lead, which is a wire, in the right ventricle inside the heart, which does the electrogram, which is the signal voltage from inside the heart.
Well, with the pig, at the baseline, before we blocked the pig's artery to simulate a heart attack, that was the signal.
After 43 seconds, even an expert couldn't tell the difference, and after three minutes -- well, if you really studied it, you'd see a difference.
But what happened when we looked inside the pig's heart, to the electrogram?
There was the baseline -- first of all, a much bigger and more reliable signal.
Second of all, I'll bet even you people who are untrained can see the difference, and we see here an ST segment elevation right after this sharp line.
Look at the difference there. It doesn't take much -- every layperson could see that difference, and computers can be programmed to easily detect it.
Then, look at that after three minutes.
We see that the signal that's actually in the heart, we can use it to tell people that they're having a heart attack even before they have symptoms so we can save their life.
Then we tried it with my son, Dr. Tim Fischell, we tried it on some human patients who had to have a stent put in.
Well, he kept the balloon filled to block the artery, to simulate a blockage, which is what a heart attack is.
And it's not hard to see that -- the baseline is the first picture on the upper left.
Next to it, at 30 seconds, you see this rise here, then this rise -- that's the ST elevation.
And if we had a computer that could detect it, we could tell you you're having a heart attack so early it could save your life and prevent congestive heart failure.
And then he did it again. We filled the balloon again a few minutes later and here you see, even after 10 seconds, a great rise in this piece, which we can have computers inside, under your chest like a pacemaker, with a wire into your heart like a pacemaker.
And computers don't go to sleep.
We have a little battery and on this little battery that computer will run for five years without needing replacement.
What does the system look like?
Well, on the left is the IMD, which is Implantable Medical Device, and tonight in the tent you can see it -- they've exhibited it.
It's about this big, the size of a pacemaker.
It's implanted with very conventional techniques.
And the EXD is an External Device that you can have on your night table.
It'll wake you up and tell you to get your tail to the emergency room when the thing goes off because, if you don't, you're in deep doo-doo.
And then, finally, a programmer that will set the level of the stimulation, which is the level which says you are having a heart attack.
The FDA says, OK, test this final device after it's built in some animal, which we said is a pig, so we had to get this pig to have a heart attack.
And when you go to the farmyard, you can't easily get pigs to have heart attacks, so we said, well, we're experts in stents.
Tonight you'll see some of our invented stents.
We said, so we'll put in a stent, but we're not going to put in a stent that we'd put in people.
We're putting in a copper stent, and this copper stent erodes the artery and causes heart attacks.
That's not very nice, but, after all, we had to find out what the answer is.
So we took two copper stents and we put it in the artery of this pig, and let me show you the result that's very gratifying as far as people who have heart disease are concerned.
So there it was, Thursday morning we stopped the pig's medication and there is his electrogram, the signal from inside the pig's heart coming out by radio telemetry.
Then, on Friday at 6:43, he began to get certain signs, which later we had the pig run around -- I'm not going to go into this early stage.
But look what happened at 10:06 after we removed this pig's medication that kept him from having a heart attack.
Any one of you now is an expert on ST elevation. Can you see it there?
Can you see it in the picture after the big rise of the QRS -- you see ST elevation?
This pig at 10:06 was having a heart attack.
What happens after you have the heart attack, this blockage?
Your rhythm becomes irregular, and that's what happened 45 minutes later.
Then, ventricular fibrillation, the heart quivers instead of beats -- this is just before death of the pig -- and then the pig died; it went flat-line.
But we had a little bit over an hour where we could've saved this pig's life.
Well, because of the FDA, we didn't save the pig's life, because we need to do this type of animal research for humans.
But when it comes to the sake of a human, we can save their life.
We can save the lives of people who are at high risk for a heart attack.
What is the response to acute myocardial infarction, a heart attack, today?
Well, you feel some chest pain or indigestion.
It's not all that bad; you decide not to do anything.
Several hours pass and it gets worse, and even the man won't ignore it.
Finally, you go to the emergency room.
You wait as burns and other critical patients are treated, because 75 percent of the patients who go to an emergency room with chest pains don't have AMI, so you're not taken very seriously.
They finally see you. It takes more time to get your electrocardiogram on your skin and diagnose it, and it's hard to do because they don't have the baseline data, which the computer we put in you gets.
Finally, if you're lucky, you are treated in three or four hours after the incident, but the heart muscle has died.
And that is the typical treatment in the advanced world -- not Africa -- that's the typical treatment in the advanced world today.
So we developed the AngelMed Guardian System and we have a device inside this patient, called the Implanted AngelMed Guardian.
And when you have a blockage, the alarm goes off and it sends the alarm and the electrogram to an external device, which gets your baseline electrogram from 24 hours ago and the one that caused the alarm, so you can take it to the emergency room and show them, and say, take care of me right away.
Then it goes to a network operations center, where they get your data from your patient database that's been put in at some central location, say, in the United States.
Then it goes to a diagnostic center, and within one minute of your heart attack, your signal appears on the screen of a computer and the computer analyzes what your problem is.
And the person who's there, the medical practitioner, calls you -- this is also a cell phone -- and says, "Mr. Smith, you're in deep doo-doo; you have a problem.
We've called the ambulance. The ambulance is on the way.
It'll pick you up, and then we're going to call your doctor, tell him about it.
We're going to send him the signal that we have, that says you have a heart attack, and we're going to send the signal to the hospital and we're going to have it analyzed there, and there you're going to be with your doctor and you'll be taken care of so you won't die of a heart attack."
That's the first invention that I wanted to describe.
(Applause) And now I want to talk about something entirely different.
At first I didn't think migraine headaches were a big problem because I'd never had a migraine headache, but then I spoke to some people who have three or four every week of their life, and their lives are being totally ruined by it.
We have a mission statement for our company doing migraine, which is, "Prevent or ameliorate migraine headaches by the application of a safe, controlled magnetic pulse applied, as needed, by the patient."
Now, you're probably very few physicists here.
If you're a physicist you'd know there's a certain Faraday's Law, which says if I apply a magnetic pulse on salt water -- that's your brains by the way -- it'll generate electric currents, and the electric current in the brain can erase a migraine headache.
That's what we have discovered.
So here's a picture of what we're doing.
The patients who have a migraine preceded by an aura have a band of excited neurons -- that's shown in red -- that moves at three to five millimeters a minute towards the mid-brain.
And when it hits the mid-brain, that's when the headache begins.
There's this migraine that is preceded by a visual aura, and this visual aura, by the way -- and I'll show you a picture -- but it sort of begins with little dancing lights, gets bigger and bigger until it fills your whole visual field.
And what we tried was this; here is a device called the Cadwell Model MES10.
Weighs about 70 pounds, has a wire about an inch in diameter.
And here's one of the patients who has an aura and always has a headache, bad one, after the aura. What do we do?
This is what an aura looks like.
It's sort of funny dancing lights, shown there on the left and right side.
And that's a fully developed visual aura, as we see on top.
In the middle, our experimentalist, the neurologist, who said, "I'm going to move this down a little and I'm going to erase half your aura."
And, by God, the neurologist did erase it, and that's the middle picture: half of the aura erased by a short magnetic pulse.
What does that mean?
That means that the magnetic pulse is generating an electric current that's interfering with the erroneous electrical activity in the brain.
And finally he says, "OK, now I'm going to -- " all of the aura get erased with an appropriately placed magnetic pulse.
What is the result? We designed a magnetic depolarizer that looks like this, that you could have -- a lady, in her pocket book -- and when you get an aura you can try it and see how it works.
Well, the next thing they have to show is what was on ABC News, Channel 7, last week in New York City, in the 11 o'clock news.
Anchor: For anyone who suffers from migraine headaches -- and there are 30 million Americans who do -- tonight: a possible answer.
Eyewitness news reporter Stacy Sager tonight, with a small and portable machine that literally zaps your migraines away.
Christina Sidebottom: Well, my first reaction was that it was -- looked awfully gun-like, and it was very strange.
Stacy Sager: But for Christina Sidebottom, almost anything was worth trying if it could stop a migraine.
It may look silly or even frightening as you walk around with it in your purse, but researchers here in Ohio organizing clinical trials for this migraine zapper, say it is scientifically sound -- that, in fact, when the average person gets a migraine, it's caused by something similar to an electrical impulse.
The zapper creates a magnetic field to counteract that.
Yousef Mohammed: In other words, we're treating electricity with electricity, rather than treating electricity with the chemicals that we're using nowadays.
SS: But is it safe to use everyday?
Experts say the research has actually been around for more than a decade, and more long-term studies need to be done. Christina now swears by it.
CS: It's been the most wonderful thing for my migraine.
SS: Researchers are hoping to present their studies to the FDA this summer.
Robert Fischell: And that is the invention to treat migraines.
(Applause) You see, the problem is, 30 million Americans have migraine headaches, and we need a means to treat it, and I think that we now have it.
And this is the first device that we did, and I'm going to talk about my second wish, which has something to do with this.
Our conclusions from our studies so far, at three research centers, is there is a marked improvement in pain levels after using it just once.
The most severe headaches responded better after we did it several times, and the unexpected finding indicates that even established headaches, not only those with aura, get treated and get diminished.
And auras can be erased and the migraine, then, does not occur.
And that is the migraine invention that we are talking about and that we are working on.
(Applause) The third and last invention began with an idea.
Epilepsy can best be treated by responsive electrical stimulation.
Now, why do we use -- add on, nearly, an epileptic focus?
Now, unfortunately, us technical people, unlike Mr. Bono, have to get into all these technical words.
Well, "responsive electrical stimulation" means that we sense, at a place in your brain which is called an "epileptic focus," which is where the epileptic seizure begins -- we sense there, that it's going to happen, and then we respond by applying an electrical energy at that spot, which erases the errant signal so that you don't get the clinical manifestations of the migraine headache.
We use current pacemaker defibrillator technology that's used for the heart.
We thought we could adapt it for the brain.
The device could be implanted under the scalp to be totally hidden and avoid wire breakage, which occurs if you put it in the chest and you try to move your neck around.
Form a company to develop a neuro-pacemaker for epilepsy, as well as other diseases of the brain, because all diseases of the brain are a result of some electrical malfunction in it, that causes many, if not all, of brain disorders.
We formed a company called NeuroPace and we started work on responsive neurostimulation, and this is a picture of what the device looked like, that's placed into the cranial bone.
This is probably a better picture.
Here we have our device in which we put in a frame.
There's a cut made in the scalp; it's opened; the neurosurgeon has a template; he marks it around, and uses a dental burr to remove a piece of the cranial bone exactly the size of our device.
And tonight, you'll be able to see the device in the tent.
And then with four screws, we put in a frame, then we snap in the device and we run with wires -- the one shown in green will go to the surface of the brain with electrodes, to the epileptic focus, the origin of the epilepsy, where we can sense the electrical signal and have computer analysis that tells us when to hit it with some electrical current to prevent the clinical manifestation of the seizure.
In the blue wire, we see what's called a deep brain electrode.
If that's the source of the epilepsy, we can attack that as well.
The comprehensive solution: this is the device; it's about one inches by two inches and, oddly enough, just the thickness of most cranial bones.
The advantages of responsive neurostimulation: It can detect and terminate seizures before the clinical symptoms occur, provide stimulation only when needed, can be turned off if seizures disappear; it has minimal side effects -- as a matter of fact, in all our clinical trials to date, we've seen no side effects in the 40 or so patients in whom it's been implanted -- and it's invisible, cosmetically hidden, so, if you have epilepsy and you have the device, no one will know it because you can't tell that it's there.
And this shows what an electroencephalogram is, and on the left is the signal of a spontaneous seizure of one of the patients.
Then we stimulated, and you see how that heavy black line and then you see the electroencephalogram signal going to normal, which means they did not get the epileptic seizure.
That concludes my discussion of epilepsy, which is the third invention that I want to discuss here this afternoon.
(Applause) I have three wishes. Well, I can't do much about Africa.
I'm a tech; I'm into medical gadgetry, which is mostly high-tech stuff like Mr. Bono talked about.
The first wish is to use the epilepsy responsive neurostimulator, called RNS, for Responsive NeuroStimulator -- that's a brilliant acronym -- for the treatment of other brain disorders.
Well, if we're going to do it for epilepsy, why the hell not try it for something else?
Then you saw what that device looked like, that the woman was using to fix her migraines?
I tell you this: that's something which some research engineer like me would concoct, not a real designer of good equipment.
(Laughter) We want to have some people, who really know how to do this, perform human engineering studies to develop the optimum design for the portable device for treating migraine headaches.
And some of the sponsors of this TED meeting are such organizations.
Then we're going to challenge the TED attendees to come up with a way to improve health care in the USA, where we have problems that Africa doesn't have.
And by reducing malpractice litigation -- malpractice litigation is not an African problem; it's an American problem.
(Applause) So, to get quickly to my first wish -- the brain operates by electrical signals.
If the electrical signals create a brain disorder, electro-stimulation can overcome that disorder by acting on the brain's neurons.
In other words, if you've screwed up electrical signals, maybe, by putting other electrical signals from a computer in the brain, we can counteract that.
A signal in the brain that triggers brain dysfunction might be sensed as a trigger for electro-stimulation like we're doing with epilepsy.
But even if there is no signal, electro-stimulation of an appropriate part of the brain can turn off a brain disorder.
And consider treating psychotic disorders -- and I want this involved with the TED group -- such as obsessive-compulsive disorder that, presently, is not well treated with drugs, and includes five million Americans.
And Mr. Fischer, and his group at NeuroPace, and myself believe that we can have a dramatic effect in improving OCD in America and in the world.
That is the first wish.
(Applause) The second wish is, at the present time, the clinical trials of transcranial magnetic stimulators -- that's what TMS means, device to treat migraine headaches -- appears to be quite successful.
Well, that's the good news.
The present portable device is far from optimally designed, both as to human factors as appearance.
I think she said it looks like a gun. A lot of people don't like guns.
(Laughter) Engage a company having prior successes for human factors engineering and industrial design to optimize the design of the first portable TMS device that will be sold to the patients who have migraine headaches.
And that is the second wish.
(Applause) And, of the 100,000-dollar prize money, that TED was so generous to give me, I am donating 50,000 dollars to the NeuroPace people to get on with the treatment of OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and I'm making another 50,000 available for a company to optimize the design of the device for migraines.
And that's how I'll use my 100,000-dollar prize money.
(Applause) Well, the third and final wish is somewhat -- unfortunately, it's much more complicated because it involves lawyers.
(Laughter) Well, medical malpractice litigation in the US has escalated the cost of malpractice insurance, so that competent physicians are leaving their practice.
Lawyers take cases on contingency with the hope of a big share of a big settlement by a sympathetic jury, because this patient really ended up badly.
The high cost of health care in the US is partly due to litigation and insurance costs.
I've seen pictures, graphs in today's USA Today showing it skyrocketing out of control, and this is one factor.
Well, how can the TED community help with this situation?
I have a couple of ideas to begin with.
As a starting point for discussion with the TED group, a major part of the problem is the nature of the written extent of informed consent that the patient or spouse must read and sign.
For example, I asked the epilepsy people what are they using for informed consent.
Would you believe, 12 pages, single space, the patient has to read before they're in our trial to cure their epilepsy?
What do you think someone has at the end of reading 12 single-spaced pages?
They don't understand what the hell it's about.
(Laughter) That's the present system. How about making a video?
We have entertainment people here; we have people who know how to do videos, with visual presentation of the anatomy and procedure done with animation.
Everybody knows that we can do better with a visual thing that can be interactive with the patient, where they see the video and they're being videoed and they press, do you understand this? No, I don't.
Well, then let's go to a simpler explanation.
Then there's a simpler one and, oh yes, I understand that.
Well, press the button and you're on record, you understand.
And that is one of the ideas.
Now, also a video is done of the patient or spouse and medical presenter, with the patient agreeing that he understands the procedure to be done, including all the possible failure modes.
The patient or spouse agrees not to file a lawsuit if one of the known procedure failures occurs.
Now, in America, in fact, you cannot give up your right to trial by jury.
However, if a video is there that everything was explained to you, and you have it all in the video file, it'll be much less likely that some hotshot lawyer will take this case on contingency, because it won't be nearly as good a case.
If a medical error occurs, the patient or spouse agrees to a settlement for fair compensation by arbitration instead of going to court.
That would save hundreds of millions of dollars in legal costs in the United States and would decrease the cost of medicine for everyone.
These are just some starting points.
And, so there, that's the end of all my wishes.
I wish I had more wishes but three is what I've got and there they are.
(Applause)
This is called Hooked on a Feeling: The Pursuit of Happiness and Human Design.
I put up a somewhat dour Darwin, but a very happy chimp up there.
My first point is that the pursuit of happiness is obligatory.
Man wishes to be happy, only wishes to be happy, and cannot wish not to be so.
We are wired to pursue happiness, not only to enjoy it, but to want more and more of it.
So given that that's true, how good are we at increasing our happiness?
Well, we certainly try.
If you look on the Amazon site, there are over 2,000 titles with advice on the seven habits, the nine choices, the 10 secrets, the 14,000 thoughts that are supposed to bring happiness.
Now another way we try to increase our happiness is we medicate ourselves.
And so there's over 120 million prescriptions out there for antidepressants.
Prozac was really the first absolute blockbuster drug.
It was clean, efficient, there was no high, there was really no danger, it had no street value.
In 1995, illegal drugs were a $400 billion business, representing eight percent of world trade, roughly the same as gas and oil.
These routes to happiness haven't really increased happiness very much.
One problem that's happening now is, although the rates of happiness are about as flat as the surface of the moon, depression and anxiety are rising.
Some people say this is because we have better diagnosis, and more people are being found out.
It isn't just that. We're seeing it all over the world.
In the United States right now there are more suicides than homicides.
There is a rash of suicide in China.
And the World Health Organization predicts by the year 2020 that depression will be the second largest cause of disability.
Now the good news here is that if you take surveys from around the world, we see that about three quarters of people will say they are at least pretty happy.
But this does not follow any of the usual trends.
For example, these two show great growth in income, absolutely flat happiness curves.
My field, the field of psychology, hasn't done a whole lot to help us move forward in understanding human happiness.
In part, we have the legacy of Freud, who was a pessimist, who said that pursuit of happiness is a doomed quest, is propelled by infantile aspects of the individual that can never be met in reality.
He said, "One feels inclined to say that the intention that man should be happy is not included in the plan of creation."
So the ultimate goal of psychoanalytic psychotherapy was really what Freud called ordinary misery.
(Laughter) And Freud in part reflects the anatomy of the human emotion system -- which is that we have both a positive and a negative system, and our negative system is extremely sensitive.
So for example, we're born loving the taste of something sweet and reacting aversively to the taste of something bitter.
We also find that people are more averse to losing than they are happy to gain.
The formula for a happy marriage is five positive remarks, or interactions, for every one negative.
And that's how powerful the one negative is.
Especially expressions of contempt or disgust, well you really need a lot of positives to upset that.
I also put in here the stress response.
We're wired for dangers that are immediate, that are physical, that are imminent, and so our body goes into an incredible reaction where endogenous opioids come in.
We have a system that is really ancient, and really there for physical danger.
And so over time, this becomes a stress response, which has enormous effects on the body.
Cortisol floods the brain; it destroys hippocampal cells and memory, and can lead to all kinds of health problems.
But unfortunately, we need this system in part.
If we were only governed by pleasure we would not survive.
We really have two command posts.
Emotions are short-lived intense responses to challenge and to opportunity.
And each one of them allows us to click into alternate selves that tune in, turn on, drop out thoughts, perceptions, feelings and memories.
We tend to think of emotions as just feelings.
But in fact, emotions are an all-systems alert that change what we remember, what kind of decisions we make, and how we perceive things.
So let me go forward to the new science of happiness.
We've come away from the Freudian gloom, and people are now actively studying this.
And one of the key points in the science of happiness is that happiness and unhappiness are not endpoints of a single continuum.
The Freudian model is really one continuum that, as you get less miserable, you get happier.
And that isn't true -- when you get less miserable, you get less miserable.
And that happiness is a whole other end of the equation.
And it's been missing. It's been missing from psychotherapy.
So when people's symptoms go away, they tend to recur, because there isn't a sense of the other half -- of what pleasure, happiness, compassion, gratitude, what are the positive emotions.
And of course we know this intuitively, that happiness is not just the absence of misery.
But somehow it was not put forward until very recently, seeing these as two parallel systems.
So that the body can both look for opportunity and also protect itself from danger, at the same time.
And they're sort of two reciprocal and dynamically interacting systems.
People have also wanted to deconstruct.
We use this word "happy," and it's this very large umbrella of a term.
And then three emotions for which there are no English words: fiero, which is the pride in accomplishment of a challenge; schadenfreude, which is happiness in another's misfortune, a malicious pleasure; and naches, which is a pride and joy in one's children.
Absent from this list, and absent from any discussions of happiness, are happiness in another's happiness.
We don't seem to have a word for that.
We are very sensitive to the negative, but it is in part offset by the fact that we have a positivity.
We're also born pleasure-seekers.
Babies love the taste of sweet and hate the taste of bitter.
They love to touch smooth surfaces rather than rough ones.
They like to look at beautiful faces rather than plain faces.
They like to listen to consonant melodies instead of dissonant melodies.
Babies really are born with a lot of innate pleasures.
There was once a statement made by a psychologist that said that 80 percent of the pursuit of happiness is really just about the genes, and it's as difficult to become happier as it is to become taller.
That's nonsense.
There is a decent contribution to happiness from the genes -- about 50 percent -- but there is still that 50 percent that is unaccounted for.
Let's just go into the brain for a moment, and see where does happiness arise from in evolution.
We have basically at least two systems here, and they both are very ancient.
One is the reward system, and that's fed by the chemical dopamine.
And it starts in the ventral tegmental area.
It goes to the nucleus accumbens, all the way up to the prefrontal cortex, orbital frontal cortex, where decisions are made, high level.
This was originally seen as a system that was the pleasure system of the brain.
In the 1950s, Olds and Milner put electrodes into the brain of a rat.
And the rat would just keep pressing that bar thousands and thousands and thousands of times.
It wouldn't eat. It wouldn't sleep. It wouldn't have sex.
It wouldn't do anything but press this bar.
So they assumed this must be, you know, the brain's orgasmatron.
It turned out that it wasn't, that it really is a system of motivation, a system of wanting.
It gives objects what's called incentive salience.
It makes something look so attractive that you just have to go after it.
That's something different from the system that is the pleasure system, which simply says, "I like this."
The pleasure system, as you see, which is the internal opiates, there is a hormone oxytocin, is widely spread throughout the brain.
Dopamine system, the wanting system, is much more centralized.
The other thing about positive emotions is that they have a universal signal.
And we see here the smile.
And the universal signal is not just raising the corner of the lips to the zygomatic major.
It's also crinkling the outer corner of the eye, the orbicularis oculi.
So you see, even 10-month-old babies, when they see their mother, will show this particular kind of smile.
Extroverts use it more than introverts.
People who are relieved of depression show it more after than before.
So if you want to unmask a true look of happiness, you will look for this expression.
Our pleasures are really ancient.
And we learn, of course, many, many pleasures, but many of them are base. And one of them, of course, is biophilia -- that we have a response to the natural world that's very profound.
Very interesting studies done on people recovering from surgery, who found that people who faced a brick wall versus people who looked out on trees and nature, the people who looked out on the brick wall were in the hospital longer, needed more medication, and had more medical complications.
There is something very restorative about nature, and it's part of how we are tuned.
Humans, particularly so, we're very imitative creatures.
And we imitate from almost the second we are born.
Here is a three-week-old baby.
And if you stick your tongue out at this baby, the baby will do the same.
We are social beings from the beginning.
And even studies of cooperation show that cooperation between individuals lights up reward centers of the brain.
One problem that psychology has had is instead of looking at this intersubjectivity -- or the importance of the social brain to humans who come into the world helpless and need each other tremendously -- is that they focus instead on the self and self-esteem, and not self-other.
It's sort of "me," not "we."
And I think this has been a really tremendous problem that goes against our biology and nature, and hasn't made us any happier at all.
Because when you think about it, people are happiest when in flow, when they're absorbed in something out in the world, when they're with other people, when they're active, engaged in sports, focusing on a loved one, learning, having sex, whatever.
They're not sitting in front of the mirror trying to figure themselves out, or thinking about themselves.
These are not the periods when you feel happiest.
The other thing is, that a piece of evidence is, is if you look at computerized text analysis of people who commit suicide, what you find there, and it's quite interesting, is use of the first person singular -- "I," "me," "my," not "we" and "us" -- and the letters are less hopeless than they are really alone.
And being alone is very unnatural to the human.
There is a profound need to belong.
But there are ways in which our evolutionary history can really trip us up.
Because, for example, the genes don't care whether we're happy, they care that we replicate, that we pass our genes on.
So for example we have three systems that underlie reproduction, because it's so important.
There's lust, which is just wanting to have sex.
And that's really mediated by the sex hormones.
Romantic attraction, that gets into the desire system.
And that's dopamine-fed. And that's, "I must have this one person."
There's attachment, which is oxytocin, and the opiates, which says, "This is a long-term bond."
See the problem is that, as humans, these three can separate.
So a person can be in a long term attachment, become romantically infatuated with someone else, and want to have sex with a third person.
The other way in which our genes can sometimes lead us astray is in social status.
We are very acutely aware of our social status and always seek to further and increase it.
Now in the animal world, there is only one way to increase status, and that's dominance.
I seize command by physical prowess, and I keep it by beating my chest, and you make submissive gestures.
Now, the human has a whole other way to rise to the top, and that is a prestige route, which is freely conferred.
Someone has expertise and knowledge, and knows how to do things, and we give that person status.
And that's clearly the way for us to create many more niches of status so that people don't have to be lower on the status hierarchy as they are in the animal world.
The data isn't terribly supportive of money buying happiness.
But it's not irrelevant.
So if you look at questions like this, life satisfaction, you see life satisfaction going up with each rung of income.
You see mental distress going up with lower income.
So clearly there is some effect.
But the effect is relatively small.
And one of the problems with money is materialism.
What happens when people pursue money too avidly, is they forget about the real basic pleasures of life.
So we have here, this couple.
"Do you think the less-fortunate are having better sex?"
And then this kid over here is saying, "Leave me alone with my toys."
So one of the things is that it really takes over.
That whole dopamine-wanting system takes over and derails from any of the pleasure system.
Maslow had this idea back in the 1950s that as people rise above their biological needs, as the world becomes safer and we don't have to worry about basic needs being met -- our biological system, whatever motivates us, is being satisfied -- we can rise above them, to think beyond ourselves toward self-actualization or transcendence, and rise above the materialist.
So to just quickly conclude with some brief data that suggests this might be so.
One is people who underwent what is called a quantum change: they felt their life and their whole values had changed.
And sure enough, if you look at the kinds of values that come in, you see wealth, adventure, achievement, pleasure, fun, be respected, before the change, and much more post-materialist values after.
Women had a whole different set of value shifts.
But very similarly, the only one that survived there was happiness.
They went from attractiveness and happiness and wealth and self-control to generosity and forgiveness.
I end with a few quotes.
"There is only one question: How to love this world?"
And Rilke, "If your daily life seems poor, do not blame it; blame yourself.
Tell yourself that you are not poet enough to call forth its riches."
"First, say to yourself what you would be.
Then do what you have to do."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Let me share with you today an original discovery.
But I want to tell it to you the way it really happened -- not the way I present it in a scientific meeting, or the way you'd read it in a scientific paper.
It's a story about beyond biomimetics, to something I'm calling biomutualism.
I define that as an association between biology and another discipline, where each discipline reciprocally advances the other, but where the collective discoveries that emerge are beyond any single field.
Now, in terms of biomimetics, as human technologies take on more of the characteristics of nature, nature becomes a much more useful teacher.
Engineering can be inspired by biology by using its principles and analogies when they're advantageous, but then integrating that with the best human engineering, ultimately to make something actually better than nature.
Now, being a biologist, I was very curious about this.
These are gecko toes.
And we wondered how they use these bizarre toes to climb up a wall so quickly.
We discovered it. And what we found was that they have leaf-like structures on their toes, with millions of tiny hairs that look like a rug, and each of those hairs has the worst case of split-ends possible: about 100 to 1000 split ends that are nano-size.
And the individual has 2 billion of these nano-size split ends.
They don't stick by Velcro or suction or glue.
They actually stick by intermolecular forces alone, van der Waals forces.
And I'm really pleased to report to you today that the first synthetic self-cleaning, dry adhesive has been made.
From the simplest version in nature, one branch, my engineering collaborator, Ron Fearing, at Berkeley, had made the first synthetic version.
And so has my other incredible collaborator, Mark Cutkosky, at Stanford -- he made much larger hairs than the gecko, but used the same general principles.
And here is its first test.
(Laughter) That's Kellar Autumn, my former Ph.D. student, professor now at Lewis and Clark, literally giving his first-born child up for this test.
(Laughter) More recently, this happened.
Man: This the first time someone has actually climbed with it.
Narrator: Lynn Verinsky, a professional climber, who appeared to be brimming with confidence.
Lynn Verinsky: Honestly, it's going to be perfectly safe. It will be perfectly safe.
Man: How do you know?
Lynn Verinsky: Because of liability insurance. (Laughter) Narrator: With a mattress below and attached to a safety rope, Lynn began her 60-foot ascent.
Lynn made it to the top in a perfect pairing of Hollywood and science.
Man: So you're the first human being to officially emulate a gecko.
Lynn Verinsky: Ha! Wow. And what a privilege that has been.
Robert Full: That's what she did on rough surfaces.
But she actually used these on smooth surfaces -- two of them -- to climb up, and pull herself up.
And you can try this in the lobby, and look at the gecko-inspired material.
Now the problem with the robots doing this is that they can't get unstuck, with the material.
This is the gecko's solution. They actually peel their toes away from the surface, at high rates, as they run up the wall.
Well I'm really excited today to show you the newest version of a robot, Stickybot, using a new hierarchical dry adhesive.
Here is the actual robot.
And here is what it does.
And if you look, you can see that it uses the toe peeling, just like the gecko does.
If we can show some of the video, you can see it climbing up the wall.
(Applause) There it is.
And now it can go on other surfaces because of the new adhesive that the Stanford group was able to do in designing this incredible robot.
(Applause) Oh. One thing I want to point out is, look at Stickybot.
You see something on it. It's not just to look like a gecko.
It has a tail. And just when you think you've figured out nature, this kind of thing happens.
The engineers told us, for the climbing robots, that, if they don't have a tail, they fall off the wall.
So what they did was they asked us an important question.
They said, "Well, it kind of looks like a tail."
Even though we put a passive bar there.
"Do animals use their tails when they climb up walls?"
What they were doing was returning the favor, by giving us a hypothesis to test, in biology, that we wouldn't have thought of.
So of course, in reality, we were then panicked, being the biologists, and we should know this already.
We said, "Well, what do tails do?"
Well we know that tails store fat, for example.
We know that you can grab onto things with them.
And perhaps it is most well known that they provide static balance.
(Laughter) It can also act as a counterbalance.
So watch this kangaroo.
See that tail? That's incredible!
Marc Raibert built a Uniroo hopping robot.
And it was unstable without its tail.
Now mostly tails limit maneuverability, like this human inside this dinosaur suit.
(Laughter) My colleagues actually went on to test this limitation, by increasing the moment of inertia of a student, so they had a tail, and running them through and obstacle course, and found a decrement in performance, like you'd predict.
(Laughter) But of course, this is a passive tail.
And you can also have active tails.
And when I went back to research this, I realized that one of the great TED moments in the past, from Nathan, we've talked about an active tail.
Video: Myhrvold thinks tail-cracking dinosaurs were interested in love, not war.
Robert Full: He talked about the tail being a whip for communication.
It can also be used in defense.
Pretty powerful.
So we then went back and looked at the animal.
And we ran it up a surface.
But this time what we did is we put a slippery patch that you see in yellow there.
And watch on the right what the animal is doing with its tail when it slips. This is slowed down 10 times.
So here is normal speed.
And watch it now slip, and see what it does with its tail.
It has an active tail that functions as a fifth leg, and it contributes to stability.
If you make it slip a huge amount, this is what we discovered.
This is incredible.
The engineers had a really good idea.
And then of course we wondered, okay, they have an active tail, but let's picture them.
They're climbing up a wall, or a tree.
And they get to the top and let's say there's some leaves there.
And what would happen if they climbed on the underside of that leaf, and there was some wind, or we shook it?
And we did that experiment, that you see here.
(Applause) And this is what we discovered.
Now that's real time. You can't see anything.
But there it is slowed down.
What we discovered was the world's fastest air-righting response.
For those of you who remember your physics, that's a zero-angular-momentum righting response. But it's like a cat.
You know, cats falling. Cats do this. They twist their bodies.
But geckos do it better.
And they do it with their tail.
So they do it with this active tail as they swing around.
And then they always land in the sort of superman skydiving posture.
Okay, now we wondered, if we were right, we should be able to test this in a physical model, in a robot.
So for TED we actually built a robot, over there, a prototype, with the tail.
And we're going to attempt the first air-righting response in a tail, with a robot.
If we could have the lights on it.
Okay, there it goes.
And show the video.
There it is.
And it works just like it does in the animal.
So all you need is a swing of the tail to right yourself.
(Applause) Now, of course, we were normally frightened because the animal has no gliding adaptations, so we thought, "Oh that's okay. We'll put it in a vertical wind tunnel.
We'll blow the air up, we'll give it a landing target, a tree trunk, just outside the plexi-glass enclosure, and see what it does.
(Laughter) So we did. And here is what it does.
So the wind is coming from the bottom. This is slowed down 10 times.
It does an equilibrium glide. Highly controlled.
This is sort of incredible. But actually it's quite beautiful, when you take a picture of it.
And it's better than that, it -- just in the slide -- maneuvers in mid-air.
And the way it does it, is it takes its tail and it swings it one way to yaw left, and it swings its other way to yaw right.
So we can maneuver this way.
And then -- we had to film this several times to believe this -- it also does this. Watch this.
It oscillates its tail up and down like a dolphin.
It can actually swim through the air.
But watch its front legs. Can you see what they are doing?
What does that mean for the origin of flapping flight?
Maybe it's evolved from coming down from trees, and trying to control a glide.
Stay tuned for that.
(Laughter) So then we wondered, "Can they actually maneuver with this?"
So there is the landing target. Could they steer towards it with these capabilities? Here it is in the wind tunnel.
And it certainly looks like it.
You can see it even better from down on top.
Watch the animal.
Definitely moving towards the landing target.
Watch the whip of its tail as it does it. Look at that.
It's unbelievable.
So now we were really confused, because there are no reports of it gliding.
So we went, "Oh my god, we have to go to the field, and see if it actually does this."
Completely opposite of the way you'd see it on a nature film, of course.
We wondered, "Do they actually glide in nature?"
Well we went to the forests of Singapore and Southeast Asia.
And the next video you see is the first time we've showed this.
This is the actual video -- not staged, a real research video -- of animal gliding down. There is a red trajectory line.
Look at the end to see the animal.
But then as it gets closer to the tree, look at the close-up. And see if you can see it land.
So there it comes down. There is a gecko at the end of that trajectory line.
You see it there? There? Watch it come down.
Now watch up there and you can see the landing. Did you see it hit?
It actually uses its tail too, just like we saw in the lab.
So now we can continue this mutualism by suggesting that they can make an active tail.
And here is the first active tail, in the robot, made by Boston Dynamics.
So to conclude, I think we need to build biomutualisms, like I showed, that will increase the pace of basic discovery in their application.
To do this though, we need to redesign education in a major way, to balance depth with interdisciplinary communication, and explicitly train people how to contribute to, and benefit from other disciplines.
And of course you need the organisms and the environment to do it.
That is, whether you care about security, search and rescue or health, we must preserve nature's designs, otherwise these secrets will be lost forever.
And from what I heard from our new president, I'm very optimistic. Thank you.
(Applause)
Why do so many people reach success and then fail?
One of the big reasons is, we think success is a one-way street.
So we do everything that leads up to success, but then we get there. We figure we've made it, we sit back in our comfort zone, and we actually stop doing everything that made us successful.
And it doesn't take long to go downhill.
And I can tell you this happens, because it happened to me.
Reaching success, I worked hard, I pushed myself.
But then I stopped, because I figured, "Oh, you know, I made it.
I can just sit back and relax."
Reaching success, I always tried to improve and do good work.
But then I stopped because I figured, "Hey, I'm good enough.
I don't need to improve any more."
Reaching success, I was pretty good at coming up with good ideas.
Because I did all these simple things that led to ideas.
But then I stopped, because I figured I was this hot-shot guy and I shouldn't have to work at ideas, they should just come like magic.
And the only thing that came was creative block.
I couldn't come up with any ideas.
Reaching success, I always focused on clients and projects, and ignored the money. Then all this money started pouring in.
And I got distracted by it.
And suddenly I was on the phone to my stockbroker and my real estate agent, when I should have been talking to my clients.
And reaching success, I always did what I loved.
But then I got into stuff that I didn't love, like management. I am the world's worst manager, but I figured I should be doing it, because I was, after all, the president of the company.
Well, soon a black cloud formed over my head and here I was, outwardly very successful, but inwardly very depressed.
But I'm a guy; I knew how to fix it.
I bought a fast car.
(Laughter) It didn't help.
I was faster but just as depressed.
So I went to my doctor. I said, "Doc, I can buy anything I want. But I'm not happy. I'm depressed.
It's true what they say, and I didn't believe it until it happened to me.
But money can't buy happiness."
He said, "No. But it can buy Prozac."
And he put me on anti-depressants.
And yeah, the black cloud faded a little bit, but so did all the work, because I was just floating along. I couldn't care less if clients ever called.
(Laughter) And clients didn't call.
(Laughter) Because they could see I was no longer serving them, I was only serving myself.
So they took their money and their projects to others who would serve them better.
Well, it didn't take long for business to drop like a rock.
My partner and I, Thom, we had to let all our employees go.
It was down to just the two of us, and we were about to go under.
And that was great.
Because with no employees, there was nobody for me to manage.
So I went back to doing the projects I loved.
I had fun again, I worked harder and, to cut a long story short, did all the things that took me back up to success.
But it wasn't a quick trip.
It took seven years.
But in the end, business grew bigger than ever.
And when I went back to following these eight principles, the black cloud over my head disappeared altogether.
And I woke up one day and I said, "I don't need Prozac anymore."
And I threw it away and haven't needed it since.
I learned that success isn't a one-way street.
It doesn't look like this; it really looks more like this.
It's a continuous journey.
And if we want to avoid "success-to-failure-syndrome," we just keep following these eight principles, because that is not only how we achieve success, it's how we sustain it.
So here is to your continued success.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I have had the distinct pleasure of living inside two biospheres.
Of course we all here in this room live in Biosphere 1.
I've also lived in Biosphere 2.
And the wonderful thing about that is that I get to compare biospheres.
And hopefully from that I get to learn something.
So what did I learn? Well, here I am inside Biosphere 2, making a pizza.
So I am harvesting the wheat, in order to make the dough.
And then of course I have to milk the goats and feed the goats in order to make the cheese.
It took me four months in Biosphere 2 to make a pizza.
Here in Biosphere 1, well it takes me about two minutes, because I pick up the phone and I call and say, "Hey, can you deliver the pizza?"
So Biosphere 2 was essentially a three-acre, entirely sealed, miniature world that I lived in for two years and 20 minutes.
(Laughter) Over the top it was sealed with steel and glass, underneath it was sealed with a pan of steel -- essentially entirely sealed.
So we had our own miniature rainforest, a private beach with a coral reef.
We had a savanna, a marsh, a desert.
We had our own half-acre farm that we had to grow everything.
And of course we had our human habitat, where we lived.
Back in the mid-'80s when we were designing Biosphere 2, we had to ask ourselves some pretty basic questions.
I mean, what is a biosphere?
Back then, yes, I guess we all know now that it is essentially the sphere of life around the Earth, right?
Well, you have to get a little more specific than that if you're going to build one.
And so we decided that what it really is is that it is entirely materially closed -- that is, nothing goes in or out at all, no material -- and energetically open, which is essentially what planet Earth is.
This is a chamber that was 1/400th the size of Biosphere 2 that we called our Test Module.
And the very first day that this fellow, John Allen, walked in, to spend a couple of days in there with all the plants and animals and bacteria that we'd put in there to hopefully keep him alive, the doctors were incredibly concerned that he was going to succumb to some dreadful toxin, or that his lungs were going to get choked with bacteria or something, fungus.
But of course none of that happened.
And over the ensuing few years, there were great sagas about designing Biosphere 2.
But by 1991 we finally had this thing built.
And it was time for us to go in and give it a go.
We needed to know, is life this malleable?
Can you take this biosphere, that has evolved on a planetary scale, and jam it into a little bottle, and will it survive?
Big questions.
And we wanted to know this both for being able to go somewhere else in the universe -- if we were going to go to Mars, for instance, would we take a biosphere with us, to live in it?
We also wanted to know so we can understand more about the Earth that we all live in.
Well, in 1991 it was finally time for us to go in and try out this baby.
Let's take it on a maiden voyage.
Will it work? Or will something happen that we can't understand and we can't fix, thereby negating the concept of man-made biospheres?
So eight of us went in: four men and four women.
More on that later.
(Laughter) And this is the world that we lived in.
So, on the top, we had these beautiful rainforests and an ocean, and underneath we had all this technosphere, we called it, which is where all the pumps and the valves and the water tanks and the air handlers, and all of that.
One of the Biospherians called it "garden of Eden on top of an aircraft carrier."
And then also we had the human habitat of course, with the laboratories, and all of that.
This is the agriculture.
It was essentially an organic farm.
The day I walked into Biosphere 2, I was, for the first time, breathing a completely different atmosphere than everybody else in the world, except seven other people.
At that moment I became part of that biosphere.
And I don't mean that in an abstract sense; I mean it rather literally.
When I breathed out, my CO2 fed the sweet potatoes that I was growing.
And we ate an awful lot of the sweet potatoes.
(Laughter) And those sweet potatoes became part of me.
In fact, we ate so many sweet potatoes I became orange with sweet potato.
I literally was eating the same carbon over and over again.
I was eating myself in some strange sort of bizarre way.
When it came to our atmosphere, however, it wasn't that much of a joke over the long term, because it turned out that we were losing oxygen, quite a lot of oxygen.
And we knew that we were losing CO2.
And so we were working to sequester carbon.
Good lord -- we know that term now.
We were growing plants like crazy.
We were taking their biomass, storing them in the basement, growing plants, going around, around, around, trying to take all of that carbon out of the atmosphere.
We were trying to stop carbon from going into the atmosphere.
We stopped irrigating our soil, as much as we could.
We stopped tilling, so that we could prevent greenhouse gasses from going into the air.
But our oxygen was going down faster than our CO2 was going up, which was quite unexpected, because we had seen them going in tandem in the test module.
And it was like playing atomic hide-and-seek.
We had lost seven tons of oxygen.
And we had no clue where it was.
And I tell you, when you lose a lot of oxygen -- and our oxygen went down quite far; it went from 21 percent down to 14.2 percent -- my goodness, do you feel dreadful.
I mean we were dragging ourselves around the Biosphere.
And we had sleep apnea at night.
So you'd wake up gasping with breath, because your blood chemistry has changed.
And that you literally do that. You stop breathing and then you -- (Gasps) -- take a breath and it wakes you up. And it's very irritating.
And everybody outside thought we were dying.
I mean, the media was making it sound like were were dying.
And I had to call up my mother every other day saying, "No, Mum, it's fine, fine.
We're not dead. We're fine. We're fine."
And the doctor was, in fact, checking us to make sure we were, in fact, fine.
But in fact he was the person who was most susceptible to the oxygen.
And one day he couldn't add up a line of figures.
And it was time for us to put oxygen in.
And you might think, well, "Boy, your life support system was failing you. Wasn't that dreadful?"
Yes. In a sense it was terrifying.
Except that I knew I could walk out the airlock door at any time, if it really got bad, though who was going to say, "I can't take it anymore!"?
Not me, that was for sure.
But on the other hand, it was the scientific gold of the project, because we could really crank this baby up, as a scientific tool, and see if we could, in fact, find where those seven tons of oxygen had gone.
And we did indeed find it.
And we found it in the concrete.
Essentially it had done something very simple.
We had put too much carbon in the soil in the form of compost.
It broke down; it took oxygen out of the air; it put CO2 into the air; and it went into the concrete.
Pretty straightforward really.
So at the end of the two years when we came out, we were elated, because, in fact, although you might say we had discovered something that was quite "uhh," when your oxygen is going down, stopped working, essentially, in your life support system, that's a very bad failure.
Except that we knew what it was. And we knew how to fix it.
And nothing else emerged that really was as serious as that.
And we proved the concept, more or less.
People, on the other hand, was a different subject.
We were -- yeah I don't know that we were fixable.
We all went quite nuts, I will say.
And the day I came out of Biosphere 2, I was thrilled I was going to see all my family and my friends.
For two years I'd been seeing people through the glass.
And everybody ran up to me.
And I recoiled. They stank!
People stink!
We stink of hairspray and underarm deodorant, and all kinds of stuff.
Now we had stuff inside Biosphere to keep ourselves clean, but nothing with perfume.
And boy do we stink out here.
Not only that, but I lost touch of where my food came from.
I had been growing all my own food.
I had no idea what was in my food, where it came from.
I didn't even recognize half the names in most of the food that I was eating.
In fact, I would stand for hours in the aisles of shops, reading all the names on all of the things.
People must have thought I was nuts.
It was really quite astonishing.
And I slowly lost track of where I was in this big biosphere, in this big biosphere that we all live in.
In Biosphere 2 I totally understood that I had a huge impact on my biosphere, everyday, and it had an impact on me, very viscerally, very literally.
So I went about my business: Paragon Space Development Corporation, a little firm I started with people while I was in the Biosphere, because I had nothing else to do.
And one of the things we did was try to figure out: how small can you make these biospheres, and what can you do with them?
And so we sent one onto the Mir Space Station.
We had one on the shuttle and one on the International Space Station, for 16 months, where we managed to produce the first organisms to go through complete multiple life cycles in space -- really pushing the envelope of understanding how malleable our life systems are.
And I'm also proud to announce that you're getting a sneak preview -- on Friday we're going to announce that we're actually forming a team to develop a system to grow plants on the Moon, which is going to be pretty fun.
And the legacy of that is a system that we were designing: an entirely sealed system to grow plants to grow on Mars.
And part of that is that we had to model very rapid circulation of CO2 and oxygen and water through this plant system.
As a result of that modeling I ended up in all places, in Eritrea, in the Horn of Africa.
Eritrea, formerly part of Ethiopia, is one of those places that is astonishingly beautiful, incredibly stark, and I have no understanding of how people eke out a living there.
It is so dry.
This is what I saw.
But this is also what I saw.
I saw a company that had taken seawater and sand, and they were growing a kind of crop that will grow on pure salt water without having to treat it.
And it will produce a food crop.
In this case it was oilseed.
It was astonishing. They were also producing mangroves in a plantation.
And the mangroves were providing wood and honey and leaves for the animals, so that they could produce milk and whatnot, like we had in the Biosphere.
And all of it was coming from this: shrimp farms.
Shrimp farms are a scourge on the earth, frankly, from an environmental point of view.
They pour huge amounts of pollutants into the ocean.
They also pollute their next-door neighbors.
So they're all shitting each other's ponds, quite literally.
And what this project was doing was taking the effluent of these, and turning them into all of this food.
They were literally turning pollution into abundance for a desert people.
They had created an industrial ecosystem, of a sense.
I was there because I was actually modeling the mangrove portion for a carbon credit program, under the U.N.
Kyoto Protocol system.
And as I was modeling this mangrove swamp, I was thinking to myself, "How do you put a box around this?"
When I'm modeling a plant in a box, literally, I know where to draw the boundary.
In a mangrove forest like this I have no idea.
Well, of course you have to draw the boundary around the whole of the Earth.
And understand its interactions with the entire Earth.
And put your project in that context.
Around the world today we're seeing an incredible transformation, from what I would call a biocidal species, one that -- whether we intentionally or unintentionally -- have designed our systems to kill life, a lot of the time.
This is in fact, this beautiful photograph, is in fact over the Amazon.
And here the light green are areas of massive deforestation.
And those beautiful wispy clouds are, in fact, fires, human-made fires.
We're in the process of transforming from this, to what I would call a biophilic society, one where we learn to nurture society.
Now it may not seem like it, but we are.
It is happening all across the world, in every kind of walk of life, and every kind of career and industry that you can think of.
And I think often times people get lost in that.
They go, "But how can I possibly find my way in that?
It's such a huge subject."
And I would say that the small stuff counts. It really does.
This is the story of a rake in my backyard.
This was my backyard, very early on, when I bought my property.
And in Arizona, of course, everybody puts gravel down.
And they like to keep everything beautifully raked. And they keep all the leaves away.
And on Sunday morning the neighbors leaf blower comes out, and I want to throttle them.
It's a certain type of aesthetic.
We're very uncomfortable with untidiness.
And I threw away my rake.
And I let all of the leaves fall from the trees that I have on my property.
And over time, essentially what have I been doing?
I've been building topsoil.
And so now all the birds come in. And I have hawks.
And I have an oasis.
This is what happens every spring. For six weeks, six to eight weeks, I have this flush of green oasis.
This is actually in a riparian area.
And all of Tucson could be like this if everybody would just revolt and throw away the rake.
The small stuff counts.
The Industrial Revolution -- and Prometheus -- has given us this, the ability to light up the world.
It has also given us this, the ability to look at the world from the outside.
Now we may not all have another biosphere that we can run to, and compare it to this biosphere.
But we can look at the world, and try to understand where we are in its context, and how we choose to interact with it.
And if you lose where you are in your biosphere, or are perhaps having a difficulty connecting with where you are in the biosphere, I would say to you, take a deep breath.
The yogis had it right.
Breath does, in fact, connect us all in a very literal way.
Take a breath now.
And as you breathe, think about what is in your breath.
There perhaps is the CO2 from the person sitting next-door to you.
Maybe there is a little bit of oxygen from some algae on the beach not far from here.
It also connects us in time.
There may be some carbon in your breath from the dinosaurs.
There could also be carbon that you are exhaling now that will be in the breath of your great-great-great-grandchildren.
Thank you. (Applause)
Centuries ago, the Inca developed ingenuous suits of armor that could flex with the blows of sharp spears and maces, protecting warriors from even the fiercest physical attacks.
These hardy structures were made not from iron or steel, but rather something unexpectedly soft: cotton.
These thickly woven, layered quilts of cotton could distribute the energy from a blow across a large surface area, shielding warriors without restricting their mobility.
These seemingly contradictory features strength and flexibility, softness and durability have their roots in the intricate biology of the nearly invisible cotton fiber.
These fibers begin life deep within a cotton flower, on the surface of a seed.
As many as 16,000 fibers will festoon a single seed, bulging from the seeds surface like miniature water balloons.
Each cotton fiber, no matter how large it grows, is made of just one cell.
That cell has multiple layers of cell wall.
After a few days, the sides of the first layer, called the primary cell wall, stiffen, pushing cell growth in one direction and causing the fiber to elongate.
The fiber elongates quickly for about 16 days.
Then it begins the next stage: strengthening the cell wall.
It does this by making more of the carbohydrate cellulose.
Cellulose will make up 34% of the cell wall at this stage and swiftly increases.
This new growth also reinforces the cell wall by going against the grain of the existing wall.
The strengthened wall is more rigid, restricting further growth.
That means if the fiber remodels its walls too early, it will be short, and ultimately make rough, weak fabrics.
But if cell wall strengthening begins too late, the wall wont be sturdy enough producing fibers that are too weak to hold fabrics together well.
In ideal growing conditions with the right temperature, water, fertilizer, pest control, and light a cotton fiber can grow up to 3.6 centimeters long with only a 25 micrometer width.
Long, fine fibers can wrap around one another better than shorter, less fine fibers, which means those long, fine fibers make stronger threads that hang together better as fabric.
Cotton with these qualities has diverse uses from soft textiles to the U.S. dollar bill, which is 75% cotton.
The next crucial stage of the cotton fibers growth begins as it thickens its secondary cell wall by depositing large quantities of cellulose into the secondary layer.
Cellulose goes on to make up over 90% of the fibers weight.
The more cellulose that gets deposited, the denser that secondary layer becomes and this determines the strength of the final fiber.
This stage is essential for developing long-lasting material for the likes of, say, a t-shirt.
The garments capacity to withstand years of washing and wear is largely determined by the density of that secondary cell wall.
On the other hand, its softness is strongly influenced by the length of the fiber, established with the remodeling of the primary wall layer.
Finally, after about 50 days, the fiber is fully grown.
The living matter within the cell dies off, leaving behind only the cellulose.
The dried cotton seed pod, or boll, that surrounds the fibers cracks open, unveiling a burst of several thousand fiber cells in a fluffy mass.
The thread-like fibers we see thinner than a human hair are the remains of those dense, dried out walls of cellulose.
Tens of thousands of these fibers spun into yarn will go on to make everything from fabric, to coffee filters, diapers, and fishing nets.
And with the help of modern science, cotton might soon be softer, stronger, and more resilient than ever as researchers investigate how to optimize its growth based on nutrients, weather conditions, and genetics.
Four years ago, a teenage girl changed my life in one conversation.
She was 13 years old, she was a friend's little cousin and she casually told me that she had met the man she was going to marry.
So I said, "OK, tell me about him."
And she told me that his name was Harry Styles.
(Laughter) So I laughed a little, like you, and then she said, "I know you don't think I'm serious, but I'm actually going to be with him.
Because I love him so much that I would slit someone's throat to be with him."
(Laughter) And that was the moment that I became obsessed with fangirls.
I didn't know it then, but that moment would transform the course of my life and go on to change everything that I thought I knew about being an adult, being a woman and being truly happy.
But before we get started, what is a fangirl, and what is a Harry Styles?
Well, according to the dictionary, the Merriam-Webster dictionary, a fangirl is a "girl or woman who is an extremely or overly enthusiastic fan of someone or something."
Technically, you can have fangirls of anything, but my specific interest was in fangirls of boy bands.
Because of their somewhat lethal reputation.
I remember, my dad had told me this story of some Beatles fans in the '60s, who apparently had torn a parked BMW to literal pieces, because the band had supposedly just been sat in it.
In the '60s, the Beatles were the biggest boy band on the planet, but when I met this girl in 2015, the biggest boy band on the planet was none other than One Direction.
And Harry Styles was a member of One Direction.
Harry Styles was reputed for his compassionate demeanor and perfect hair.
I learn this when I read thousands of tweets about him.
I learn that he is a sweet cupcake.
I learn that he is a perfect angel.
I learn that one time, he vomited on the side of a freeway in California and that within two hours, fans had turned the site of the vomit into a sacred shrine.
(Laughter) I scroll through -- (Laughter) I scroll through fan-made paintings of Harry, baby photos of him, paintings of baby photos of him.
I watch videos that show me how to make DIY love totems for Harry -- for example, a lampshade covered in photos of his face, or a key ring that states the exact time of his birth.
I read hours of fan fiction, and I fall down this specific rabbit hole of stories that actually place me as a protagonist inside of various imagined romances with him.
So in one, I tell him that I'm pregnant with his child.
In another, we meet in hospital where we're both fighting cancer, and in another, we fall so deeply in love that we become fugitives who kill people.
(Laughter) But then ...
something unthinkable happens.
One Direction, the biggest boy band on the planet, loses a member.
Zayn Malik quits the band, and the internet explodes with feels.
I read tweets as these girls describe the physical pain of this loss, how they can't eat or sleep or walk.
I read them describe how much Zayn had meant to them.
And I watch videos of 10-year-old girls crying.
But, like, really crying.
And then I watch as people repost these videos but with new titles that contain words like "crazy" and "creepy" and "insane."
And suddenly, my YouTube sidebar contains "Compilation: Fans react to Zayn leaving.
Psycho alert!"
Then I watch as mainstream news outlets cover the story.
I read them describe these "young banshees."
I read one journalist say, "It's a commonly known fact since the age of the Beatles that there is nothing scarier in this world than a group of excited teenage girls."
(Laughter) And then I ask myself a question I've never considered in my life.
Why is it that the image of young girls screaming their lungs out with excitement for a pop star is considered crazy, psycho, scary, a bit much?
But the image of young boys screaming their lungs out for a footballer is perfectly normal?
Boys crying at the footie, that's the love of the game.
Girls crying at a Justin Bieber concert?
That's pathetic.
And as soon as I realized this double standard, I realized that all of my curiosity about fangirls had been sparked by exactly the same judgments.
I, too, had suspected that they were a bit crazy.
I'd looked at images of girls screaming for the Beatles, the Backstreet Boys, One Direction, and the word that had come to mind was not "excitement" but "hysteria."
And what I did not know was the history of that word.
That in the 19th century, hysteria was considered to be a legitimate female mental disorder that could be diagnosed by doctors if women displayed excessive emotion or difficult behavior.
The word "hysterical" comes from the Latin word "hystericus," meaning "of the womb," because it was thought that this condition was caused by a dysfunction of the uterus.
And so, a treatment for hysteria was a hysterectomy.
Which is what we still call a removal of the womb.
And at this point, I decide to redeclare my obsession.
Because I am no longer just obsessed with fangirls.
Now, I'm obsessed with the way that the world talks about fangirls and the way that the world looks at young, female enthusiasm.
Because, I want to know, if girls grow up in a world where words like "crazy" and "psycho" and "hysterical" are casually used to describe female enthusiasm, then how does that shape the way that those girls get to see themselves?
And if girls grow up in a world that tells them that they are designed just a bit crazier than the boys, then isn't that a little bit like telling them that they are born less capable of rationality than men, less capable of reason and unworthy of the same intellectual respect as their brothers.
Separately, I become obsessed with female screams.
Not in a creepy way.
I'm talking about, like, those shrieks and squeals that fangirls let out at concerts.
I want to know why it is that some people instinctively flinch when I merely describe the sound, like it's painful just to think about it.
Then I meet Amy Hume.
She's a voice coach.
And she blows my mind.
Because she tells me that the female voice between the ages of 11 and 13 is one of the most interesting things to study.
Why?
Because there's this research by Carol Gilligan that says that is the age when girls begin to perform and alter their voices.
For example, adding breath for maturity, (Imitating vocal fry) or adding vocal fry for apathy.
(Laughter) But tell me, according to this research, when do you reckon boys begin to perform and alter their voices?
Now, I guessed 18, because "men mature later," right?
Wrong.
The answer was four years old.
Because that is when boys learn not to cry or squeal.
That those are not manly sounds.
And that's when I realized that a fangirl's shriek is therefore like a superpower.
(Laughter) Because it's this fearless and honest expression of pure celebration and joy, and it's a sound they have not forgotten how to make.
I actually reckon that fangirls have a second superpower, because they know how to do something that most of my adult friends have no idea how to do.
Fangirls know how to love something without apology or fear.
My years of researching fangirls culminated in this determination to write something that celebrates and vindicates them.
So I decided to make this thriller comedy musical that sounds like a Beyonc concert meets rave meets church.
I called it "Fangirls," and I designed it like a Trojan horse.
So it appears to make fun of these young women, only to, like, smuggle them into your heart.
(Laughter) Thanks.
(Applause) At one point -- Thanks.
At one point, a girl sings, "Why should I hide my feelings?
Because they annoy you?
Or because it isn't what the boys do?"
And as a former fangirl cynic, that is the question that I want to leave you all with.
Why should fangirls tone it down?
Because they're crazy?
Or because our definition of "reasonable" is based on what it is acceptable for men to do?
What if we rethink the judgments we've been conditioned to feel when we see young women screaming their lungs out with excitement?
What if we decided to rethink the words we use to describe that joy, and what if we didn't allow ourselves to diminish girls with words that undermine their intelligence, their interests and their capability?
Because, according to my research, they are capable of building a shrine to Harry Styles's vomit on the side of a freeway within two hours.
(Laughter) That takes some executive skills in logistics and communication.
(Laughter) If that isn't "capable," I don't know what is.
(Applause) I reckon, instead of judging fangirls, we can learn from them.
We can all die tomorrow, so why not love things while we're still breathing?
And with that, I'd like to ask you all to try something with me.
Can I get you all to stand up?
Stand up if you can, stand up.
Alright, so here's what's going to happen.
I'm going to count to three and when I finish, I'm going to ask every single one of you to let out your very best fangirl scream.
(Laughter) Yeah?
Here is why I am asking you to do this.
Because if all five-or-so thousand of you do this and really commit, we all get our first chance to hear that sound and to decide that it is not a crazy sound.
It is a hopeful sound.
So shall we do this?
I said, shall we do this?
(Audience: Yes!) Alright. OK, I am going to cheat and I'm not going to go full volume, because I'm miked and we don't want to hear that.
But it means you all have to go 110 percent.
You ready? Take a deep breath with me.
Think of someone you love, let's go, one, two, three.
(Audience screams) (Laughter and applause) You all just sounded stunning and as sane and as intelligent and as dignified as when you walked in this room.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to talk about the transformed media landscape, and what it means for anybody who has a message that they want to get out to anywhere in the world.
And I want to illustrate that by telling a couple of stories about that transformation.
I'll start here. Last November there was a presidential election.
You probably read something about it in the papers.
And there was some concern that in some parts of the country there might be voter suppression.
And so a plan came up to video the vote.
And the idea was that individual citizens with phones capable of taking photos or making video would document their polling places, on the lookout for any kind of voter suppression techniques, and would upload this to a central place.
And that this would operate as a kind of citizen observation -- that citizens would not be there just to cast individual votes, but also to help ensure the sanctity of the vote overall.
So this is a pattern that assumes we're all in this together.
What matters here isn't technical capital, it's social capital.
These tools don't get socially interesting until they get technologically boring.
It isn't when the shiny new tools show up that their uses start permeating society.
It's when everybody is able to take them for granted.
Because now that media is increasingly social, innovation can happen anywhere that people can take for granted the idea that we're all in this together.
And so we're starting to see a media landscape in which innovation is happening everywhere, and moving from one spot to another.
That is a huge transformation.
Not to put too fine a point on it, the moment we're living through -- the moment our historical generation is living through -- is the largest increase in expressive capability in human history.
Now that's a big claim. I'm going to try to back it up.
There are only four periods in the last 500 years where media has changed enough to qualify for the label "revolution."
The first one is the famous one, the printing press: movable type, oil-based inks, that whole complex of innovations that made printing possible and turned Europe upside-down, starting in the middle of the 1400s.
Then, a couple of hundred years ago, there was innovation in two-way communication, conversational media: first the telegraph, then the telephone.
Slow, text-based conversations, then real-time voice based conversations.
Then, about 150 years ago, there was a revolution in recorded media other than print: first photos, then recorded sound, then movies, all encoded onto physical objects.
And finally, about 100 years ago, the harnessing of electromagnetic spectrum to send sound and images through the air -- radio and television.
This is the media landscape as we knew it in the 20th century.
This is what those of us of a certain age grew up with, and are used to.
But there is a curious asymmetry here.
The media that is good at creating conversations is no good at creating groups.
And the media that's good at creating groups is no good at creating conversations.
If you want to have a conversation in this world, you have it with one other person.
If you want to address a group, you get the same message and you give it to everybody in the group, whether you're doing that with a broadcasting tower or a printing press.
That was the media landscape as we had it in the twentieth century.
And this is what changed.
This thing that looks like a peacock hit a windscreen is Bill Cheswick's map of the Internet.
He traces the edges of the individual networks and then color codes them.
The Internet is the first medium in history that has native support for groups and conversation at the same time.
Whereas the phone gave us the one-to-one pattern, and television, radio, magazines, books, gave us the one-to-many pattern, the Internet gives us the many-to-many pattern.
For the first time, media is natively good at supporting these kinds of conversations.
That's one of the big changes.
The second big change is that, as all media gets digitized, the Internet also becomes the mode of carriage for all other media, meaning that phone calls migrate to the Internet, magazines migrate to the Internet, movies migrate to the Internet.
And that means that every medium is right next door to every other medium.
Put another way, media is increasingly less just a source of information, and it is increasingly more a site of coordination, because groups that see or hear or watch or listen to something can now gather around and talk to each other as well.
And the third big change is that members of the former audience, as Dan Gilmore calls them, can now also be producers and not consumers.
Every time a new consumer joins this media landscape a new producer joins as well, because the same equipment -- phones, computers -- let you consume and produce.
It's as if, when you bought a book, they threw in the printing press for free; it's like you had a phone that could turn into a radio if you pressed the right buttons.
That is a huge change in the media landscape we're used to.
And it's not just Internet or no Internet.
We've had the Internet in its public form for almost 20 years now, and it's still changing as the media becomes more social.
It's still changing patterns even among groups who know how to deal with the Internet well.
Second story.
Last May, China in the Sichuan province had a terrible earthquake, 7.9 magnitude, massive destruction in a wide area, as the Richter Scale has it.
And the earthquake was reported as it was happening.
People were texting from their phones. They were taking photos of buildings.
They were taking videos of buildings shaking.
They were uploading it to QQ, China's largest Internet service.
They were Twittering it.
And so as the quake was happening the news was reported.
And because of the social connections, Chinese students coming elsewhere, and going to school, or businesses in the rest of the world opening offices in China -- there were people listening all over the world, hearing this news.
The BBC got their first wind of the Chinese quake from Twitter.
Twitter announced the existence of the quake several minutes before the US Geological Survey had anything up online for anybody to read.
The last time China had a quake of that magnitude it took them three months to admit that it had happened.
(Laughter) Now they might have liked to have done that here, rather than seeing these pictures go up online.
But they weren't given that choice, because their own citizens beat them to the punch.
Even the government learned of the earthquake from their own citizens, rather than from the Xinhua News Agency.
And this stuff rippled like wildfire.
For a while there the top 10 most clicked links on Twitter, the global short messaging service -- nine of the top 10 links were about the quake.
People collating information, pointing people to news sources, pointing people to the US geological survey.
The 10th one was kittens on a treadmill, but that's the Internet for you.
(Laughter) But nine of the 10 in those first hours.
And within half a day donation sites were up, and donations were pouring in from all around the world.
This was an incredible, coordinated global response.
And the Chinese then, in one of their periods of media openness, decided that they were going to let it go, that they were going to let this citizen reporting fly.
And then this happened.
People began to figure out, in the Sichuan Provence, that the reason so many school buildings had collapsed -- because tragically the earthquake happened during a school day -- the reason so many school buildings collapsed is that corrupt officials had taken bribes to allow those building to be built to less than code.
And so they started, the citizen journalists started reporting that as well. And there was an incredible picture.
You may have seen in on the front page of the New York Times.
A local official literally prostrated himself in the street, in front of these protesters, in order to get them to go away.
Essentially to say, "We will do anything to placate you, just please stop protesting in public."
But these are people who have been radicalized, because, thanks to the one child policy, they have lost everyone in their next generation.
Someone who has seen the death of a single child now has nothing to lose.
And so the protest kept going.
And finally the Chinese cracked down.
That was enough of citizen media.
And so they began to arrest the protesters.
They began to shut down the media that the protests were happening on.
China is probably the most successful manager of Internet censorship in the world, using something that is widely described as the Great Firewall of China.
And the Great Firewall of China is a set of observation points that assume that media is produced by professionals, it mostly comes in from the outside world, it comes in relatively sparse chunks, and it comes in relatively slowly.
And because of those four characteristics they are able to filter it as it comes into the country.
But like the Maginot Line, the great firewall of China was facing in the wrong direction for this challenge, because not one of those four things was true in this environment.
The media was produced locally. It was produced by amateurs.
It was produced quickly. And it was produced at such an incredible abundance that there was no way to filter it as it appeared.
And so now the Chinese government, who for a dozen years, has quite successfully filtered the web, is now in the position of having to decide whether to allow or shut down entire services, because the transformation to amateur media is so enormous that they can't deal with it any other way.
And in fact that is happening this week.
On the 20th anniversary of Tiananmen they just, two days ago, announced that they were simply shutting down access to Twitter, because there was no way to filter it other than that.
They had to turn the spigot entirely off.
Now these changes don't just affect people who want to censor messages.
They also affect people who want to send messages, because this is really a transformation of the ecosystem as a whole, not just a particular strategy.
The classic media problem, from the 20th century is, how does an organization have a message that they want to get out to a group of people distributed at the edges of a network.
And here is the twentieth century answer.
Bundle up the message. Send the same message to everybody.
National message. Targeted individuals.
Relatively sparse number of producers.
Very expensive to do, so there is not a lot of competition.
This is how you reach people.
All of that is over.
We are increasingly in a landscape where media is global, social, ubiquitous and cheap.
Now most organizations that are trying to send messages to the outside world, to the distributed collection of the audience, are now used to this change.
The audience can talk back.
And that's a little freaky. But you can get used to it after a while, as people do.
But that's not the really crazy change that we're living in the middle of.
The really crazy change is here: it's the fact that they are no longer disconnected from each other, the fact that former consumers are now producers, the fact that the audience can talk directly to one another; because there is a lot more amateurs than professionals, and because the size of the network, the complexity of the network is actually the square of the number of participants, meaning that the network, when it grows large, grows very, very large.
As recently at last decade, most of the media that was available for public consumption was produced by professionals.
Those days are over, never to return.
It is the green lines now, that are the source of the free content, which brings me to my last story.
We saw some of the most imaginative use of social media during the Obama campaign.
And I don't mean most imaginative use in politics -- I mean most imaginative use ever.
And one of the things Obama did, was they famously, the Obama campaign did, was they famously put up MyBarackObama.com, myBO.com And millions of citizens rushed in to participate, and to try and figure out how to help.
An incredible conversation sprung up there.
And then, this time last year, Obama announced that he was going to change his vote on FISA, The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
He had said, in January, that he would not sign a bill that granted telecom immunity for possibly warrantless spying on American persons.
By the summer, in the middle of the general campaign, He said, "I've thought about the issue more. I've changed my mind.
I'm going to vote for this bill."
And many of his own supporters on his own site went very publicly berserk.
It was Senator Obama when they created it. They changed the name later.
"Please get FISA right."
Within days of this group being created it was the fastest growing group on myBO.com; within weeks of its being created it was the largest group.
Obama had to issue a press release.
He had to issue a reply.
And he said essentially, "I have considered the issue.
I understand where you are coming from.
But having considered it all, I'm still going to vote the way I'm going to vote.
But I wanted to reach out to you and say, I understand that you disagree with me, and I'm going to take my lumps on this one."
This didn't please anybody. But then a funny thing happened in the conversation.
People in that group realized that Obama had never shut them down.
Nobody in the Obama campaign had ever tried to hide the group or make it harder to join, to deny its existence, to delete it, to take to off the site.
They had understood that their role with myBO.com was to convene their supporters but not to control their supporters.
And that is the kind of discipline that it takes to make really mature use of this media.
Media, the media landscape that we knew, as familiar as it was, as easy conceptually as it was to deal with the idea that professionals broadcast messages to amateurs, is increasingly slipping away.
In a world where media is global, social, ubiquitous and cheap, in a world of media where the former audience are now increasingly full participants, in that world, media is less and less often about crafting a single message to be consumed by individuals.
It is more and more often a way of creating an environment for convening and supporting groups.
And the choice we face, I mean anybody who has a message they want to have heard anywhere in the world, isn't whether or not that is the media environment we want to operate in.
That's the media environment we've got.
The question we all face now is, "How can we make best use of this media?
Even though it means changing the way we've always done it."
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
At any given moment, trillions of cells are traveling through your blood vessels, sometimes circling the body in just one minute.
Each of these cells has its origins deep in your bones.
Bones might seem rock-solid, but theyre actually quite porous inside.
Large and small blood vessels enter through these holes.
And inside most of the large bones of your skeleton is a hollow core filled with soft bone marrow.
Marrow contains fat and other supportive tissue, but its most essential elements are blood stem cells.
These stem cells are constantly dividing.
They can differentiate into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets, and send about hundreds of billions of new blood cells into circulation every day.
These new cells enter the bloodstream through holes in small capillaries in the marrow.
Through the capillaries, they reach larger blood vessels and exit the bone.
If theres a problem with your blood, theres a good chance it can be traced back to the bone marrow.
Blood cancers often begin with genetic mutations in the stem cells.
The stem cells themselves are not cancerous, but these mutations can interfere with the process of differentiation and result in malignant blood cells.
So for patients with advanced blood cancers like leukemia and lymphoma, the best chance for a cure is often an allogeneic bone marrow transplant, which replaces the patients bone marrow with a donors.
Heres how it works.
First, blood stem cells are extracted from the donor.
Most commonly, blood stem cells are filtered out of the donors bloodstream by circulating the blood through a machine that separates it into different components.
In other cases, the marrow is extracted directly from a bone in the hip, the iliac crest, with a needle.
Meanwhile, the recipient prepares for the transplant.
High doses of chemotherapy or radiation kill the patients existing marrow, destroying both malignant cells and blood stem cells.
This also weakens the immune system, making it less likely to attack the transplanted cells.
Then the donor cells are infused into the patients body through a central line.
They initially circulate in the recipients peripheral bloodstream, but molecules on the stem cells, called chemokines, act as homing devices and quickly traffic them back to the marrow.
Over the course of a few weeks, they begin to multiply and start producing new, healthy blood cells.
Just a small population of blood stem cells can regenerate a whole bodys worth of healthy marrow.
A bone marrow transplant can also lead to something called graft-versus-tumor activity, when new immune cells generated by the donated marrow can wipe out cancer cells the recipients original immune system couldnt.
This phenomenon can help eradicate stubborn blood cancers.
But bone marrow transplants also come with risks, including graft-versus-host disease.
It happens when the immune system generated by the donor cells attacks the patients organs.
This life-threatening condition occurs in about 3050% of patients who receive donor cells from anyone other than an identical twin, particularly when the stem cells are collected from the blood as opposed to the bone marrow.
Patients may take immunosuppressant medications or certain immune cells may be removed from the donated sample in order to reduce the risk of graft-versus-host disease.
But even if a patient avoids graft-versus-host disease, their immune system may reject the donor cells.
So its crucial to find the best match possible in the first place.
Key regions of the genetic code determine how the immune system identifies foreign cells.
If these regions are similar in the donor and the recipient, the recipients immune system is more likely to accept the donor cells.
Because these genes are inherited, the best matches are often siblings.
But many patients who need a bone marrow transplant dont have a matched family member.
Those patients turn to donor registries of volunteers willing to offer their bone marrow.
All it takes to be on the registry is a cheek swab to test for a genetic match.
And in many cases, the donation itself isnt much more complicated than giving blood.
Its a way to save someones life with a resource thats completely renewable.
As the April sun rises on a pile of firewood, something royal stirs inside.
This wasp queen is one of thousands who mated in late autumn and hibernated through the winter.
Now she emerges into the spring air to begin her reign.
Most of her sisters werent so lucky.
While hibernating in compost piles and underground burrows, many sleeping queens were eaten by spiders.
Warm winters caused by climate change led other queens to emerge early, only to find there was no available food.
And some queens that survived the winter fell victim to the threats of spring, such as carnivorous plants, birds, and manmade pesticides.
Our queen is the lone survivor of her old hive, and now, she must become the foundress of a new one.
But first, breakfast.
The queen heads for a citrus grove full of honeybee hives.
The bees can be dangerous if provoked, but right now theyre paralyzed by the morning cold.
Their hairy bodies are dripping with sugar water from an earlier feeding, and the resourceful queen licks them for a morning snack.
Newly energized, our queen searches for a safe nesting area.
This tree hollow, safe from rain, wind, and predators, is ideal.
She chews the surrounding wood and plant fibers to make a paper-like pulp.
Then she builds around 50 brood cells that comprise the beginning of her nest.
Using sperm stored from last fall, the queen lays a fertilized egg into each cell, producing as many as 12 in 20 minutes.
Within a week, these will hatch into female larva.
But until then, the queen must hunt down smaller insects to feed her brood, all while expanding the hive, laying eggs, and defending against intruders.
Fortunately, our queen is well prepared.
Unlike bees, wasps can sting as many times as they need to.
With such a busy schedule, the queen barely has time to feed herself.
Luckily, she doesnt have to.
When she feeds an insect to her grubs, they digest the bug into a sugary substance that sustains their mother.
By the end of July, these first larva have matured into adult workers, ready to take on foraging, building, and defense.
The queen can now lay eggs full-time, sustaining herself on her workers spoils and their unfertilized eggs.
Although each worker only lives for roughly 3 weeks, the queens continuous egg-laying swells their ranks.
In just one summer, the nest reaches the size of a basketball, supporting thousands of workers.
Such a large population needs to eat, and the nearby garden provides a veritable buffet.
As the swarm descends, alarmed humans try to swat them.
They even fight back with pesticides that purposefully poison wasps, and inadvertently impact a wide-range of local wildlife.
But the wasps are actually vital to this ecosystem.
Sitting at the top of the local invertebrate food chain, these insects keep spiders, mites, and centipedes, in check.
Wasps consume crop-eating insects, making them particularly helpful for farms and gardens.
They even pollinate fruits and vegetables, and help winemakers by biting into their grapes and jump-starting fermentation.
This feast continues until autumn, when the foundress changes course.
She begins grooming some eggs into a new generation of queens, while also laying unfertilized eggs that will mature into reproductive males called drones.
This new crop of queens and males requires more food.
But with summer over, the usual sources run dry, and the foraging wasps start taking more aggressive risks.
By September, the hives organization deteriorates.
Hungry workers no longer clean the nest and various scavengers move in.
Just when it seems the hive can no longer sustain itself, the fertile queens and their drones depart in a massive swarm.
As the days grow colder, the workers starve, and our queen reaches the end of her lifespan.
But above, a swarm of reproductive wasps has successfully mated.
The males die off shortly after, but the newly fertilized queens are ready to find shelter for their long sleep.
And this woodpile looks like the perfect place to spend the winter.
Lord Shiva primordial destroyer of evil, slayer of demons, protector, and omniscient observer of the universe was testing his wifes patience.
Historically, the union between Shiva and Parvati was a glorious one.
They maintained the equilibrium between thought and action on which the well-being of the world depended.
Without Parvati as the agent of energy, growth, and transformation on Earth, Shiva would become a detached observer, and the world would remain static.
But together, the two formed a divine union known as Ardhanarishvara a sacred combination which brought fertility and connection to all living things.
For these reasons, Parvati was worshipped far and wide as the mother of the natural world and the essential counterpart to Shivas powers of raw creation.
She oversaw humanitys material comforts; and ensured that the Earths inhabitants were bonded to each other physically, emotionally, and spiritually.
Yet a rift had grown between these two formidable forces.
While Parvati sustained daily life with care and control, Shiva had begun to belittle his wifes essential work and insisted on quarreling about their roles in the universe.
He believed that Brahma, the Creator of the world, had conceived the material plane purely for his own fancy.
And therefore, all material things were merely distractions called my nothing but a cosmic illusion.
For millennia Parvati had merely smiled knowingly as Shiva dismissed the things she nurtured.
But upon His latest rebuke, she knew she had to prove the importance of her work once and for all.
She took flight from the world, withdrawing her half of the cosmic energy that kept the Earth turning.
At her disappearance, a sudden, terrifying and all-encompassing scarcity enveloped the world in eerie silence.
Without Parvati, the land became dry and barren.
Rivers shrank and crops shriveled in the fields.
Hunger descended on humanity.
Parents struggled to console their starving children while their own stomachs rumbled.
With nothing to eat, people no longer gathered over heaped bowls of rice, but withdrew and shrank from the darkening world.
To His shock and awe, Shiva also felt the profound emptiness left by his wifes absence.
Despite His supreme power, He too realized that He was not immune to the need for sustenance, and His yearning felt bottomless and unbearable.
As Shiva despaired over the desolate Earth, He came to realize that the material world could not be so easily dismissed.
At her husbands epiphany, the compassionate Parvati could no longer stand by and watch her devotees wasting away.
To walk among them and restore their health, she took the form of a new avatar, carrying a golden bowl of porridge and armed with a jewel-encrusted ladle.
As word of this hopeful figure spread, she was worshipped as Annapurna, the Goddess of food.
With the arrival of Annapurna, the world blossomed anew.
People rejoiced at fertility and food, and communed together to give thanks.
Some believe that Annapurna first appeared in the sacred city of Kashi, or the Place of Freedom, on the banks of the Ganges where she opened a kitchen to fill the bellies of the people until they could eat no more.
But it was not only mere mortals who were served at her feast.
Humbled at the scenes of earthly pleasure blooming all around him, Lord Shiva himself approached the goddess with an empty bowl and begged for food and forgiveness.
For this reason, the supreme deity is sometimes portrayed as a poor beggar at the mercy of Annapurna; holding her golden bowl in her left hand, while the right forms the abhaya mudra a gesture of safety and assurance.
With these symbols, this powerful avatar makes it clear that the material world is anything but an illusion.
Rather, it is a cycle of life that must be sustained from the feeding of open mouths and rumbling bellies, to the equilibrium of the Earth.
My journey to coming here today started in 1974.
That's me with the funny gloves.
I was 17 and going on a peace walk.
What I didn't know though, was most of those people, standing there with me, were Moonies.
(Laughter) And within a week I had come to believe that the second coming of Christ had occurred, that it was Sun Myung Moon, and that I had been specially chosen and prepared by God to be his disciple.
Now as cool as that sounds, my family was not that thrilled with this.
(Laughter) And they tried everything they could to get me out of there.
There was an underground railroad of sorts that was going on during those years. Maybe some of you remember it.
They were called deprogrammers.
And after about five long years my family had me deprogrammed.
And I then became a deprogrammer.
I started going out on cases.
And after about five years of doing this, I was arrested for kidnapping.
Most of the cases I went out on were called involuntary.
What happened was that the family had to get their loved ones some safe place somehow.
And so they took them to some safe place.
And we would come in and talk to them, usually for about a week.
And so after this happened, I decided it was a good time to turn my back on this work.
And about 20 years went by.
There was a burning question though that would not leave me.
And that was, "How did this happen to me?"
And in fact, what did happen to my brain?
Because something did.
And so I decided to write a book, a memoir, about this decade of my life.
And toward the end of writing that book there was a documentary that came out.
It was on Jonestown.
And it had a chilling effect on me.
These are the dead in Jonestown.
About 900 people died that day, most of them taking their own lives.
Women gave poison to their babies, and watched foam come from their mouths as they died.
The top picture is a group of Moonies that have been blessed by their messiah.
Their mates were chosen for them.
The bottom picture is Hitler youth.
This is the leg of a suicide bomber.
The thing I had to admit to myself, with great repulsion, was that I get it.
I understand how this could happen.
I understand how someone's brain, how someone's mind can come to the place where it makes sense -- in fact it would be wrong, when your brain is working like that -- not to try to save the world through genocide.
And so what is this? How does this work?
And how I've come to view what happened to me is a viral, memetic infection.
For those of you who aren't familiar with memetics, a meme has been defined as an idea that replicates in the human brain and moves from brain to brain like a virus, much like a virus. The way a virus works is -- it can infect and do the most damage to someone who has a compromised immune system.
In 1974, I was young, I was naive, and I was pretty lost in my world.
I was really idealistic.
These easy ideas to complex questions are very appealing when you are emotionally vulnerable.
What happens is that circular logic takes over.
"Moon is one with God.
God is going to fix all the problems in the world.
All I have to do is humbly follow.
Because God is going to stop war and hunger -- all these things I wanted to do -- all I have to do is humbly follow.
Because after all, God is [working through] the messiah. He's going to fix all this."
It becomes impenetrable.
And the most dangerous part of this is that is creates "us" and "them," "right" and "wrong," "good" and "evil."
And it makes anything possible, makes anything rationalizable.
And the thing is, though, if you looked at my brain during those years in the Moonies -- neuroscience is expanding exponentially, as Ray Kurzweil said yesterday. Science is expanding.
We're beginning to look inside the brain.
And so if you looked at my brain, or any brain that's infected with a viral memetic infection like this, and compared it to anyone in this room, or anyone who uses critical thinking on a regular basis, I am convinced it would look very, very different.
And that, strange as it may sound, gives me hope.
And the reason that gives me hope is that the first thing is to admit that we have a problem.
But it's a human problem. It's a scientific problem, if you will.
It happens in the human brain. There is no evil force out there to get us.
And so this is something that, through research and education, I believe that we can solve.
And so the first step is to realize that we can do this together, and that there is no "us" and "them."
Thank you very much. (Applause)
Paleontology, a science geared towards small children, focused on digging up dinosaurs while sporting a "Jurassic Park" costume.
Skulls are popped out of the ground and put on display for public gawking.
The relevance of this, beyond clickbait, coloring books and monster movies is unknown.
No ...
That's not paleontology at all.
Paleontology is nothing less than the study of past life.
All past life.
It involves fundamental questions like "Who are we?"
And "How did we get here?" -- using the broadest possible definition of "we": life itself.
Dinosaurs, a category of birds, are just a small percentage of that.
(Laughter) Yet they get the most media attention.
[The incredible diversity of ancient life, Dinosaurs, Paleontology] It's a very accurate meme; I didn't even make this one.
This is just the truth.
Anyway, most of us paleontologists consider dinosaurs to be a gateway drug.
There is so much cooler stuff in the fossil record, and we know so much about it.
Let's go on a brief, dinosaur-free tour of the last four billion years.
(Laughter) First up, genetic material.
Viruses, basically, started producing proteins and wrecking their environment.
The Earth was infected with life.
Some of these new bacteria learned how to eat sunshine, producing oxygen, pulling in carbon from the air and destroying the iron food of other microbes by turning it into rust.
This went on for billions of years.
Some bacteria consumed other bacteria, gaining their power to turn oxygen into energy, becoming the precursors of animals and plants.
But as a result, there were climate shocks, from hot to cold and back again, which ended up turning the Earth into a snowball covered with glaciers.
The technical term for this time period is "Snowball Earth."
(Laughter) Seven hundred, eight hundred million years ago.
Anyway, microbes banded together, creating multicellular life.
Six hundred million years ago, geometric colonies appeared, sucking microbes from the water.
These were soon replaced by the ancestors of modern animals.
The Cambrian explosion.
Lobster relatives ate other animals, capturing them using their grasping arms.
Armored wriggling clam worms crawled across the seafloor and into it, creating new ecosystems.
Our tadpole-like ancestors flitted along ancient coastlines, while their eel-like relatives with gnashing throat teeth swam above the ice-cream cone corals of the first reefs, dodging school-bus-sized krakens and hungry sea scorpions.
Plant fungus came onto land.
But then the glaciers returned, killing pretty much everything.
But mass extinctions open opportunities.
Jawless fishes invaded the ocean, sporting points, prongs, and finally, fins.
Spiders, scorpions, snails and worms came onto land.
Somewhere around China, a fish developed jaws, and its descendants drove jawless fishes, sea scorpions and branching plankton to extinction.
Some of these fishes, which had arm bones in their fins, sprouted fingers, seven or eight per flipper.
On land, plants became trees, growing massive or spreading their spores only once before dying.
But then the glaciers came back again, and it was mass extinction number two.
It was the age of weird fishes and plated sea lilies.
Sharks with wings.
Sharks with buzz saw jaws.
Sharks with fins covered in tiny teeth.
Sharks with crushing tooth plates.
Bony fishes that looked like modern angelfish and eels for the first time.
Wetlands developed, sporting ten-foot-long millipedes and giant dragon flies.
These spread across the supercontinent of Pangaea and died, creating coal, leading to a 100-million-year Ice Age.
Finally, vertebrates made it onto land on a permanent basis, leading to alligator-like amphibians and saber-toothed protomammals.
But then, volcanoes erupted all over Siberia, everything almost died and it was mass extinction number three.
(Laughter) The day life nearly died.
A single, lonely tusked mammal survived and thrived, but it was soon replaced by galloping crocodiles.
In the ocean, marine reptiles, giant rafts made of the living relatives of sea urchins and armored squids, ammonoids, of every kind and form.
But then, Pangaea started to split apart, forming a sea of lava that would one day become the Atlantic Ocean, spewing toxic gas into the atmosphere and mass extinction number four.
(Laughter) Yeah, there's actually a lot more than these five, these are the big ones.
(Laughter) So, finally, there were whale-sized fishes, and modern fishes mobbed corals, made gigantic by using their captured algae to eat sunshine.
Crabs, stingrays and other fishes with crushing teeth appeared, smashing shells and leading to an arms race between predators and prey.
There was an explosion of marine biodiversity.
Mammals climbed trees, flew and did a lot of other things that are seemingly sort of modern.
They were feeding on the first flowers pollinated by the first bees.
There were ecological revolutions on land and at sea, leading to the modern world.
Except that an asteroid hit Mexico, and then that triggered volcanoes on the other side of the world in India, and everything almost died again.
(Laughter) But -- there's always a but, because we're still here -- mammals arose from the ashes, became small under extreme heat and then ever larger.
There were palm trees and snakes in the Arctic.
Predatory deer dogs frolicked along ancient rivers, while their relatives returned to the ocean to become the first otter-like whales.
Not hyenas and other sort of carnivores were chased off by giant long-necked rhinos.
Everything at this point seems kind of familiar but not really.
In Antarctica, an ice age started, forming the first permanent polar ice cap in two hundred million years.
This dried out the rest of the world, but it allowed the rise of grasses, of rodents, of cats.
Somewhere in Africa, an ape started walking across the new savannah.
Oh, and there were giant saber-toothed salmon, I just have to mention that.
(Laughter) So, we know all of this happened and so much more.
How?
Why?
Paleontology is a thriving science at the intersection of multiple other fields and technologies.
There is no bigger data than the fossil record, and we mine every bit of it.
We use CAT scans, we use isotopes, we use genomes, we use robots, we use mathematical simulations and all kinds of analytics.
We maximize all of it so that we can understand the past and how evolution works.
It also lets us make predictions for the future.
What will happen after the next mass extinction?
What weird things will show up?
Will mammals get smaller again?
Will there even be mammals?
In sum, we have learned a lot about dinosaurs.
But there's so much left to learn from the other 99.9 percent of things that have ever lived.
And that's paleontology.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
Food is design.
It is design when you compose plates, but it is amazing, even better and most delightful design when it's about the units.
[Small thing.] [Big idea.] "Pasta" comes from Latin, and it means "paste."
It's about putting together water and some powder, so that you can actually shape it.
There are cultures in the world that use rice powder, others use soy powder.
In Italy, we tend to use durum wheat.
Pasta existed for centuries, but it really blossomed during the Renaissance.
And it's only later on in the 17th century that it became more mass produced.
Whenever you design an object of any kind, you think of how you want it to perform.
So think about the same for pasta.
Do you want it to be ribbed or you want it to be smooth?
The ribbed ones absorb the sauce better.
Do you want them to be round or do you want them to be square?
They have a different feel on the palate.
Everything is for a reason.
In the amazing taxonomy of the pasta species, there are many different ways to divide it, but one of the basic divisions is between fresh pasta and dry pasta.
Dry pasta is always durum wheat flour and water.
Fresh pasta could be either that or it could be flour and eggs.
Just think of having a dough that you can shape in any way you want.
I mean, really, wouldn't you go crazy?
So fresh and dry, but then, there's also long and short.
And then within those families, there's even more diversity.
Let's talk about some really classical types of short pasta.
Penne -- we all know them, right?
They are cut at a slanted angle, perfect to pick up some of the sauce.
"Farfalle" means "butterflies," or how do you call it here, bow ties, because they are, like, pinched in the middle.
"Orecchiette" means "little ears," and they're typical from Puglia, and they are delicious.
And "conquilla," shells, and of course, they look like shells.
They are ribbed, so they scoop up the sauce on the outside and they are smooth on the inside.
Pasta is definitely gorgeous, but the form also is about how it touches the palate, how it touches the tongue, so it's never just about giving it a shape.
When you hone one object across centuries, standards become really, really high.
Many so-called great designers failed miserably, because they tried to impose a shape onto pasta.
The great Philippe Starck tried mandala.
Some parts of it, the walls, were very thick, and the others were thinner, so when you would boil the pasta, some of it would be completely mushy while part of it was too crunchy and uncooked.
So really wrong, but they were not women from Bologna, they were not chefs from Naples, they were not centuries of families of grandmothers that were trying to improve on the thinness of the walls of the pasta.
There's no way to trace pasta back to one designer, one inventor, and that's the beauty of it.
It belongs to the people.
And if you think about it, this simple mixture of a carbohydrate and water becomes the scaffold for a whole culture to be built.
I'm the luckiest guy in the world.
I got to see the last case of killer smallpox in the world.
I was in India this past year, and I may have seen the last cases of polio in the world.
There's nothing that makes you feel more -- the blessing and the honor of working in a program like that -- than to know that something that horrible no longer exists.
So I'm going to tell you -- (Applause) so I'm going to show you some dirty pictures.
They are difficult to watch, but you should look at them with optimism, because the horror of these pictures will be matched by the uplifting quality of knowing that they no longer exist.
But first, I'm going to tell you a little bit about my own journey.
My background is not exactly the conventional medical education that you might expect.
When I was an intern in San Francisco, I heard about a group of Native Americans who had taken over Alcatraz Island, and a Native American who wanted to give birth on that island, and no other doctor wanted to go and help her give birth.
I went out to Alcatraz, and I lived on the island for several weeks.
She gave birth; I caught the baby; I got off the island; I landed in San Francisco; and all the press wanted to talk to me, because my three weeks on the island made me an expert in Indian affairs.
(Laughter) I wound up on every television show.
Someone saw me on television; they called me up; and they asked me if I'd like to be in a movie and to play a young doctor for a bunch of rock and roll stars who were traveling in a bus ride from San Francisco to England.
And I said, yes, I would do that, so I became the doctor in an absolutely awful movie called "Medicine Ball Caravan."
(Laughter) Now, you know from the '60s, you're either on the bus or you're off the bus; I was on the bus.
My wife of 37 years and I joined the bus.
Our bus ride took us from San Francisco to London, then we switched buses at the big pond.
We then got on two more buses and we drove through Turkey and Iran, Afghanistan, over the Khyber Pass into Pakistan, like every other young doctor.
This is us at the Khyber Pass, and that's our bus.
We had some difficulty getting over the Khyber Pass.
But we wound up in India.
And then, like everyone else in our generation, we went to live in a Himalayan monastery.
(Laughter) This is just like a residency program, for those of you that are in medical school.
(Laughter) And we studied with a wise man, a guru named Karoli Baba, who then told me to get rid of the dress, put on a three-piece suit, go join the United Nations as a diplomat and work for the World Health Organization.
And he made an outrageous prediction that smallpox would be eradicated, and that this was God's gift to humanity, because of the hard work of dedicated scientists.
And that prediction came true.
This little girl is Rahima Banu, and she was the last case of killer smallpox in the world.
And this document is the certificate that the global commission signed, certifying the world to have eradicated the first disease in history.
The key to eradicating smallpox was early detection, early response.
I'm going to ask you to repeat that: early detection, early response.
Can you say that?
Audience: Early detection, early response.
Larry Brilliant: Smallpox was the worst disease in history.
It killed more people than all the wars in history.
In the last century, it killed 500 million people.
You're reading about Larry Page already.
Somebody reads very fast.
(Laughter) In the year that Larry Page and Sergey Brin -- with whom I have a certain affection and a new affiliation -- in the year in which they were born, two million people died of smallpox.
We declared smallpox eradicated in 1980.
This is the most important slide that I've ever seen in public health, [Sovereigns killed by smallpox] because it shows you to be the richest and the strongest, and to be kings and queens of the world, did not protect you from dying of smallpox.
Never can you doubt that we are all in this together.
But to see smallpox from the perspective of a sovereign is the wrong perspective.
You should see it from the perspective of a mother, watching her child develop this disease and standing by helplessly.
Day one, day two, day three, day four, day five, day six.
You're a mother and you're watching your child, and on day six, you see pustules that become hard.
Day seven, they show the classic scars of smallpox umbilication.
Day eight.
And Al Gore said earlier that the most photographed image in the world, the most printed image in the world, was that of the Earth.
But this was in 1974, and as of that moment, this photograph was the photograph that was the most widely printed, because we printed two billion copies of this photograph, and we took them hand to hand, door to door, to show people and ask them if there was smallpox in their house, because that was our surveillance system.
We didn't have Google, we didn't have web crawlers, we didn't have computers.
By day nine -- you look at this picture and you're horrified; I look at this picture and I say, "Thank God," because it's clear that this is only an ordinary case of smallpox, and I know this child will live.
And by day 13, the lesions are scabbing, his eyelids are swollen, but you know this child has no other secondary infection.
And by day 20, while he will be scarred for life, he will live.
There are other kinds of smallpox that are not like that.
This is confluent smallpox, in which there isn't a single place on the body where you could put a finger and not be covered by lesions.
Flat smallpox, which killed 100 percent of people who got it.
And hemorrhagic smallpox, the most cruel of all, which had a predilection for pregnant women.
I've probably had 50 women die.
I've never seen anybody die from it who wasn't a pregnant woman.
In 1967, the WHO embarked on what was an outrageous program to eradicate a disease.
In that year, there were 34 countries affected with smallpox.
By 1970, we were down to 18 countries.
1974, we were down to five countries.
But in that year, smallpox exploded throughout India.
And India was the place where smallpox made its last stand.
In 1974, India had a population of 600 million.
There are 21 linguistic states in India, which is like saying 21 different countries.
There are 20 million people on the road at any time, in buses and trains, walking; 500,000 villages, 120 million households, and none of them wanted to report if they had a case of smallpox in their house, because they thought that smallpox was the visitation of a deity, Shitala Mata, the cooling mother, and it was wrong to bring strangers into your house when the deity was in the house.
It wasn't just India that had smallpox deities; smallpox deities were prevalent all over the world.
So, how we eradicated smallpox was -- mass vaccination wouldn't work.
You could vaccinate everybody in India, but one year later there'd be 21 million new babies, which was then the population of Canada.
It wouldn't do just to vaccinate everyone.
You had to find every single case of smallpox in the world at the same time, and draw a circle of immunity around it.
And that's what we did.
In India alone, my 150,000 best friends and I went door to door, with that same picture, to every single house in India.
And in the process, I learned something very important.
Every time we did a house-to-house search, we had a spike in the number of reports of smallpox.
When we didn't search, we had the illusion that there was no disease.
When we did search, we had the illusion that there was more disease.
A surveillance system was necessary, because what we needed was early detection, early response.
So we searched and we searched, and we found every case of smallpox in India.
We had a reward. We raised the reward.
We continued to increase the reward.
And as we did that, the number of reported cases in the world dropped to zero.
It was the largest campaign in United Nations history, until the Iraq war.
150,000 people from all over the world -- doctors of every race, religion, culture and nation, who fought side by side, brothers and sisters, with each other, not against each other, in a common cause to make the world better.
But smallpox was the fourth disease that was intended for eradication.
We failed three other times.
We failed against malaria, yellow fever and yaws.
But soon we may see polio eradicated.
But the key to eradicating polio is early detection, early response.
This may be the year we eradicate polio.
That will make it the second disease in history.
And David Heymann, who's watching this on the webcast -- David, keep on going. We're close!
(Applause) I feel like Hank Aaron.
Let's get another disease off the list of terrible things to worry about.
I was just in India working on the polio program.
The polio surveillance program is four million people going door to door.
That is the surveillance system.
But we need to have early detection, early response.
Blindness, the same thing.
The key to discovering blindness is doing epidemiological surveys and finding out the causes of blindness, so you can mount the correct response.
The Seva Foundation was started by a group of alumni of the Smallpox Eradication Programme, who, having climbed the highest mountain, tasted the elixir of the success of eradicating a disease, wanted to do it again.
And over the last 27 years, Seva's programs in 15 countries have given back sight to more than two million blind people.
Seva got started because we wanted to apply these lessons of surveillance and epidemiology to something which nobody else was looking at as a public health issue: blindness, which heretofore had been thought of only as a clinical disease.
In 1980, Steve Jobs gave me that computer, which is Apple number 12, and it's still in Kathmandu, and it's still working, and we ought to go get it and auction it off and make more money for Seva.
And we conducted the first Nepal survey ever done for health, and the first nationwide blindness survey ever done, and we had astonishing results.
Instead of finding out what we thought was the case -- that blindness was caused mostly by glaucoma and trachoma -- we were astounded to find out that blindness was caused instead by cataract.
You can't cure or prevent what you don't know is there.
In your TED packages there's a DVD, "Infinite Vision," about Dr. V and the Aravind Eye Hospital.
I hope that you will take a look at it.
Aravind, which started as a Seva project, is now the world's largest and best eye hospital.
This year, that one hospital will give back sight to more than 300,000 people in Tamil Nadu, India.
(Applause) Bird flu.
I stand here as a representative of all terrible things -- this might be the worst.
The key to preventing or mitigating pandemic bird flu is early detection and rapid response.
We will not have a vaccine or adequate supplies of an antiviral to combat bird flu if it occurs in the next three years.
WHO stages the progress of a pandemic.
We are now at stage three on the pandemic alert stage, with just a little bit of human-to-human transmission, but no human-to-human-to-human sustained transmission.
The moment WHO says we've moved to category four -- this will not be like Katrina.
There'll be no airplanes flying.
Would you get in an airplane with 250 people you didn't know, coughing and sneezing, when you knew that some of them might carry a disease that could kill you, for which you had no antivirals or vaccine?
I did a study of the top epidemiologists in the world in October.
I asked them -- these are all fluologists and specialists in influenza -- and I asked them the questions you'd like to ask them: What do you think the likelihood is that there'll be a pandemic?
If it happens, how bad do you think it will be?
Fifteen percent said they thought there'd be a pandemic within three years.
But much worse than that, 90 percent said they thought there'd be a pandemic within your children or your grandchildren's lifetime.
And they thought that if there was a pandemic, a billion people would get sick.
As many as 165 million people would die.
There would be a global recession and depression as our just-in-time inventory system and the tight rubber band of globalization broke, and the cost to our economy of one to three trillion dollars would be far worse for everyone than merely 100 million people dying, because so many more people would lose their job and their healthcare benefits, that the consequences are almost unthinkable.
And it's getting worse, because travel is getting so much better.
Let me show you a simulation of what a pandemic looks like.
So we know what we're talking about.
Let's assume, for example, that the first case occurs in South Asia.
It initially goes quite slowly.
You get two or three discrete locations.
Then there'll be secondary outbreaks, and the disease will spread from country to country so fast that you won't know what hit you.
Within three weeks it will be everywhere in the world.
Now, if we had an "undo" button, and we could go back and isolate it and grab it when it first started -- if we could find it early, and we had early detection and early response, and we could put each one of those viruses in jail -- that's the only way to deal with something like a pandemic.
And let me show you why that is.
We have a joke.
This is an epidemic curve, and everyone in medicine, I think, ultimately gets to know what it is.
But the joke is, an epidemiologist likes to arrive at an epidemic right here and ride to glory on the downhill curve.
(Laughter) But you don't get to do that usually.
You usually arrive right about here.
What we really want is to arrive right here, so we can stop the epidemic.
But you can't always do that.
But there's an organization that has been able to find a way to learn when the first cases occur, and that is called GPHIN; it's the Global Public Health Information Network.
And that simulation that I showed you that you thought was bird flu -- that was SARS.
And SARS is the pandemic that did not occur.
And it didn't occur because GPHIN found the pandemic-to-be of SARS three months before WHO actually announced it, and because of that, we were able to stop the SARS pandemic.
And I think we owe a great debt of gratitude to GPHIN and to Ron St. John, who I hope is in the audience some place -- over there -- who's the founder of GPHIN.
(Applause) Hello, Ron!
(Applause) And TED has flown Ron here from Ottawa, where GPHIN is located, because not only did GPHIN find SARS early, but you may have seen last week that Iran announced that they had bird flu in Iran, but GPHIN found the bird flu in Iran not February 14 -- but last September.
We need an early-warning system to protect us against the things that are humanity's worst nightmare.
And so my TED wish is based on the common denominator of these experiences.
Smallpox -- early detection, early response.
Blindness, polio -- early detection, early response.
Pandemic bird flu -- early detection, early response.
It is a litany.
It is so obvious that our only way of dealing with these new diseases is to find them early and to kill them before they spread.
So, my TED wish is for you to help build a global system -- an early-warning system -- to protect us against humanity's worst nightmares.
And what I thought I would call it is "Early Detection," But it should really be called ...
"Total Early Detection." [TED] (Laughter) What?
(Applause) But in all seriousness, because this idea is birthed in TED, I would like it to be a legacy of TED, and I'd like to call it the "International System for Total Early Disease Detection."
[INSTEDD] And INSTEDD then becomes our mantra.
So instead of a hidden pandemic of bird flu, we find it and immediately contain it.
Instead of a novel virus caused by bio-terror or bio-error, or shift or drift, we find it and we contain it.
Instead of industrial accidents like oil spills or the catastrophe in Bhopal, we find them, and we respond to them.
Instead of famine, hidden until it is too late, we detect it, and we respond.
And instead of a system which is owned by a government, and hidden in the bowels of government, let's build an early detection system that's freely available to anyone in the world in their own language.
Let's make it transparent, non-governmental, not owned by any single country or company, housed in a neutral country, with redundant backup in a different time zone and a different continent.
And let's build it on GPHIN.
Let's increase the websites that they crawl from 20,000 to 20 million.
Let's increase the languages they crawl from seven to 70, or more.
Let's build in outbound confirmation messages, using text messages or SMS or instant messaging to find out from people who are within 100 meters of the rumor that you hear, if it is, in fact, valid.
And let's add satellite confirmation.
And we'll add Gapminder's amazing graphics to the front end.
And we'll grow it as a moral force in the world, finding out those terrible things before anybody else knows about them, and sending our response to them, so that next year, instead of us meeting here, lamenting how many terrible things there are in the world, we will have pulled together, used the unique skills and the magic of this community, and be proud that we have done everything we can to stop pandemics, other catastrophes, and change the world, beginning right now.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: An amazing presentation.
First of all, just so everyone understands: you're saying that by creating web crawlers, looking on the Internet for patterns, they can detect something suspicious before WHO, before anyone else can see it?
Give an example of how that could possibly be true.
Larry Brilliant: You're not mad about the copyright violation?
CA: No. I love it.
(Laughter) LB: Well, as Ron St. John -- I hope you'll go and meet him in the dinner afterwards and talk to him.
When he started GPHIN -- In 1997, there was an outbreak of bird flu -- H5N1.
It was in Hong Kong.
And a remarkable doctor in Hong Kong responded immediately, by slaughtering 1.5 million chickens and birds, and they stopped that outbreak in its tracks.
Immediate detection, immediate response.
Then a number of years went by, and there were a lot of rumors about bird flu.
Ron and his team in Ottawa began to crawl the web -- only crawling 20,000 different websites, mostly periodicals -- and they read about and heard about a concern, of a lot of children who had high fever and symptoms of bird flu.
They reported this to WHO.
WHO took a little while taking action, because WHO will only receive a report from a government, because it's the United Nations.
But they were able to point to WHO and let them know that there was this surprising and unexplained cluster of illnesses that looked like bird flu.
That turned out to be SARS.
That's how the world found out about SARS.
And because of that, we were able to stop SARS.
Now, what's really important is that, before there was GPHIN, 100 percent of all the world's reports of bad things -- whether you're talking about famine or you're talking about bird flu or you're talking about Ebola -- 100 percent of all those reports came from nations.
The moment these guys in Ottawa -- on a budget of 800,000 dollars a year -- got cracking, 75 percent of all the reports in the world came from GPHIN, 25 percent of all the reports in the world came from all the other 180 nations.
Now, here's what's really interesting: after they'd been working for a couple years, what do you think happened to those nations?
They felt pretty stupid.
And now, their reporting percentage is down to 50 percent, because other nations have started to report.
So, can you find diseases early by crawling the web?
Of course you can.
Of course you can.
You saw that they found SARS using their Chinese web crawler a full six weeks before they found it using their English web crawler.
Well, they're only crawling in seven languages.
These bad viruses really don't have any intention of showing up first in English or Spanish or French.
(Laughter) So yes, I want to take GPHIN, I want to build on it.
I want to add all the languages of the world that we possibly can.
I want to make this open to everybody, so that the health officer in Nairobi or in Patna, Bihar will have as much access to it as the folks in Ottawa or in CDC.
And I want to make it part of our culture that there is a community of people who are watching out for the worst nightmares of humanity, and that it's accessible to everyone.
A talk about surgical robots is also a talk about surgery.
And while I've tried to make my images not too graphic, keep in mind that surgeons have a different relationship with blood than normal people do, because, after all, what a surgeon does to a patient, if it were done without consent, would be a felony.
Surgeons are the tailors, the plumbers, the carpenters -- some would say the butchers -- of the medical world: cutting, reshaping, reforming, bypassing, fixing.
But you need to talk about surgical instruments and the evolution of surgical technology together.
So in order to give you some kind of a perspective of where we are right now with surgical robots, and where we're going to be going in the future, I want to give you a little bit of perspective of how we got to this point, how we even came to believe that surgery was OK, that this was something that was possible to do, that this kind of cutting and reforming was OK.
So, a little bit of perspective -- about 10,000 years of perspective.
This is a trephinated skull.
And trephination is simply just cutting a hole in the skull.
And many, many hundreds of skulls like this have been found in archaeological sites all over the world, dating back five to 10 thousand years.
Five to 10 thousand years! Now imagine this.
You are a healer in a Stone Age village.
And you have some guy that you're not quite sure what's wrong with him -- Oliver Sacks is going to be born way in the future.
He's got some seizure disorder. And you don't understand this.
But you think to yourself, "I'm not quite sure what's wrong with this guy.
But maybe if I cut a hole in his head I can fix it."
(Laughter) Now that is surgical thinking.
Now we've got the dawn of interventional surgery here.
What is astonishing about this is, even though we don't know really how much of this was intended to be religious, or how much of it was intended to be therapeutic, what we can tell is that these patients lived!
Judging by the healing on the borders of these holes, they lived days, months, years following trephination.
And so what we are seeing is evidence of a refined technique that was being handed down over thousands and thousands of years, all over the world.
This arose independently at sites everywhere that had no communication to one another.
We really are seeing the dawn of interventional surgery.
Now we can fast forward many thousands of years into the Bronze Age and beyond.
And we see new refined tools coming out.
But surgeons in these eras are a little bit more conservative than their bold, trephinating ancestors.
These guys confined their surgery to fairly superficial injuries.
And surgeons were tradesmen, rather than physicians.
This persisted all the way into and through the Renaissance.
That may have saved the writers, but it didn't really save the surgeons terribly much.
They were still a mistrusted lot.
Surgeons still had a bit of a PR problem, because the landscape was dominated by the itinerant barber surgeon.
These were folks that traveled from village to village, town to town, doing surgery sort of as a form of performance art.
Because we were in the age before anesthesia, the agony of the patient is really as much of the public spectacle as the surgery itself.
One of the most famous of these guys, Frere Jacques, shown here doing a lithotomy -- which is the removal of the bladder stone, one of the most invasive surgeries they did at the time -- had to take less than two minutes.
You had to have quite a flair for the dramatic, and be really, really quick.
And so here you see him doing a lithotomy.
And he is credited with doing over 4,000 of these public surgeries, wandering around in Europe, which is an astonishing number, when you think that surgery must have been a last resort.
I mean who would put themselves through that?
Until anesthesia, the absence of sensation.
With the demonstration of the Morton Ether Inhaler at the Mass. General in 1847, a whole new era of surgery was ushered in.
Anesthesia gave surgeons the freedom to operate.
Anesthesia gave them the freedom to experiment, to start to delve deeper into the body.
This was truly a revolution in surgery.
But there was a pretty big problem with this.
After these very long, painstaking operations, attempting to cure things they'd never been able to touch before, the patients died.
They died of massive infection.
Surgery didn't hurt anymore, but it killed you pretty quickly.
And infection would continue to claim a majority of surgical patients until the next big revolution in surgery, which was aseptic technique.
Joseph Lister was aepsis's, or sterility's, biggest advocate, to a very very skeptical bunch of surgeons.
But eventually they did come around.
The Mayo brothers came out to visit Lister in Europe.
And they came back to their American clinic and they said they had learned it was as important to wash your hands before doing surgery as it was to wash up afterwards. (Laughter) Something so simple.
And yet, operative mortality dropped profoundly.
These surgeries were actually now being effective.
With the patient insensitive to pain, and a sterile operating field all bets were off, the sky was the limit.
You could now start doing surgery everywhere, on the gut, on the liver, on the heart, on the brain.
Transplantation: you could take an organ out of one person, you could put it in another person, and it would work.
Surgeons didn't have a problem with respectability anymore; they had become gods.
The era of the "big surgeon, big incision" had arrived, but at quite a cost, because they are saving lives, but not necessarily quality of life, because healthy people don't usually need surgery, and unhealthy people have a very hard time recovering from a cut like that.
The question had to be asked, "Well, can we do these same surgeries but through little incisions?"
Laparoscopy is doing this kind of surgery: surgery with long instruments through small incisions.
And it really changed the landscape of surgery.
Some of the tools for this had been around for a hundred years, but it had only been used as a diagnostic technique until the 1980s, when there was changes in camera technologies and things like that, that allowed this to be done for real operations.
So what you see -- this is now the first surgical image -- as we're coming down the tube, this is a new entry into the body.
It looks very different from what you're expecting surgery to look like.
We bring instruments in, from two separate cuts in the side, and then you can start manipulating tissue.
Within 10 years of the first gallbladder surgeries being done laparoscopically, a majority of gallbladder surgeries were being done laparoscopically -- truly a pretty big revolution.
But there were casualties of this revolution.
These techniques were a lot harder to learn than people had anticipated.
The learning curve was very long.
And during that learning curve the complications went quite a bit higher.
Surgeons had to give up their 3D vision.
They had to give up their wrists.
They had to give up intuitive motion in the instruments.
This surgeon has over 3,000 hours of laparoscopic experience.
Now this is a particularly frustrating placement of the needle.
But this is hard.
And one of the reasons why it is so hard is because the external ergonomics are terrible.
You've got these long instruments, and you're working off your centerline.
And the instruments are essentially working backwards.
So what you need to do, to take the capability of your hand, and put it on the other side of that small incision, is you need to put a wrist on that instrument.
And so -- I get to talk about robots -- the da Vinci robot put just that wrist on the other side of that incision.
And so here you're seeing the operation of this wrist.
And now, in contrast to the laparoscopy, you can precisely place the needle in your instruments, and you can pass it all the way through and follow it in a trajectory.
And the reason why this becomes so much easier is -- you can see on the bottom -- the hands are making the motions, and the instruments are following those motions exactly.
Now, what you put between those instruments and those hands, is a large, fairly complicated robot.
The surgeon is sitting at a console, and controlling the robot with these controllers.
And the robot is moving these instruments around, and powering them, down inside the body.
You have a 3D camera, so you get a 3D view.
And since this was introduced in 1999, a lot of these robots have been out and being used for surgical procedures like a prostatectomy, which is a prostate deep in the pelvis, and it requires fine dissection and delicate manipulation to be able to get a good surgical outcome.
You can also sew bypass vessels directly onto a beating heart without cracking the chest.
This is all done in between the ribs.
And you can go inside the heart itself and repair the valves from the inside.
You've got these technologies -- thank you -- (Applause) And so you might say, "Wow this is really cool!
So, smartypants, why isn't all surgery being done this way?"
And there are some reasons, some good reasons.
And cost is one of them.
I talked about the large, complicated robot.
With all its bells and whistles, one of those robots will cost you about as much as a solid gold surgeon.
More useful than a solid gold surgeon, but, still, it's a fairly big capital investment.
But once you've got it, your procedure costs do come down.
But there are other barriers.
So something like a prostatectomy -- the prostate is small, and it's in one spot, and you can set your robot up very precisely to work in that one spot.
And so it's perfect for something like that.
And in fact if you, or anyone you know, had their prostate taken out in the last couple of years, chances are it was done with one of these systems.
But if you need to reach more places than just one, you need to move the robot.
And you need to put some new incisions in there.
And you need to re-set it up.
And then you need to add some more ports, and more.
And the problem is it gets time-consuming, and cumbersome.
And for that reason there are many surgeries that just aren't being done with the da Vinci.
So we had to ask the question, "Well how do we fix that?"
What if we could change it so that we didn't have to re-set up each time we wanted to move somewhere different?
What if we could bring all the instruments in together in one place?
How would that change the capabilities of the surgeon?
And how would that change the experience for the patient?
Now, to do that, we need to be able to bring a camera and instruments in together through one small tube, like that tube you saw in the laparoscopy video.
Or, not so coincidentally, like a tube like this.
So what's going to come out of that tube is the debut of this new technology, this new robot that is going to be able to reach anywhere.
Ready? So here it comes.
This is the camera, and three instruments.
And as you see it come out, in order to actually be able to do anything useful, it can't all stay clustered up like this.
It has to be able to come off of the centerline and then be able to work back toward that centerline.
He's a cheeky little devil.
But what this lets you do is gives you that all-important traction, and counter-traction, so that you can dissect, so that you can sew, so that you can do all the things that you need to do, all the surgical tasks.
But it's all coming in through one incision.
It's not so simple.
But it's worth it for the freedom that this gives us as we're going around.
For the patient, however, it's transparent. This is all they're going to see.
It's very exciting to think where we get to go with this.
We get to write the script of the next revolution in surgery.
As we take these capabilities, and we get to go to the next places, we get to decide what our new surgeries are going to be.
And I think to really get the rest of the way in that revolution, we need to not just take our hands in in new ways, we also need to take our eyes in in new ways.
We need to see beyond the surface.
We need to be able to guide what we're cutting in a much better way.
This is a cancer surgery.
One of the problems with this, even for surgeons who've been looking at this a lot, is you can't see the cancer, especially when it's hidden below the surface.
And so what we're starting to do is we're starting to inject specially designed markers into the bloodstream that will target the cancer.
It will go, bind to the cancer.
And we can make those markers glow.
And we can take special cameras, and we can look at it.
Now we know where we need to cut, even when it's below the surface.
We can take these markers and we can inject them in a tumor site.
And we can follow where they flow out from that tumor site, so we can see the first places where that cancer might travel.
We can inject these dyes into the bloodstream, so that when we do a new vessel and we bypass a blockage on the heart, we can see if we actually made the connection, before we close that patient back up again -- something that we haven't been able to do without radiation before.
We can light up tumors like this kidney tumor, so that you can exactly see where the boundary is between the kidney tumor and the kidney you want to leave behind, or the liver tumor and the liver you want to leave behind.
And we don't even need to confine ourselves to this macro vision.
We have flexible microscopic probes that we can bring down into the body.
And we can look at cells directly.
I'm looking at nerves here. So these are nerves you see, down on the bottom, and the microscope probe that's being held by the robotic hand, up at the top.
So this is all very prototypey at this point.
But you care about nerves, if you are a surgical patient.
Because they let you keep continence, bladder control, and sexual function after surgery, all of which is generally fairly important to the patient.
So, with the combination of these technologies we can reach it all, and we can see it all.
We can heal the disease.
And we can leave the patient whole and intact and functional afterwards.
Now, I've talked about the patient as if the patient is, somehow, someone abstract outside this room.
And that is not the case.
Many of you, all of you maybe, will at some point, or have already, faced a diagnosis of cancer, or heart disease, or some organ dysfunction that's going to buy you a date with a surgeon.
And when you get to that point -- I mean, these maladies don't care how many books you've written, how many companies you've started, that Nobel Prize you have yet to win, how much time you planned to spend with your children.
These maladies come for us all.
And the prospect I'm offering you, of an easier surgery ...
is that going to make that diagnosis any less terrifying?
I'm not sure I really even want it to.
Because facing your own mortality causes a re-evaluation of priorities, and a realignment of what your goals are in life, unlike anything else.
And I would never want to deprive you of that epiphany.
What I want instead, is for you to be whole, intact, and functional enough to go out and save the world, after you've decided you need to do it.
And that is my vision for your future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You're probably familiar with FOMO.
[This guy invented the term] That's short for "Fear Of Missing Out."
It's that feeling you get when it seems everyone else is doing something better than what you're doing now.
But there's another FO you need to know about, and it's far more dangerous.
It's called FOBO, and it's short for "Fear Of a Better Option."
[The Way We Work] We live in a world of overwhelming choice.
Even decisions that used to be simple, like choosing a restaurant or making everyday purchases, are now fraught with overanalysis.
Technology has only made the issue more pronounced.
If you want to buy a pair of white shoelaces online, you have to sort through thousands of items and read through hundreds of reviews.
That's an astounding amount of information to process to just buy two pieces of string that cost less than your morning latte.
Chances are you've experienced FOBO when you've struggled to choose just one from a group of perfectly acceptable outcomes.
It's a symptom of a culture which sees value in collecting and preserving as many options as possible.
You might wonder why all of this is so bad.
It seems counterintuitive.
Shouldn't it be a privilege to have so many good options to choose from?
The problem is, FOBO induces such severe analysis paralysis that it can negatively impact both your personal and professional life.
When you can't make decisions with conviction, you waste precious time and energy.
Luckily, there is a way to overcome FOBO.
Here's a secret.
With any decision you make, you first have to determine the stakes, as this will inform your decision-making strategy.
When it comes down to it, you only really face three types of decisions in life: high stakes, low stakes and no stakes.
Let's start with no-stakes decisions.
These are the minor details of life, where there is almost never an incorrect answer, and in a few hours, you won't even remember making the decision.
A good example of this is choosing what to watch on TV.
With thousands of shows, it's easy to get overwhelmed, yet no matter what you pick, the consequences are basically nonexistent.
So spending more than a few moments on FOBO is a massive waste of energy.
You just need to move on.
When it comes to no-stakes decisions, the key is to outsource them to the universe.
For example, you can whittle down your choices to just two and then flip a coin.
Or try my personal favorite -- ask the watch.
Assign each one of your choices to one half of your watch, then let the second hand tell you what you're going to do.
Looks like I'll be having the fish.
That brings us to low-stakes decisions.
These have consequences, but none are earth-shattering, and there are plenty of acceptable outcomes.
Many routine things at work, like purchasing a printer, booking a hotel or choosing between possible venues for an off-site are classically low-stakes in nature.
Some thinking is required, but these aren't make-or-break deliberations, and you'll probably forget about them in a few weeks.
Here, you can also outsource decision-making, but you want some critical thinking involved, as there are some stakes.
This time, you'll outsource to a person.
Set some basic criteria, select someone to present a recommendation, and then take their advice.
Make sure to avoid the temptation to canvass.
Your goal is to clear your plate, not to kick the can down the road.
Now that you tackled low-stakes and no-stakes decisions, you've created the space and time you'll need to handle high-stakes decisions.
These are things like "which house should I buy" or "which job should I accept."
Since the stakes are high and there are long-term implications, you absolutely want to get it right.
Before we get to work, let's establish a few basic principles to guide you through the process.
First, think about what really matters to you, and set your criteria accordingly.
Second, gather the relevant facts.
Make sure you collect data about all of the options, so you can be confident that you're truly making an informed decision.
And third, remember that FOBO, by nature, comes when you struggle to choose just one from a group of perfectly acceptable options.
So no matter what you choose, you can rest assured that the downside is limited.
Now that you've established some ground rules, the process can begin.
Start by identifying a front-runner based on your intuition, then compare each of your options head-to-head with the front-runner, one-by-one.
Each time, choose the better of the two based on the criteria, and discard the other one.
Here's the trick to avoiding FOBO.
When you eliminate an option, it's gone forever.
If you keep returning to discarded options, you risk getting stuck.
Now repeat this process until you get down to one final choice.
If you follow this system, you will usually end up with a decision on your own.
On the rare occasion that you get stuck, you will outsource the final decision to a small group of qualified people who you trust and who are equipped to provide you with guidance on this particular topic.
Engage a group of five or less, ideally an odd number of people so that you have a built-in tiebreaker if you need it.
Now that you've made your choice, one last challenge remains.
You have to commit.
I can't promise you that you'll ever truly know if you've made the perfect decision, but I can tell you this: a significant percentage of people in the world will never have to worry about FOBO.
Unlike the billions of people who have few options, if any, due to war, poverty or illness, you have plentiful opportunities to live decisively.
You may not get everything you want, but the mere fact you get to decide is powerful.
In fact, it's a gift.
Make the most of it.
When I was pregnant, I just got very frustrated.
Don't eat deli meats, do this particular prenatal test.
Why did you make that choice? Why didn't you make a different choice?
I felt like I was being told to do things, and I never got the answer to why.
[The Way We Work] Sometimes in the world of modern parenting you just can't seem to win.
If I go back to work, I spend less time with my kid.
What if they don't get the attention they need to adequately develop?
If I stay home, and give up my income stream, will I look back and regret my decision?
There's a lot of conflicting advice out there about whether to stay home or go back to work, so trying to make a choice between the two can be confusing and emotional.
You love your kids and want what's best for them, but how do you determine what best means when everyone has a different opinion?
There are many variations of parents that a household can have, and I think more families should be asking the question of whether it makes sense for the male partner to stay home.
But the truth is that in the current time, most of the discussions about stay-at-home parents focus on women in particular.
And it's usually the women who say they feel that what they do during the day is gonna determine at a deep level what kind of mom and person they are.
That is a huge weight to put on yourself as a parent.
And when you're met with the side-eye after telling someone you're going back to work or not, it can poke holes in your confidence.
Is it better to stay at home or go back to work?
It's an emotional decision, yes, but as an economist I've learned that we can use data to help navigate through those emotional decisions and feel confident we're making the best decision for our family.
Specifically there are three main factors you should consider before you decide.
First, you need to think about how this decision will affect your family budget.
Let's do some numbers.
Say your total household income is 100,000 dollars, with you and your partner making 50,000 each.
That means you bring home about 85,000 dollars after taxes.
If both of you work and the family pays 1,500 dollars a month for childcare, your total disposable income would be 67,000 dollars a year.
Are you with me so far?
If you decide to stay home, your family makes less but you don't pay for childcare.
Your disposable income goes down in this scenario, but not by as much as it would if you didn't factor in the childcare.
It becomes more complicated if childcare is more expensive in your area.
A full-time nanny can run 40, 50,000 dollars a year depending on where you live.
If that's the case in your neighborhood, in the scenario I outlined, it would completely wipe out one parent's income, and you'd be better off financially with one parent staying home.
Of course, this is only a short-term analysis.
Childcare is less expensive sometimes when kids are in school, and you may make a higher income later, so you wanna factor that in if you can.
Once you've done the math, you'll know what's possible and you'll be able to make a more informed choice, which should feel empowering.
Second, it's time to talk about what's best for your child.
You may think this should be the core of your decision, but there's actually no right answer.
According to studies from Europe and the US, the decision to go back to work or stay at home won't actually make or break your child's future success.
Research shows that two parents working full-time has a similar effect on your child's future test scores and income to one parent working and one not.
What seems to be most important is the environment your child is in during their spare time.
As long as they're engaging in enriching activities; reading, practicing their motor skills, interacting with other kids, they're gonna thrive whether or not you're at home with them.
There is a bit of nuance in the data.
For example, studies have found, that if both parents work, kids from poor families are impacted positively, and kids from richer families are impacted less positively.
So depending on your household configuration, the effects on your child could be a little positive, or a little negative, but the overall impact is negligible.
Now I wanna call out an exception: maternity leave.
There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that babies do better when their mothers take some maternity leave.
The early days with your child can impact their development, so if you have paid leave, you should take it, and if you don't, maybe consider taking some unpaid leave for those first few months, if your budget allows.
And finally, ask yourself, what do I want?
While this may seem simple, it's the factor that feels most taboo to explore.
In talking to parents I find that when a woman chooses to stay home, she often feels obligated to say she made this choice for her children's optimal development.
Which, sure, can be part of the reason, but a perfectly acceptable answer is, "this is the lifestyle I prefer," or "this is what works for my family."
The same goes for the working mother.
Saying, "I like my job, and that's why I went back to work," is enough.
If you wanna go back to work, that's great.
You're lucky to have a job that you love and you have every right to keep it once you become a parent.
Be honest with yourself about what you'd like to do.
If you're upfront about that, you're guaranteed to feel happier, which will allow you to be the best version of a parent you can be, and isn't that the whole point?
There is no right and wrong when it comes to parenting.
The best decision is the one that will make you -- and your family -- the happiest.
Up to you to decide what's next.
By acknowledging that the choice to stay home or not is just that, a choice, with factors pushing you in various directions, we can ditch the guilt and enjoy doing what feels best for our families.
Ethic, Hedge, and Octavia stand on the edge of a bottomless ravine.
Its the only thing between them and the tower that houses the second of three powerful artifacts.
Theyve got a brief window of time to get across before the guards return.
With Hedges fuel gauge on empty he wont be able to fly Ethic across, so the only option is to make a bridge.
Fortunately, the floating stacks of stones nearby are bridge components invented by Octavia herself called hover-blocks.
Activate a pile with a burst of energy, and theyll self-assemble to span the ravine as Ethic walks across.
But there is, of course, a catch.
The hover-blocks are only stable when theyre perfectly palindromic.
Meaning they have to form a sequence thats the same when viewed forwards and backwards.
The stacks start in random orders, but will always put themselves into a palindromic configuration if they can.
If they get to a point where a palindrome isnt possible, the bridge will collapse, and whoevers on it will fall into the ravine.
Lets look at an example.
This stack would make itself stable.
First the A blocks hold themselves in place.
Then the Bs.
And finally the C would nestle right between the Bs.
However, suppose there was one more A.
First two A blocks form up, then two Bs, but now the remaining C and A have nowhere to go, so the whole thing falls apart.
The Node of Power enables Hedge to energize a single stack of blocks.
What instructions can Ethic give Hedge to allow him to efficiently find and power a stable palindromic stack?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Examples of palindromes include ANNA, RACECAR, and MADAM IM ADAM.
Counting the number of times a given letter appears in a palindrome will reveal a helpful pattern.
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Lets first look at a nave solution to this problem.
A nave solution is a simple, brute-force approach that isnt optimized but will get the job done.
Nave solutions are helpful ways to analyze problems, and work as stepping stones to better solutions.
In this case, a nave solution is to approach a pile of blocks, try all the arrangements, and see if one is a palindrome by reading it forward and then backwards.
The problem with this approach is that it would take a tremendous amount of time.
If Hedge tried one combination every second, a stack of just 10 different blocks would take him 42 days to exhaust.
Thats because the total time is a function of the factorial of the number of blocks there are.
10 blocks have over 3 million combinations.
What this nave solution shows is that we need a much faster way to tell whether a pile of blocks can form a palindrome.
To start, it may be intuitively clear that a pile of all different blocks will never form one.
Why?
So when can a given sequence become a palindrome?
One way to figure that out is to analyze a few existing palindromes.
In ANNA, there are 2 As and 2 Ns.
RACECAR has 2 Rs, 2 As, 2 Cs, and 1 E.
And MADAM IM ADAM has 4 Ms, 4 As, 2 Ds, and 1 I.
The pattern here is that most of the letters occur an even number of times, and theres at most 1 that occurs just once.
Is that it?
What if RACECAR had 3 Es instead of 1?
We could tack the new Es onto the ends and still get a palindrome, so 3 is ok.
But make that 3 Es and 3 Cs, and theres nowhere for the last C to go.
So the most generalized insight is that at most one letter can appear an odd number of times, but the rest have to be even.
Hedge can count the letters in each stack and organize them into a dictionary, which is a tidy way of storing information.
A loop could then go through and count how many times odd numbers appear.
If there are less than 2 odd characters, the stack can be made into a palindrome.
This approach is much, much faster than the nave solution.
Instead of factorial time, it takes linear time.
Thats where the time increases in proportion to the number of blocks there are.
Now write a loop for Hedge to approach the piles individually, and stop when he finds a good one, and youll be ready to go.
Heres what happens: Hedge is fast, but there are so many piles it takes a long time.
Too long.
Ethic and Hedge are safe.
But Octavia is not so lucky.
Someone has tripped the magical alarms in the Element Temple.
By the time you and the other monks arrive on the scene, you know you have a disaster on your hands.
Overnight, four young apprentices broke into the temples inner chamber to steal the sacred element crystals.
But when the alarm went off they panicked, and each of them swallowed the crystal they held right before they were caught.
With no idea how to control the crystals vast powers, theyll soon transform into uncontrollable elemental spirits.
Improbably enough, the old monk next to you has seen something similar happen before.
He explains: You must determine who ate which crystal and get each into the proper containment field before they transform.
The elements compel their masters: those who ate the Earth and Water Crystals must speak the truth, while those who consumed Fire and Air must lie."
The youths are too scared to confess their own transgressions.
Instead, they fall to accusing each other.
Rikku took the Water crystal! Sumi blurts out.
Rikku interrupts angrily.
It was Bella, she stole the Fire crystal! So Bella yells: Jonah ate the Air crystal, I saw him! Jonah looks up timidly and shakes his head.
I I dont know what happened, but Sumi doesnt have the Earth crystal. So who ate which crystal?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Theres no getting around it this will take some trial and error.
But thats not a bad thing.
If we make a wrong guess, well eventually reach a point where our conclusions contradict each other.
That would allow us to confirm that our initial guess was wrong and work from there.
This is a technique known as proof by contradiction.
The trick is in being strategic about where we begin our guessing.
Some assumptions might not lead to contradictions without making further assumptions.
We want to pick one that creates the most constraints on its own, and thus gives us the most information when it turns out to be right or wrong.
Take, for example, Sumis statement.
If we assume shes telling the truth, wed know the identity of both truth tellers.
Rikku would have the Water crystal, and since shes not lying about him, Sumi would have Earth.
So Bella would have the Fire crystal, as Rikku says.
But then Bella would have to be lying about Jonah having the Air crystal.
And yet thats the only remaining option.
This is a contradiction, and it tells us our initial assumption was wrong.
So now we can go back to the start, but with the added knowledge that Sumi is lying.
As a liar, Sumi must either have the Fire or Air crystal.
That means Jonah was telling the truth about her, so he cant have taken either of those.
And that means Bella was lying about him, so she must also have either Fire or Air.
Since Sumi was lying, Rikku cant have taken the Water crystal the only one left who could have it is Jonah.
And because weve already identified the two liars, Rikku must have the Earth crystal.
That means Bella has the Fire crystal and Sumi has Air.
You manage to get them all in the proper containment fields just as the crystals magic begins to manifest.
Compared with the difficult task of training these kids to control their new powers, figuring out who had which crystal was elementary.
I was not one of those kids that knew exactly what they wanted to do when they were growing up.
In the last 15 years of my career, I've been an English teacher, attorney, video game creator and now, a toilet paper salesman, selling millions of rolls of toilet paper a year.
[The Way We Work] Life is about finding the intersection of what you really, really love with what you're really, really good at.
As simple as it sounds, it's really not that easy to find.
After a brief stint as an English teacher, I went to law school and ended up becoming an attorney at a big law firm here in New York City.
Like most Americans, for the next two, three years, I was holding on to my job for dear life, working really late hours at a job that I thought maybe I was good at but certainly not one that I really loved.
I then came upon the epiphany that it takes years if not tens of thousands of hours to get really good at something.
I really didn't have a lot of time to waste.
This talk isn't for those looking to quit their job because they don't like their boss or they had a long day at work.
This is for those that are ready to make the completely scary leap into a brand-new career.
So as you think about making a career change, here are a few tips I hope you consider and a few things I've picked up along the way.
First, there's three things to think about before you're ready to move on.
Number one: professional life is about learning.
If you're not even interested in learning anymore, that's a huge red flag that there might not be a future for you in that industry.
Number two: career changes are often gut-driven.
If you constantly have sleepless nights where you're wide awake staring at the ceiling thinking, "Oh, man. I can't live with myself if I never try to make this change or if I don't even actually investigate it," then trust your gut.
It might be time for that career change.
On the flip side, one reason to not move on is short-term pain.
If you don't like your boss or people at the office are grating on you, that's actually not a good reason to absolutely change your career, because when you do change a career, you generally have to start from the bottom, and you'll probably feel a lot of short-term pain, whether it's through a lack of salary or lack of a title.
Pain at any job is inevitable.
So now you're convinced that it's time to change your career.
Then there's three things to do immediately.
First: network, network, network.
No one ever builds a career without a good mentor or a good support network.
What I mean by networking is getting all the great advice that you can possibly get.
Technology has made it so simple to reach out to new people to say, "Hey, I'm thinking about making a career change.
Do you have just five minutes to chat with me?"
That passion and that hunger and that ability to be a sponge really attracts awesome mentors and people willing to give you their time to give you some good advice.
So go out there and meet new people.
The second thing you need to do immediately is shore up your finances.
The reality is, when you change your career, you'll either start with a job with a lower title or lower pay or maybe even no pay, especially if you're starting your own business.
So going out there and making sure your finances are in order to make the transition less painful is really, really important.
For me personally, as I made the transition from being an attorney over to a video game creator, I wanted to have at least six to 12 months of personal runway in the bank.
Six to 12 months might not be the right number for you, but be honest with yourself on what that number should be.
Number three, if you're not ready to make the full jump right at this moment, then get your side hustle on.
Side hustles could be anything from volunteering with an organization that's in the new industry you want to go into, could be starting your business part-time on the weekends.
It's a free way to get a taste to see if you really love something.
So you're ready to make the move or maybe you already made the move.
Here are three things you should think about doing, right now.
One: do not -- I repeat -- do not burn bridges.
You spent years building those bridges, why burn them now?
The world is such a small place, especially with all these online platforms, that, believe me, you will see these people again and probably in the most inopportune times.
Number two: take stock of what you've learned in your previous career or careers.
Most likely, a lot of those things are really applicable to your new job and your new career, whether it's interacting with people, playing on a team or dealing with jerks and assholes.
All those things are really universally applicable.
You'll find jerks no matter what industry you're in; no one's immune to it, everyone's got to figure it out, and you probably know how to do it already.
Lastly, when you start your new job, you're going to be nervous.
But don't worry, take a deep breath, because this is what I want to tell you: you're part of a new team now, and everyone around you is rooting for your success, because your success is their success.
So welcome to your new career.
I want to share with you some ideas about the secret power of time, in a very short time.
Video: All right, start the clock please. 30 seconds studio.
Keep it quiet please. Settle down.
It's about time. End sequence. Take one.
15 seconds studio.
10, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two ...
Philip Zimbardo: Let's tune into the conversation of the principals in Adam's temptation.
"Come on Adam, don't be so wishy-washy. Take a bite." "I did."
"One bite, Adam. Don't abandon Eve."
"I don't know, guys.
I don't want to get in trouble."
"Okay. One bite. What the hell?"
(Laughter) Life is temptation. It's all about yielding, resisting, yes, no, now, later, impulsive, reflective, present focus and future focus.
Promised virtues fall prey to the passions of the moment.
Of teenage girls who pledged sexual abstinence and virginity until marriage -- thank you George Bush -- the majority, 60 percent, yielded to sexual temptations within one year.
And most of them did so without using birth control.
So much for promises.
Now lets tempt four-year-olds, giving them a treat.
They can have one marshmallow now. But if they wait until the experimenter comes back, they can have two.
Of course it pays, if you like marshmallows, to wait.
What happens is two-thirds of the kids give in to temptation.
They cannot wait. The others, of course, wait.
They resist the temptation. They delay the now for later.
Walter Mischel, my colleague at Stanford, went back 14 years later, to try to discover what was different about those kids.
There were enormous differences between kids who resisted and kids who yielded, in many ways.
The kids who resisted scored 250 points higher on the SAT.
That's enormous. That's like a whole set of different IQ points.
They didn't get in as much trouble. They were better students.
They were self-confident and determined. And the key for me today, the key for you, is, they were future-focused rather than present-focused.
So what is time perspective? That's what I'm going to talk about today.
Time perspective is the study of how individuals, all of us, divide the flow of your human experience into time zones or time categories.
And you do it automatically and non-consciously.
They vary between cultures, between nations, between individuals, between social classes, between education levels.
And the problem is that they can become biased, because you learn to over-use some of them and under-use the others.
What determines any decision you make?
You make a decision on which you're going to base an action.
For some people it's only about what is in the immediate situation, what other people are doing and what you're feeling.
And those people, when they make their decisions in that format -- we're going to call them "present-oriented," because their focus is what is now.
For others, the present is irrelevant.
It's always about "What is this situation like that I've experienced in the past?"
So that their decisions are based on past memories.
And we're going to call those people "past-oriented," because they focus on what was.
For others it's not the past, it's not the present, it's only about the future.
Their focus is always about anticipated consequences.
Cost-benefit analysis.
We're going to call them "future-oriented." Their focus is on what will be.
So, time paradox, I want to argue, the paradox of time perspective, is something that influences every decision you make, you're totally unaware of.
Namely, the extent to which you have one of these biased time perspectives.
Well there is actually six of them. There are two ways to be present-oriented.
There is two ways to be past-oriented, two ways to be future.
You can focus on past-positive, or past-negative.
You can be present-hedonistic, namely you focus on the joys of life, or present-fatalist -- it doesn't matter, your life is controlled.
You can be future-oriented, setting goals.
Or you can be transcendental future: namely, life begins after death.
Developing the mental flexibility to shift time perspectives fluidly depending on the demands of the situation, that's what you've got to learn to do.
So, very quickly, what is the optimal time profile?
High on past-positive. Moderately high on future.
And moderate on present-hedonism.
And always low on past-negative and present-fatalism.
So the optimal temporal mix is what you get from the past -- past-positive gives you roots. You connect your family, identity and your self.
What you get from the future is wings to soar to new destinations, new challenges.
What you get from the present hedonism is the energy, the energy to explore yourself, places, people, sensuality.
Any time perspective in excess has more negatives than positives.
What do futures sacrifice for success?
They sacrifice family time. They sacrifice friend time.
They sacrifice fun time. They sacrifice personal indulgence.
They sacrifice hobbies. And they sacrifice sleep. So it affects their health.
And they live for work, achievement and control.
I'm sure that resonates with some of the TEDsters.
(Laughter) And it resonated for me. I grew up as a poor kid in the South Bronx ghetto, a Sicilian family -- everyone lived in the past and present.
I'm here as a future-oriented person who went over the top, who did all these sacrifices because teachers intervened, and made me future oriented.
Told me don't eat that marshmallow, because if you wait you're going to get two of them, until I learned to balance out.
I've added present-hedonism, I've added a focus on the past-positive, so, at 76 years old, I am more energetic than ever, more productive, and I'm happier than I have ever been.
I just want to say that we are applying this to many world problems: changing the drop-out rates of school kids, combating addictions, enhancing teen health, curing vets' PTSD with time metaphors -- getting miracle cures -- promoting sustainability and conservation, reducing physical rehabilitation where there is a 50-percent drop out rate, altering appeals to suicidal terrorists, and modifying family conflicts as time-zone clashes.
So I want to end by saying: many of life's puzzles can be solved by understanding your time perspective and that of others.
And the idea is so simple, so obvious, but I think the consequences are really profound.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
In 2013, a team of researchers held a math test.
The exam was administered to over 1,100 American adults, and designed, in part, to test their ability to evaluate sets of data.
Hidden among these math problems were two almost identical questions.
Both problems used the same difficult data set, and each had one objectively correct answer.
The first asked about the correlation between rashes and a new skin cream.
The second asked about the correlation between crime rates and gun control legislation.
Participants with strong math skills were much more likely to get the first question correct.
But despite being mathematically identical, the results for the second question looked totally different.
Here, math skills werent the best predictor of which participants answered correctly.
Instead, another variable the researchers had been tracking came into play: political identity.
Participants whose political beliefs aligned with a correct interpretation of the data were far more likely to answer the problem right.
Even the studys top mathematicians were 45% more likely to get the second question wrong when the correct answer challenged their political beliefs.
What is it about politics that inspires this kind of illogical error?
Can someones political identity actually affect their ability to process information?
The answer lies in a cognitive phenomenon that has become increasingly visible in public life: partisanship.
While its often invoked in the context of politics, partisanship is more broadly defined as a strong preference or bias towards any particular group or idea.
Our political, ethnic, religious, and national identities are all different forms of partisanship.
Of course, identifying with social groups is an essential and healthy part of human life.
Our sense of self is defined not only by who we are as individuals, but also by the groups we belong to.
As a result, were strongly motivated to defend our group identities, protecting both our sense of self and our social communities.
But this becomes a problem when the groups beliefs are at odds with reality.
Imagine watching your favorite sports team commit a serious foul.
You know thats against the rules, but your fellow fans think its totally acceptable.
The tension between these two incompatible thoughts is called cognitive dissonance, and most people are driven to resolve this uncomfortable state of limbo.
You might start to blame the referee, complain that the other team started it, or even convince yourself there was no foul in the first place.
In a case like this, people are often more motivated to maintain a positive relationship with their group than perceive the world accurately.
This behavior is especially dangerous in politics.
On an individual scale, allegiance to a party allows people to create a political identity and support policies they agree with.
But partisan-based cognitive dissonance can lead people to reject evidence thats inconsistent with the party line or discredits party leaders.
And when entire groups of people revise the facts in service of partisan beliefs, it can lead to policies that arent grounded in truth or reason.
This problem isnt new political identities have been around for centuries.
But studies show that partisan polarization has increased dramatically in the last few decades.
One theory explaining this increase is the trend towards clustering geographically in like-minded communities.
Another is the growing tendency to rely on partisan news or social media bubbles.
These often act like echo chambers, delivering news and ideas from people with similar views.
Fortunately, cognitive scientists have uncovered some strategies for resisting this distortion filter.
One is to remember that youre probably more biased than you think.
So when you encounter new information, make a deliberate effort to push through your initial intuition and evaluate it analytically.
In your own groups, try to make fact-checking and questioning assumptions a valued part of the culture.
Warning people that they might have been presented with misinformation can also help.
And when youre trying to persuade someone else, affirming their values and framing the issue in their language can help make people more receptive.
We still have a long way to go before solving the problem of partisanship.
But hopefully, these tools can help keep us better informed, and capable of making evidence-based decisions about our shared reality.
I'm going to talk about post-conflict recovery and how we might do post-conflict recovery better.
The record on post-conflict recovery is not very impressive.
40 percent of all post-conflict situations, historically, have reverted back to conflict within a decade.
In fact, they've accounted for half of all civil wars.
Why has the record been so poor?
Well, the conventional approach to post-conflict situations has rested on, on kind of, three principles.
The first principle is: it's the politics that matters.
So, the first thing that is prioritized is politics.
Try and build a political settlement first.
And then the second step is to say, "The situation is admittedly dangerous, but only for a short time."
So get peacekeepers there, but get them home as soon as possible.
So, short-term peacekeepers.
And thirdly, what is the exit strategy for the peacekeepers?
It's an election.
That will produce a legitimate and accountable government.
So that's the conventional approach.
I think that approach denies reality.
We see that there is no quick fix.
There's certainly no quick security fix.
I've tried to look at the risks of reversion to conflict, during our post-conflict decade.
And the risks stay high throughout the decade.
And they stay high regardless of the political innovations.
Does an election produce an accountable and legitimate government?
What an election produces is a winner and a loser.
And the loser is unreconciled.
The reality is that we need to reverse the sequence.
It's not the politics first; it's actually the politics last.
The politics become easier as the decade progresses if you're building on a foundation of security and economic development -- the rebuilding of prosperity.
Why does the politics get easier?
And why is it so difficult initially?
Because after years of stagnation and decline, the mentality of politics is that it's a zero-sum game.
If the reality is stagnation, I can only go up if you go down.
And that doesn't produce a productive politics.
And so the mentality has to shift from zero-sum to positive-sum before you can get a productive politics.
You can only get positive, that mental shift, if the reality is that prosperity is being built.
And in order to build prosperity, we need security in place.
So that is what you get when you face reality.
But the objective of facing reality is to change reality.
And so now let me suggest two complimentary approaches to changing the reality of the situations.
The first is to recognize the interdependence of three key actors, who are different actors, and at the moment are uncoordinated.
The first actor is the Security Council.
The Security Council typically has the responsibility for providing the peacekeepers who build the security.
And that needs to be recognized, first of all, that peacekeeping works.
It is a cost-effective approach.
It does increase security.
But it needs to be done long-term.
It needs to be a decade-long approach, rather than just a couple of years.
That's one actor, the Security Council.
The second actor, different cast of guys, is the donors.
The donors provide post-conflict aid.
Typically in the past, the donors have been interested in the first couple of years, and then they got bored.
They moved on to some other situation.
Post-conflict economic recovery is a slow process.
There are no quick processes in economics except decline.
You can do that quite fast.
(Laughter) So the donors have to stick with this situation for at least a decade.
And then the third key actor is the post-conflict government.
And there are two key things it's got to do.
One is it's got to do economic reform, not fuss about the political constitution.
It's got to reform economic policy.
Why? Because during conflict economic policy typically deteriorates.
Governments snatch short-term opportunities and, by the end of the conflict, the chickens have come home to roost.
So this legacy of conflict is really bad economic policy.
So there is a reform agenda, and there is an inclusion agenda.
The inclusion agenda doesn't come from elections.
Elections produce a loser, who is then excluded.
So the inclusion agenda means genuinely bringing people inside the tent.
So those three actors.
And they are interdependent over a long term.
If the Security Council doesn't commit to security over the course of a decade, you don't get the reassurance which produces private investment.
If you don't get the policy reform and the aid, you don't get the economic recovery, which is the true exit strategy for the peacekeepers.
So we should recognize that interdependence, by formal, mutual commitments.
The United Nations actually has a language for these mutual commitments, the recognition of mutual commitments; it's called the language of compact.
And so we need a post-conflict compact.
The United Nations even has an agency which could broker these compacts; it's called the Peace Building Commission.
It would be ideal to have a standard set of norms where, when we got to a post-conflict situation, there was an expectation of these mutual commitments from the three parties.
So that's idea one: recognize interdependence.
And now let me turn to the second approach, which is complimentary.
And that is to focus on a few critical objectives.
Typical post-conflict situation is a zoo of different actors with different priorities.
And indeed, unfortunately, if you navigate by needs you get a very unfocused agenda, because in these situations, needs are everywhere, but the capacity to implement change is very limited.
So we have to be disciplined and focus on things that are critical.
And I want to suggest that in the typical post-conflict situation three things are critical.
One is jobs.
One is improvements in basic services -- especially health, which is a disaster during conflict.
So jobs, health, and clean government.
Those are the three critical priorities.
So I'm going to talk a little about each of them.
Jobs.
What is a distinctive approach to generating jobs in post-conflict situations?
And why are jobs so important?
Jobs for whom? Especially jobs for young men.
In post-conflict situations, the reason that they so often revert to conflict, is not because elderly women get upset.
It's because young men get upset.
And why are they upset? Because they have nothing to do.
And so we need a process of generating jobs, for ordinary young men, fast.
Now, that is difficult.
Governments in post-conflict situation often respond by puffing up the civil service.
That is not a good idea.
It's not sustainable.
In fact, you're building a long-term liability by inflating civil service.
But getting the private sector to expand is also difficult, because any activity which is open to international trade is basically going to be uncompetitive in a post-conflict situation.
These are not environments where you can build export manufacturing.
There's one sector which isn't exposed to international trade, and which can generate a lot of jobs, and which is, in any case, a sensible sector to expand, post-conflict, and that is the construction sector.
The construction sector has a vital role, obviously, in reconstruction.
But typically that sector has withered away during conflict.
During conflict people are doing destruction.
There isn't any construction going on. And so the sector shrivels away.
And then when you try and expand it, because it's shriveled away, you encounter a lot of bottlenecks.
Basically, prices soar and crooked politicians then milk the rents from the sector, but it doesn't generate any jobs.
And so the policy priority is to break the bottlenecks in expanding the construction sector.
What might the bottlenecks be?
Just think what you have to do successfully to build a structure, using a lot of labor.
First you need access to land.
Often the legal system is broken down so you can't even get access to land.
Secondly you need skills, the mundane skills of the construction sector.
In post-conflict situations we don't just need Doctors Without Borders, we need Bricklayers Without Borders, to rebuild the skill set.
We need firms. The firms have gone away.
So we need to encourage the growth of local firms.
If we do that, we not only get the jobs, we get the improvements in public infrastructure, the restoration of public infrastructure.
Let me turn from jobs to the second objective, which is improving basic social services.
And to date, there has been a sort of a schizophrenia in the donor community, as to how to build basic services in post-conflict sectors.
On the one hand it pays lip service to the idea of rebuild an effective state in the image of Scandinavia in the 1950s.
Lets develop line ministries of this, that, and the other, that deliver these services.
And it's schizophrenic because in their hearts donors know that's not a realistic agenda, and so what they also do is the total bypass: just fund NGOs.
Neither of those approaches is sensible.
And so what I'd suggest is what I call Independent Service Authorities.
It's to split the functions of a monopoly line ministry up into three.
The planning function and policy function stays with the ministry; the delivery of services on the ground, you should use whatever works -- churches, NGOs, local communities, whatever works.
And in between, there should be a public agency, the Independent Service Authority, which channels public money, and especially donor money, to the retail providers.
So the NGOs become part of a public government system, rather than independent of it.
One advantage of that is that you can allocate money coherently.
Another is, you can make NGOs accountable.
You can use yardstick competition, so they have to compete against each other for the resources.
The good NGOs, like Oxfam, are very keen on this idea.
They want to have the discipline and accountability.
So that's a way to get basic services scaled up.
And because the government would be funding it, it would be co-branding these services.
So they wouldn't be provided thanks to the United States government and some NGO.
They would be co-branded as being done by the post-conflict government, in the country.
So, jobs, basic services, finally, clean government.
Clean means follow their money.
The typical post-conflict government is so short of money that it needs our money just to be on a life-support system.
You can't get the basic functions of the state done unless we put money into the core budget of these countries.
But, if we put money into the core budget, we know that there aren't the budget systems with integrity that mean that money will be well spent.
And if all we do is put money in and close our eyes it's not just that the money is wasted -- that's the least of the problems -- it's that the money is captured.
It's captured by the crooks who are at the heart of the political problem.
And so inadvertently we empower the people who are the problem.
So building clean government means, yes, provide money to the budget, but also provide a lot of scrutiny, which means a lot of technical assistance that follows the money.
Paddy Ashdown, who was the grand high nabob of Bosnia to the United Nations, in his book about his experience, he said, "I realize what I needed was accountants without borders, to follow that money."
So that's the -- let me wrap up, this is the package.
What's the goal?
If we follow this, what would we hope to achieve?
That after 10 years, the focus on the construction sector would have produced both jobs and, hence, security -- because young people would have jobs -- and it would have reconstructed the infrastructure.
So that's the focus on the construction sector.
The focus on the basic service delivery through these independent service authorities would have rescued basic services from their catastrophic levels, and it would have given ordinary people the sense that the government was doing something useful.
The emphasis on clean government would have gradually squeezed out the political crooks, because there wouldn't be any money in taking part in the politics.
And so gradually the selection, the composition of politicians, would shift from the crooked to the honest.
Where would that leave us?
Gradually it would shift from a politics of plunder to a politics of hope. Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to help you re-perceive what philanthropy is, what it could be, and what your relationship to it is.
And in doing that, I want to offer you a vision, an imagined future, if you will, of how, as the poet Seamus Heaney has put it, "Once in a lifetime the longed-for tidal wave of justice can rise up, and hope and history rhyme."
I want to start with these word pairs here.
We all know which side of these we'd like to be on.
When philanthropy was reinvented a century ago, when the foundation form was actually invented, they didn't think of themselves on the wrong side of these either.
In fact they would never have thought of themselves as closed and set in their ways, as slow to respond to new challenges, as small and risk-averse.
And in fact they weren't. They were reinventing charity in those times, what Rockefeller called "the business of benevolence."
But by the end of the 20th century, a new generation of critics and reformers had come to see philanthropy just this way.
The thing to watch for as a global philanthropy industry comes about -- and that's exactly what is happening -- is how the aspiration is to flip these old assumptions, for philanthropy to become open and big and fast and connected, in service of the long term.
This entrepreneurial energy is emerging from many quarters.
And it's driven and propelled forward by new leaders, like many of the people here, by new tools, like the ones we've seen here, and by new pressures.
I've been following this change for quite a while now, and participating in it.
This report is our main public report.
What it tells is the story of how today actually could be as historic as 100 years ago.
What I want to do is share some of the coolest things that are going on with you.
And as I do that, I'm not going to dwell much on the very large philanthropy that everybody already knows about -- the Gates or the Soros or the Google.
Instead, what I want to do is talk about the philanthropy of all of us: the democratization of philanthropy.
This is a moment in history when the average person has more power than at any time.
What I'm going to do is look at five categories of experiments, each of which challenges an old assumption of philanthropy.
The first is mass collaboration, represented here by Wikipedia.
Now, this may surprise you.
But remember, philanthropy is about giving of time and talent, not just money.
Clay Shirky, that great chronicler of everything networked, has captured the assumption that this challenges in such a beautiful way.
He said, "We have lived in this world where little things are done for love and big things for money.
Now we have Wikipedia.
Suddenly big things can be done for love."
Watch, this spring, for Paul Hawken's new book -- Author and entrepreneur many of you may know about.
The book is called "Blessed Unrest."
And when it comes out, a series of wiki sites under the label WISER, are going to launch at the same time.
WISER stands for World Index for Social and Environmental Responsibility.
WISER sets out to document, link and empower what Paul calls the largest movement, and fastest-growing movement in human history: humanity's collective immune response to today's threats.
Now, all of these big things for love -- experiments -- aren't going to take off.
But the ones that do are going to be the biggest, the most open, the fastest, the most connected form of philanthropy in human history.
Second category is online philanthropy marketplaces.
This is, of course, to philanthropy what eBay and Amazon are to commerce.
Think of it as peer-to-peer philanthropy.
And this challenges yet another assumption, which is that organized philanthropy is only for the very wealthy.
Take a look, if you haven't, at DonorsChoose.
Omidyar Network has made a big investment in DonorsChoose.
It's one of the best known of these new marketplaces where a donor can go straight into a classroom and connect with what a teacher says they need.
Take a look at Changing the Present, started by a TEDster, next time you need a wedding present or a holiday present.
GiveIndia is for a whole country.
And it goes on and on.
The third category is represented by Warren Buffet, which I call aggregated giving.
It's not just that Warren Buffet was so amazingly generous in that historic act last summer.
It's that he challenged another assumption, that every giver should have his or her own fund or foundation.
There are now, today, so many new funds that are aggregating giving and investing, bringing together people around a common goal, to think bigger.
One of the best known is Acumen Fund, led by Jacqueline Novogratz, a TEDster who got a big boost here at TED.
But there are many others: New Profit in Cambridge, New School's Venture Fund in Silicon Valley, Venture Philanthropy Partners in Washington, Global Fund for Women in San Francisco.
Take a look at these.
These funds are to philanthropy what venture capital, private equity, and eventually mutual funds are to investing, but with a twist -- because often a community forms around these funds, as it has at Acumen and other places.
Now, imagine for a second these first three types of experiments: mass collaboration, online marketplaces, aggregated giving.
And understand how they help us re-perceive what organized philanthropy is.
It's not about foundations necessarily; it's about the rest of us.
And imagine the mash-up, if you will, of these things, in the future, when these things come together in the experiments of the future -- imagine that somebody puts up, say, 100 million dollars for an inspiring goal -- there were 21 gifts of 100 million dollars or more in the US last year, not out of the question -- but only puts it up if it's matched by millions of small gifts from around the globe, thereby engaging lots of people, and building visibility and engaging people in the goal that's stated.
I'm going to look quickly at the fourth and fifth categories, which are innovation, competitions and social investing.
They're betting a visible competition, a prize, can attract talent and money to some of the most difficult issues, and thereby speed the solution.
This tackles yet another assumption, that the giver and the organization is at the center, as opposed to putting the problem at the center.
You can look to these innovators to help us especially with things that require technological or scientific solution.
That leaves the final category, social investing, which is really, anyway, the biggest of them all, represented here by Xigi.net.
And this, of course, tackles the biggest assumption of all, that business is business, and philanthropy is the vehicle of people who want to create change in the world.
Xigi is a new community site that's built by the community, linking and mapping this new social capital market.
It lists already 1,000 entities that are offering debt and equity for social enterprise.
So we can look to these innovators to help us remember that if we can leverage even a small amount of the capital that seeks a return, the good that can be driven could be astonishing.
Now, what's really interesting here is that we're not thinking our way into a new way of acting; we're acting our way into a new way of thinking.
Philanthropy is reorganizing itself before our very eyes.
And even though all of the experiments and all of the big givers don't yet fulfill this aspiration, I think this is the new zeitgeist: open, big, fast, connected, and, let us also hope, long.
We have got to realize that it is going to take a long time to do these things.
If we don't develop the stamina to stick with things -- whatever it is you pick, stick with it -- all of this stuff is just going to be, you know, a fad.
But I'm really hopeful.
And I'm hopeful because it's not only philanthropy that's reorganizing itself, it's also whole other portions of the social sector, and of business, that are busy challenging "business as usual."
And everywhere I go, including here at TED, I feel that there is a new moral hunger that is growing.
What we're seeing is people really wrestling to describe what is this new thing that's happening.
Words like "philanthrocapitalism," and "natural capitalism," and "philanthroentrepreneur," and "venture philanthropy."
We don't have a language for it yet.
Whatever we call it, it's new, it's beginning, and I think it's gong to quite significant.
And that's where my imagined future comes in, which I am going to call the social singularity.
Many of you will realize that I'm ripping a bit off of the science fiction writer Vernor Vinge's notion of a technological singularity, where a number of trends accelerate and converge and come together to create, really, a shockingly new reality.
It may be that the social singularity ahead is the one that we fear the most: a convergence of catastrophes, of environmental degradation, of weapons of mass destruction, of pandemics, of poverty.
That's because our ability to confront the problems that we face has not kept pace with our ability to create them.
And as we've heard here, it is no exaggeration to say that we hold the future of our civilization in our hands as never before.
The question is, is there a positive social singularity?
Is there a frontier for us of how we live together?
Our future doesn't have to be imagined.
We can create a future where hope and history rhyme.
But we have a problem.
Our experience to date, both individually and collectively, hasn't prepared us for what we're going to need to do, or who we're going to need to be.
We are going to need a new generation of citizen leaders willing to commit ourselves to growing and changing and learning as rapidly as possible.
That's why I have one last thing I want to show you.
This is a photograph taken about 100 years ago of my grandfather and great-grandfather.
This is a newspaper publisher and a banker.
And they were great community leaders.
And, yes, they were great philanthropists.
I keep this photograph close by to me -- it's in my office -- because I've always felt a mystical connection to these two men, both of whom I never knew.
And so, in their honor, I want to offer you this blank slide.
And I want you to imagine that this a photograph of you.
And I want you to think about the community that you want to be part of creating.
Whatever that means to you.
And I want you to imagine that it's 100 years from now, and your grandchild, or great-grandchild, or niece or nephew or god-child, is looking at this photograph of you.
What is the story you most want for them to tell?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A month ago today I stood there: 90 degrees south, the top of the bottom of the world, the Geographic South Pole.
And I stood there beside two very good friends of mine, Richard Weber and Kevin Vallely.
Together we had just broken the world speed record for a trek to the South Pole.
It took us 33 days, 23 hours and 55 minutes to get there.
We shaved five days off the previous best time.
And in the process, I became the first person in history to make the entire 650-mile journey, from Hercules Inlet to South Pole, solely on feet, without skis.
Now, many of you are probably saying, "Wait a sec, is this tough to do?"
(Laughter) Imagine, if you will, dragging a sled, as you just saw in that video clip, with 170 pounds of gear, in it everything you need to survive on your Antarctic trek.
It's going to be 40 below, every single day.
You'll be in a massive headwind.
And at some point you're going to have to cross these cracks in the ice, these crevasses.
Some of them have a very precarious thin footbridge underneath them that could give way at a moment's notice, taking your sled, you, into the abyss, never to be seen again.
The punchline to your journey? Look at the horizon.
Yes, it's uphill the entire way, because the South Pole is at 10,000 feet, and you're starting at sea level.
Our journey did not, in fact, begin at Hercules Inlet, where frozen ocean meets the land of Antarctica.
It began a little less than two years ago.
A couple of buddies of mine and I had finished a 111-day run across the entire Sahara desert.
And while we were there we learned the seriousness of the water crisis in Northern Africa.
We also learned that many of the issues facing the people of Northern Africa affected young people the most.
I came home to my wife after 111 days of running in the sand, and I said, "You know, there's no doubt if this bozo can get across the desert, we are capable of doing anything we set our minds to."
But if I'm going to continue doing these adventures, there has to be a reason for me to do them beyond just getting there.
Around that time I met an extraordinary human being, Peter Thum, who inspired me with his actions.
He's trying to find and solve water issues, the crisis around the world.
His dedication inspired me to come up with this expedition: a run to the South Pole where, with an interactive website, I will be able to bring young people, students and teachers from around the world on board the expedition with me, as active members.
So we would have a live website, that every single day of the 33 days, we would be blogging, telling stories of, you know, depleted ozone forcing us to cover our faces, or we will burn.
Crossing miles and miles of sastrugi -- frozen ice snowdrifts that could be hip-deep.
I'm telling you, crossing these things with 170-pound sled, that sled may as well have weighed 1,700 pounds, because that's what it felt like.
We were blogging to this live website daily to these students that were tracking us as well, about 10-hour trekking days, 15-hour trekking days, sometimes 20 hours of trekking daily to meet our goal.
We'd catch cat-naps at 40 below on our sled, incidentally.
In turn, students, people from around the world, would ask us questions.
Young people would ask the most amazing questions.
One of my favorite: It's 40 below, you've got to go to the bathroom, where are you going to go and how are you going to do it?
I'm not going to answer that. But I will answer some of the more popular questions.
Where do you sleep? We slept in a tent that was very low to the ground, because the winds on Antarctica were so extreme, it would blow anything else away.
What do you eat? One of my favorite dishes on expedition: butter and bacon. It's about a million calories.
We were burning about 8,500 a day, so we needed it.
How many batteries do you carry for all the equipment that you have?
Virtually none. All of our equipment, including film equipment, was charged by the sun.
And do you get along? I certainly hope so, because at some point or another on this expedition, one of your teammates is going to have to take a very big needle, and put it in an infected blister, and drain it for you.
But seriously, seriously, we did get along, because we had a common goal of wanting to inspire these young people.
They were our teammates! They were inspiring us.
The stories we were hearing got us to the South Pole.
The website worked brilliantly as a two-way street of communication.
Young people in northern Canada, kids in an elementary school, dragging sleds across the school-yard, pretending they were Richard, Ray and Kevin. Amazing.
We arrived at the South Pole. We huddled into that tent, 45 below that day, I'll never forget it.
We looked at each other with these looks of disbelief at what we had just completed.
And I remember looking at the guys thinking, "What do I take from this journey?" You know? Seriously.
That I'm this uber-endurance guy?
As I stand here today talking to you guys, I've been running for the grand sum of five years.
And a year before that I was a pack-a-day smoker, living a very sedentary lifestyle.
What I take from this journey, from my journeys, is that, in fact, within every fiber of my belief standing here, I know that we can make the impossible possible.
I'm learning this at 40.
Can you imagine? Seriously, can you imagine?
I'm learning this at 40 years of age.
Imagine being 13 years old, hearing those words, and believing it.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause)
London, 1928: a group of mold spores surf a breeze through a lab.
They drift onto a petri dish, and when they land, they germinate a medical revolution.
This lab belongs to Alexander Fleming, a Scottish scientist investigating the properties of infectious bacteria.
At this time, Fleming is away on vacation.
When he returns, he finds a colony of mold growing on a petri dish hed forgotten to place in his incubator.
And around this colony of mold is a zone completely and unexpectedly clear of bacteria.
In studying this mysterious phenomenon, Fleming came to realize that the mold was secreting some kind of compound that was killing the bacteria.
The mold was a species in the Penicillium genus, so Fleming dubbed the antibacterial compound penicillin. What Fleming stumbled upon was a microbial defense system.
The penicillium mold constantly produces penicillin in order to defend itself from threats, such as nearby bacterial colonies that might consume its resources.
Penicillin destroys many types of bacteria by disrupting synthesis of their cell walls.
These walls get their strength from a thick, protective mesh of sugars and amino acids, that are constantly being broken down and rebuilt.
Penicillin binds to one of the compounds that weaves this mesh together and prevents the wall from being reconstructed at a critical phase.
Meanwhile, penicillin stimulates the release of highly reactive molecules that cause additional damage.
Eventually, the cells structure breaks down completely.
This two-pronged attack is lethal to a wide range of bacteria, whether in petri-dishes, our bodies, or elsewhere.
Its not, however, harmful to our own cells, because those dont have cell walls.
For a decade or so after Flemings discovery, penicillin remained a laboratory curiosity.
But during World War II, researchers figured out how to isolate the active compound and grow the mold in larger quantities.
They then went on to win the Nobel Prize for their work.
Teams at Oxford and several American drug companies continued development, and within a few years it was commercially available.
Penicillin and similar compounds quickly transformed the treatment of infections.
For the time being, they remain some of the most important, life-saving antibiotics used in medicine.
However, the more we use any antibiotic, the more bacteria evolve resistance to it.
In the case of penicillin, some bacteria produce compounds that can break down the key structure that interferes with cell wall synthesis.
As antibiotic use has increased, more and more bacteria have evolved this defense, making these antibiotics ineffective against a growing number of bacterial infections.
This means its essential that doctors not overprescribe the drug.
Meanwhile, 5 to 15% of patients in developed countries self-identify as allergic to penicillin, making it the most commonly reported drug allergy.
However, the vast majority over 90% of people who think theyre allergic to penicillin actually are not.
Why the misperception?
Many patients acquire the allergy label as children, when a rash appears after theyre treated for an infection with penicillin or closely related drugs.
The rash is often blamed on penicillin, while the more likely culprit is the original infection, or a reaction between the infection and the antibiotic.
However, genuine penicillin allergies, where our immune systems mistake penicillin for an attacker, do occur rarely and can be very dangerous.
So if you think youre allergic but dont know for sure, your best bet is to visit an allergist.
Theyll complete an evaluation thatll confirm whether or not you have the allergy.
Even if you do have a penicillin allergy, your immune cells that react to the drug may lose their ability to recognize it.
In fact, about 80% of people who are allergic to penicillin outgrow their allergy within ten years.
This is great news for people who currently identify as allergic to penicillin; the drug may one day save their lives, as it has done for so many others.
Now, if President Obama invited me to be the next Czar of Mathematics, then I would have a suggestion for him that I think would vastly improve the mathematics education in this country.
And it would be easy to implement and inexpensive.
The mathematics curriculum that we have is based on a foundation of arithmetic and algebra.
And everything we learn after that is building up towards one subject.
And at top of that pyramid, it's calculus.
And I'm here to say that I think that that is the wrong summit of the pyramid ...
that the correct summit -- that all of our students, every high school graduate should know -- should be statistics: probability and statistics.
(Applause) I mean, don't get me wrong. Calculus is an important subject.
It's one of the great products of the human mind.
The laws of nature are written in the language of calculus.
And every student who studies math, science, engineering, economics, they should definitely learn calculus by the end of their freshman year of college.
But I'm here to say, as a professor of mathematics, that very few people actually use calculus in a conscious, meaningful way, in their day-to-day lives.
On the other hand, statistics -- that's a subject that you could, and should, use on daily basis. Right?
It's risk. It's reward. It's randomness.
It's understanding data.
I think if our students, if our high school students -- if all of the American citizens -- knew about probability and statistics, we wouldn't be in the economic mess that we're in today. (Laughter) (Applause) Not only -- thank you -- not only that ...
but if it's taught properly, it can be a lot of fun.
I mean, probability and statistics, it's the mathematics of games and gambling.
It's analyzing trends. It's predicting the future.
Look, the world has changed from analog to digital.
And it's time for our mathematics curriculum to change from analog to digital, from the more classical, continuous mathematics, to the more modern, discrete mathematics -- the mathematics of uncertainty, of randomness, of data -- that being probability and statistics.
In summary, instead of our students learning about the techniques of calculus, I think it would be far more significant if all of them knew what two standard deviations from the mean means. And I mean it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In the mid-19th century, suspension bridges were collapsing all across Europe.
Their industrial cables frayed during turbulent weather and snapped under the weight of their decks.
So when a German-American engineer named John Roebling proposed building the largest and most expensive suspension bridge ever conceived over New Yorks East River, city officials were understandably skeptical.
But Manhattan was increasingly overcrowded, and commuters from Brooklyn clogged the river.
In February of 1867, the government approved Roeblings proposal.
To avoid the failures of European bridges, Roebling designed a hybrid bridge model.
From suspension bridges, he incorporated large cables supported by central pillars and anchored at each bank.
This design was ideal for supporting long decks, which hung from smaller vertical cables.
But Roeblings model also drew from cable-stayed bridges.
These shorter structures held up their decks with diagonal cables that ran directly to support towers.
By adding these additional cables, Roebling improved the bridges stability, while also reducing the weight on its anchor cables.
Similar designs had been used for some other bridges but the scope of Roeblings plan here dwarfed them all.
His new bridges deck spanned over 480 meters 1.5 times longer than any previously built suspension bridge.
Since standard hemp rope would tear under the decks 14,680 tons, his proposal called for over 5,600 kilometers of metal wire to create the bridges cables.
To support all this weight, the towers would need to stand over 90 meters above sea level making them the tallest structures in the Western Hemisphere.
Roebling was confident his design would work, but while surveying the site in 1869, an incoming boat crushed his foot against the dock.
Within a month, tetanus had claimed his life.
Fortunately, John Roebling's son, Washington, was also a trained engineer and took over his fathers role.
The following year, construction on the tower foundations finally began.
This first step in construction was also the most challenging.
Building on the rocky river bed involved the use of a largely untested technology: pneumatic caissons.
Workers lowered these airtight wooden boxes into the river, where a system of pipes pumped pressurized air in and water out.
Once established, air locks allowed workers to enter the chamber and excavate the river bottom.
They placed layers of stone on top of the caisson as they dug.
When it finally hit the bedrock, they filled it with concrete, becoming the towers permanent foundation.
Working conditions in these caissons were dismal and dangerous.
Lit only by candles and gas lamps, the chambers caught fire several times, forcing them to be evacuated and flooded.
Even more dangerous was a mysterious ailment called "the bends."
Today, we understand this as decompression sickness, but at the time, it appeared to be an unexplainable pain or dizziness that killed several workmen.
In 1872, it nearly claimed the life of the chief engineer.
Washington survived, but was left paralyzed and bedridden.
Yet once again, the Roeblings proved indomitable.
Washingtons wife Emily not only carried communications between her husband and the engineers, but soon took over day-to-day project management.
Unfortunately, the bridges troubles were far from over.
By 1877, construction was over budget and behind schedule.
Worse still, it turned out the bridges cable contractor had been selling them faulty wires.
This would have been a fatal flaw if not for the abundant failsafes in John Roeblings design.
After reinforcing the cables with additional wires, they suspended the deck piece by piece.
It took 14 years, the modern equivalent of over 400 million dollars, and the lifes work of three different Roeblings, but when the Brooklyn Bridge finally opened on May 24, 1883, its splendor was undeniable.
Today, the Brooklyn Bridge still stands atop its antique caissons, supporting the gothic towers and intersecting cables that frame a gateway to New York City.
This is the exact moment that I started creating something called Tinkering School.
Tinkering School is a place where kids can pick up sticks and hammers and other dangerous objects, and be trusted.
Trusted not to hurt themselves, and trusted not to hurt others.
Tinkering School doesn't follow a set curriculum, and there are no tests.
We're not trying to teach anybody any specific thing.
When the kids arrive they're confronted with lots of stuff: wood and nails and rope and wheels, and lots of tools, real tools.
It's a six-day immersive experience for the kids.
And within that context, we can offer the kids time -- something that seems in short supply in their over-scheduled lives.
Our goal is to ensure that they leave with a better sense of how to make things than when they arrived, and the deep internal realization that you can figure things out by fooling around.
Nothing ever turns out as planned ... ever.
(Laughter) And the kids soon learn that all projects go awry -- (Laughter) and become at ease with the idea that every step in a project is a step closer to sweet success, or gleeful calamity.
We start from doodles and sketches.
And sometimes we make real plans.
And sometimes we just start building.
Building is at the heart of the experience: hands on, deeply immersed and fully committed to the problem at hand.
Robin and I, acting as collaborators, keep the landscape of the projects tilted towards completion.
Success is in the doing, and failures are celebrated and analyzed.
Problems become puzzles and obstacles disappear.
When faced with particularly difficult setbacks or complexities, a really interesting behavior emerges: decoration.
(Laughter) Decoration of the unfinished project is a kind of conceptual incubation.
From these interludes come deep insights and amazing new approaches to solving the problems that had them frustrated just moments before.
All materials are available for use.
Even those mundane, hateful, plastic grocery bags can become a bridge stronger than anyone imagined.
And the things that they build amaze even themselves.
Video: Three, two, one, go!
Gever Tulley: A rollercoaster built by seven-year-olds.
Video: Yay!
(Applause) GT: Thank you. It's been a great pleasure.
(Applause)
Can you hear me OK?
Audience: Yes.
Jim Hudspeth: OK. Well, if you can, it's really amazing, because my voice is changing the air pressure where you sit by just a few billionths of the atmospheric level, yet we take it for granted that your ears can capture that infinitesimal signal and use it to signal to the brain the full range of auditory experiences: the human voice, music, the natural world.
How does your ear do that?
And the answer to that is: through the cells that are the real hero of this presentation -- the ear's sensory receptors, which are called "hair cells."
Now, these hair cells are unfortunately named, because they have nothing at all to do with the kind of hair of which I have less and less.
These cells were originally named that by early microscopists, who noticed that emanating from one end of the cell was a little cluster of bristles.
With modern electron microscopy, we can see much better the nature of the special feature that gives the hair cell its name.
That's the hair bundle.
It's this cluster of 20 to several hundred fine cylindrical rods that stand upright at the top end of the cell.
And this apparatus is what is responsible for your hearing me right this instant.
Now, I must say that I am somewhat in love with these cells.
I've spent 45 years in their company -- (Laughter) and part of the reason is that they're really beautiful.
There's an aesthetic component to it.
Here, for example, are the cells with which an ordinary chicken conducts its hearing.
These are the cells that a bat uses for its sonar.
We use these large hair cells from a frog for many of our experiments.
Hair cells are found all the way down to the most primitive of fishes, and those of reptiles often have this really beautiful, almost crystalline, order.
But above and beyond its beauty, the hair bundle is an antenna.
It's a machine for converting sound vibrations into electrical responses that the brain can then interpret.
At the top of each hair bundle, as you can see in this image, there's a fine filament connecting each of the little hairs, the stereocilia.
It's here marked with a little red triangle.
And this filament has at its base a couple of ion channels, which are proteins that span the membrane.
And here's how it works.
This rat trap represents an ion channel.
It has a pore that passes potassium ions and calcium ions.
It has a little molecular gate that can be open, or it can be closed.
And its status is set by this elastic band which represents that protein filament.
Now, imagine that this arm represents one stereocilium and this arm represents the adjacent, shorter one with the elastic band between them.
When sound energy impinges upon the hair bundle, it pushes it in the direction towards its taller edge.
The sliding of the stereocilia puts tension in the link until the channels open and ions rush into the cell.
When the hair bundle is pushed in the opposite direction, the channels close.
And, most importantly, a back-and-forth motion of the hair bundle, as ensues during the application of acoustic waves, alternately opens and closes the channel, and each opening admits millions and millions of ions into the cell.
Those ions constitute an electrical current that excites the cell.
The excitation is passed to a nerve fiber, and then propagates into the brain.
Notice that the intensity of the sound is represented by the magnitude of this response.
A louder sound pushes the hair bundle farther, opens the channel longer, lets more ions in and gives rise to a bigger response.
Now, this mode of operation has the advantage of great speed.
Some of our senses, such as vision, use chemical reactions that take time.
And as a consequence of that, if I show you a series of pictures at intervals of 20 or 30 per second, you get the sense of a continuous image.
Because it doesn't use reactions, the hair cell is fully 1,000 times faster than our other senses.
We can hear sounds at frequencies as great as 20,000 cycles per second, and some animals have ever faster ears.
The ears of bats and whales, for example, can respond to their sonar pulses at 150,000 cycles a second.
But this speed doesn't entirely explain why the ear performs so well.
And it turns out that our hearing benefits from an amplifier, something called the "active process."
The active process enhances our hearing and makes possible all the remarkable features that I've already mentioned.
Let me tell you how it works.
First of all, the active process amplifies sound, so you can hear, at threshold, sounds that move the hair bundle by a distance of only about three-tenths of a nanometer.
That's the diameter of one water molecule.
It's really astonishing.
The system can also operate over an enormously wide dynamic range.
Why do we need this amplification?
The amplification, in ancient times, was useful because it was valuable for us to hear the tiger before the tiger could hear us.
And these days, it's essential as a distant early warning system.
It's valuable to be able to hear fire alarms or contemporary dangerous such as speeding fire engines or police cars or the like.
When the amplification fails, our hearing's sensitivity plummets, and an individual may then need an electronic hearing aid to supplant the damaged biological one.
This active process also enhances our frequency selectivity.
Even an untrained individual can distinguish two tones that differ by only two-tenths of a percent, which is one-thirtieth of the difference between two piano notes, and a trained musician can do even better.
This fine discrimination is useful in our ability to distinguish different voices and to understand the nuances of speech.
And, again, if the active process deteriorates, it becomes harder to carry out verbal communication.
Finally, the active process is valuable in setting the very broad range of sound intensities that our ears can tolerate, from the very faintest sound that you can hear, such as a dropped pen, to the loudest sound that you can stand -- say, a jackhammer or a jet plane.
The amplitude of sounds spans a range of one millionfold, which is more than is encompassed by any other sense or by any man-made device of which I'm aware.
And again, if this system deteriorates, an affected individual may have a hard time hearing the very faintest sounds or tolerating the very loudest ones.
Now, to understand how the hair cell does its thing, one has to situate it within its environment within the ear.
We learn in school that the organ of hearing is the coiled, snail-shaped cochlea.
It's an organ about the size of a chickpea.
It's embedded in the bone on either side of the skull.
We also learn that an optical prism can separate white light into its constituent frequencies, which we see as distinct colors.
In an analogous way, the cochlea acts as sort of an acoustic prism that splits apart complex sounds into their component frequencies.
So when a piano is sounded, different notes blend together into a chord.
The cochlea undoes that process.
It separates them and represents each at a different position.
In this picture, you can see where three notes -- middle C and the two extreme notes on a piano -- are represented in the cochlea.
The lowest frequencies go all the way up to the top of the cochlea.
The highest frequencies, down to 20,000 Hz, go all the way to the bottom of the cochlea, and every other frequency is represented somewhere in between.
And, as this diagram shows, successive musical tones are represented a few tens of hair cells apart along the cochlear surface.
Now, this separation of frequencies is really key in our ability to identify different sounds, because very musical instrument, every voice, emits a distinct constellation of tones.
The cochlea separates those frequencies, and the 16,000 hair cells then report to the brain how much of each frequency is present.
The brain can then compare all the nerve signals and decide what particular tone is being heard.
But this doesn't explain everything that I want to explain.
Where's the magic?
I told you already about the great things that the hair cell can do.
How does it carry out the active process and do all the remarkable features that I mentioned at the outset?
The answer is instability.
We used to think that the hair bundle was a passive object, it just sat there, except when it was stimulated.
But in fact, it's an active machine.
It's constantly using internal energy to do mechanical work and enhance our hearing.
So even at rest, in the absence of any input, an active hair bundle is constantly trembling.
It's constantly twitching back and forth.
But when even a weak sound is applied to it, it latches on to that sound and begins to move very neatly in a one-to-one way with it, and by so doing, it amplifies the signal about a thousand times.
This same instability also enhances our frequency selectivity, for a given hair cell tends to oscillate best at the frequency at which it normally trembles when it's not being stimulated.
So, this apparatus not only gives us our remarkably acute hearing, but also gives us the very sharp tuning.
I want to offer you a short demonstration of something related to this.
I'll ask the people who are running the sound system to turn up its sensitivity at one specific frequency.
So just as a hair cell is tuned to one frequency, the amplifier will now enhance a particular frequency in my voice.
Notice how specific tones emerge more clearly from the background.
This is exactly what hair cells do.
Each hair cell amplifies and reports one specific frequency and ignores all the others.
And the whole set of hair cells, as a group, can then report to the brain exactly what frequencies are present in a given sound, and the brain can determine what melody is being heard or what speech is being intended.
Now, an amplifier such as the public address system can also cause problems.
If the amplification is turned up too far, it goes unstable and begins to howl or emit sounds.
And one wonders why the active process doesn't do the same thing.
Why don't our ears beam out sounds?
And the answer is that they do.
In a suitably quiet environment, 70 percent of normal people will have one or more sounds coming out of their ears.
(Laughter) I'll give you an example of this.
You will hear two emissions at high frequencies coming from a normal human ear.
You may also be able to discern background noise, like the microphone's hiss, the gurgling of a stomach, the heartbeat, the rustling of clothes.
(Hums, microphone hiss, dampened taps, clothes rustling) This is typical.
Most ears emit just a handful of tones, but some can emit as many as 30.
Every ear is unique, so my right ear is different from my left, my ear is different from your ear, but unless an ear is damaged, it continues to emit the same spectrum of frequencies over a period of years or even decades.
So what's going on?
It turns out that the ear can control its own sensitivity, its own amplification.
So if you're in a very loud environment, like a sporting event or a musical concert, you don't need any amplification, and the system is turned down all the way.
If you are in a room like this auditorium, you might have a little bit of amplification, but of course the public address system does most of the work for you.
And finally, if you go into a really quiet room where you can hear a pin drop, the system is turned up almost all the way.
But if you go into an ultraquiet room such as a sound chamber, the system turns itself up to 11, it goes unstable and it begins to emit sound.
And these emissions constitute a really strong demonstration of just how active the hair cell can be.
So in the last minute, I want to turn to another question that might come up, which is: Where do we go from here?
And I would say that there are three issues that I would really like to address in the future.
The first is: What is the molecular motor that's responsible for the hair cell's amplification?
Somehow, nature has stumbled across a system that can oscillate or amplify at 20,000 cycles per second, or even more.
That's much faster than any other biological oscillation, and we would like to understand where it comes from.
The second issue is how the hair cell's amplification is adjusted to deal with the acoustic circumstances.
Who turns the knob to increase or decrease the amplification in a quiet or in a loud environment?
And the third issue is one that concerns all of us, which is what we can do about the deterioration of our hearing.
Thirty million Americans, and more than 400 million people worldwide, have significant problems on a daily basis with understanding speech in a noisy environment or over the telephone.
Many have even worse deficits.
Moreover, these deficits tend to get worse with time, because when human hair cells die, they're not replaced by cell division.
But we know that nonmammalian animals can replace their cells, and those creatures' cells are dying and being replaced throughout life, so the animals maintain normal hearing.
Here's an example from a little zebra fish.
The cell at the top will undergo a division to produce two new hair cells.
They dance for a little bit, and then settle down and go to work.
So we believe that if we can decode the molecular signals that are used by these other animals to regenerate their hair cells, we'll be able to do the same thing for humans.
And our group and many other groups are now engaged in research trying to resurrect these amazing hair cells.
Thank you for your attention.
(Applause)
I'll start with my favorite muse, Emily Dickinson, who said that wonder is not knowledge, neither is it ignorance.
It's something which is suspended between what we believe we can be, and a tradition we may have forgotten.
And I think, when I listen to these incredible people here, I've been so inspired -- so many incredible ideas, so many visions.
And yet, when I look at the environment outside, you see how resistant architecture is to change.
You see how resistant it is to those very ideas.
We can think them out. We can create incredible things.
And yet, at the end, it's so hard to change a wall.
We applaud the well-mannered box.
But to create a space that never existed is what interests me; to create something that has never been, a space that we have never entered except in our minds and our spirits.
And I think that's really what architecture is based on.
Architecture is not based on concrete and steel and the elements of the soil.
It's based on wonder.
And that wonder is really what has created the greatest cities, the greatest spaces that we have had.
And I think that is indeed what architecture is. It is a story.
By the way, it is a story that is told through its hard materials.
But it is a story of effort and struggle against improbabilities.
If you think of the great buildings, of the cathedrals, of the temples, of the pyramids, of pagodas, of cities in India and beyond, you think of how incredible this is that that was realized not by some abstract idea, but by people.
So, anything that has been made can be unmade.
Anything that has been made can be made better.
There it is: the things that I really believe are of important architecture.
These are the dimensions that I like to work with.
It's something very personal.
It's not, perhaps, the dimensions appreciated by art critics or architecture critics or city planners.
But I think these are the necessary oxygen for us to live in buildings, to live in cities, to connect ourselves in a social space.
And I therefore believe that optimism is what drives architecture forward.
It's the only profession where you have to believe in the future.
You can be a general, a politician, an economist who is depressed, a musician in a minor key, a painter in dark colors.
But architecture is that complete ecstasy that the future can be better.
And it is that belief that I think drives society.
And today we have a kind of evangelical pessimism all around us.
And yet it is in times like this that I think architecture can thrive with big ideas, ideas that are not small. Think of the great cities.
Think of the Empire State Building, the Rockefeller Center.
They were built in times that were not really the best of times in a certain way.
And yet that energy and power of architecture has driven an entire social and political space that these buildings occupy.
So again, I am a believer in the expressive.
I have never been a fan of the neutral.
I don't like neutrality in life, in anything.
I think expression.
And it's like espresso coffee, you know, you take the essence of the coffee.
That's what expression is.
It's been missing in much of the architecture, because we think architecture is the realm of the neutered, the realm of the kind of a state that has no opinion, that has no value.
And yet, I believe it is the expression -- expression of the city, expression of our own space -- that gives meaning to architecture.
And, of course, expressive spaces are not mute.
Expressive spaces are not spaces that simply confirm what we already know.
Expressive spaces may disturb us.
And I think that's also part of life.
Life is not just an anesthetic to make us smile, but to reach out across the abyss of history, to places we have never been, and would have perhaps been, had we not been so lucky.
So again, radical versus conservative.
Radical, what does it mean? It's something which is rooted, and something which is rooted deep in a tradition.
And I think that is what architecture is, it's radical.
It's not just a conservation in formaldehyde of dead forms.
It is actually a living connection to the cosmic event that we are part of, and a story that is certainly ongoing.
It's not something that has a good ending or a bad ending.
It's actually a story in which our acts themselves are pushing the story in a particular way.
So again I am a believer in the radical architecture.
You know the Soviet architecture of that building is the conservation.
It's like the old Las Vegas used to be.
It's about conserving emotions, conserving the traditions that have obstructed the mind in moving forward and of course what is radical is to confront them.
And I think our architecture is a confrontation with our own senses.
Therefore I believe it should not be cool.
There is a lot of appreciation for the kind of cool architecture.
I've always been an opponent of it. I think emotion is needed.
Life without emotion would really not be life.
Even the mind is emotional.
There is no reason which does not take a position in the ethical sphere, in the philosophical mystery of what we are.
So I think emotion is a dimension that is important to introduce into city space, into city life.
And of course, we are all about the struggle of emotions.
And I think that is what makes the world a wondrous place.
And of course, the confrontation of the cool, the unemotional with emotion, is a conversation that I think cities themselves have fostered.
I think that is the progress of cities.
It's not only the forms of cities, but the fact that they incarnate emotions, not just of those who build them, but of those who live there as well.
Inexplicable versus understood. You know, too often we want to understand everything.
But architecture is not the language of words.
It's a language. But it is not a language that can be reduced to a series of programmatic notes that we can verbally write.
Too many buildings that you see outside that are so banal tell you a story, but the story is very short, which says, "We have no story to tell you."
(Laughter) So the important thing actually, is to introduce the actual architectural dimensions, which might be totally inexplicable in words, because they operate in proportions, in materials, in light.
They connect themselves into various sources, into a kind of complex vector matrix that isn't really frontal but is really embedded in the lives, and in the history of a city, and of a people.
So again, the notion that a building should just be explicit I think is a false notion, which has reduced architecture into banality.
Hand versus the computer.
Of course, what would we be without computers?
Our whole practice depends on computing.
But the computer should not just be the glove of the hand; the hand should really be the driver of the computing power.
Because I believe that the hand in all its primitive, in all its physiological obscurity, has a source, though the source is unknown, though we don't have to be mystical about it.
We realize that the hand has been given us by forces that are beyond our own autonomy.
And I think when I draw drawings which may imitate the computer, but are not computer drawings -- drawings that can come from sources that are completely not known, not normal, not seen, yet the hand -- and that's what I really, to all of you who are working -- how can we make the computer respond to our hand rather than the hand responding to the computer.
I think that's part of what the complexity of architecture is.
Because certainly we have gotten used to the propaganda that the simple is the good. But I don't believe it.
Listening to all of you, the complexity of thought, the complexity of layers of meaning is overwhelming.
And I think we shouldn't shy away in architecture, You know, brain surgery, atomic theory, genetics, economics are complex complex fields.
There is no reason that architecture should shy away and present this illusory world of the simple.
It is complex. Space is complex.
Space is something that folds out of itself into completely new worlds.
And as wondrous as it is, it cannot be reduced to a kind of simplification that we have often come to be admired.
And yet, our lives are complex.
Our emotions are complex.
Our intellectual desires are complex.
So I do believe that architecture as I see it needs to mirror that complexity in every single space that we have, in every intimacy that we possess.
Of course that means that architecture is political.
The political is not an enemy of architecture.
The politeama is the city. It's all of us together.
And I've always believed that the act of architecture, even a private house, when somebody else will see it, is a political act, because it will be visible to others.
And we live in a world which is connecting us more and more.
So again, the evasion of that sphere, which has been so endemic to that sort of pure architecture, the autonomous architecture that is just an abstract object has never appealed to me.
And I do believe that this interaction with the history, with history that is often very difficult, to grapple with it, to create a position that is beyond our normal expectations and to create a critique.
Because architecture is also the asking of questions.
It's not only the giving of answers.
It's also, just like life, the asking of questions.
Therefore it is important that it be real.
You know we can simulate almost anything.
But the one thing that can be ever simulated is the human heart, the human soul.
And architecture is so closely intertwined with it because we are born somewhere and we die somewhere.
So the reality of architecture is visceral. It's not intellectual.
It's not something that comes to us from books and theories.
It's the real that we touch -- the door, the window, the threshold, the bed -- such prosaic objects. And yet, I try, in every building, to take that virtual world, which is so enigmatic and so rich, and create something in the real world.
Create a space for an office, a space of sustainability that really works between that virtuality and yet can be realized as something real.
Unexpected versus habitual.
What is a habit? It's just a shackle for ourselves.
It's a self-induced poison.
So the unexpected is always unexpected.
You know, it's true, the cathedrals, as unexpected, will always be unexpected.
You know Frank Gehry's buildings, they will continue to be unexpected in the future.
So not the habitual architecture that instills in us the false sort of stability, but an architecture that is full of tension, an architecture that goes beyond itself to reach a human soul and a human heart, and that breaks out of the shackles of habits.
And of course habits are enforced by architecture.
When we see the same kind of architecture we become immured in that world of those angles, of those lights, of those materials.
We think the world really looks like our buildings.
And yet our buildings are pretty much limited by the techniques and wonders that have been part of them.
So again, the unexpected which is also the raw.
And I often think of the raw and the refined.
What is raw? The raw, I would say is the naked experience, untouched by luxury, untouched by expensive materials, untouched by the kind of refinement that we associate with high culture.
So the rawness, I think, in space, the fact that sustainability can actually, in the future translate into a raw space, a space that isn't decorated, a space that is not mannered in any source, but a space that might be cool in terms of its temperature, might be refractive to our desires.
A space that doesn't always follow us like a dog that has been trained to follow us, but moves ahead into directions of demonstrating other possibilities, other experiences, that have never been part of the vocabulary of architecture.
And of course that juxtaposition is of great interest to me because it creates a kind of a spark of new energy.
And so I do like something which is pointed, not blunt, something which is focused on reality, something that has the power, through its leverage, to transform even a very small space.
So architecture maybe is not so big, like science, but through its focal point it can leverage in an Archimedian way what we think the world is really about.
And often it takes just a building to change our experience of what could be done, what has been done, how the world has remained both in between stability and instability.
And of course buildings have their shapes.
Those shapes are difficult to change.
And yet, I do believe that in every social space, in every public space, there is a desire to communicate more than just that blunt thought, that blunt technique, but something that pinpoints, and can point in various directions forward, backward, sideways and around.
So that is indeed what is memory.
So I believe that my main interest is to memory.
Without memory we would be amnesiacs.
We would not know which way we were going, and why we are going where we're going.
So I've been never interested in the forgettable reuse, rehashing of the same things over and over again, which, of course, get accolades of critics.
Critics like the performance to be repeated again and again the same way.
But I rather play something completely unheard of, and even with flaws, than repeat the same thing over and over which has been hollowed by its meaninglessness.
So again, memory is the city, memory is the world.
Without the memory there would be no story to tell.
There would be nowhere to turn.
The memorable, I think, is really our world, what we think the world is.
And it's not only our memory, but those who remember us, which means that architecture is not mute.
It's an art of communication.
It tells a story. The story can reach into obscure desires.
It can reach into sources that are not explicitly available.
It can reach into millennia that have been buried, and return them in a just and unexpected equity.
So again, I think the notion that the best architecture is silent has never appealed to me.
Silence maybe is good for a cemetery but not for a city.
Cities should be full of vibrations, full of sound, full of music.
And that indeed is the architectural mission that I believe is important, is to create spaces that are vibrant, that are pluralistic, that can transform the most prosaic activities, and raise them to a completely different expectation.
Create a shopping center, a swimming place that is more like a museum than like entertainment.
And these are our dreams.
And of course risk. I think architecture should be risky.
You know it costs a lot of money and so on, but yes, it should not play it safe.
It should not play it safe, because if it plays it safe it's not moving us in a direction that we want to be.
And I think, of course, risk is what underlies the world.
World without risk would not be worth living.
So yes, I do believe that the risk we take in every building.
Risks to create spaces that have never been cantilevered to that extent.
Risks of spaces that have never been so dizzying, as they should be, for a pioneering city.
Risks that really move architecture even with all its flaws, into a space which is much better that the ever again repeated hollowness of a ready-made thing.
And of course that is finally what I believe architecture to be.
It's about space. It's not about fashion.
It's not about decoration.
It's about creating with minimal means something which can not be repeated, cannot be simulated in any other sphere.
And there of course is the space that we need to breathe, is the space we need to dream.
These are the spaces that are not just luxurious spaces for some of us, but are important for everybody in this world.
So again, it's not about the changing fashions, changing theories.
It's about carving out a space for trees.
It's carving out a space where nature can enter the domestic world of a city.
A space where something which has never seen a light of day can enter into the inner workings of a density.
And I think that is really the nature of architecture.
Now I am a believer in democracy.
I don't like beautiful buildings built for totalitarian regimes.
Where people cannot speak, cannot vote, cannot do anything.
We too often admire those buildings. We think they are beautiful.
And yet when I think of the poverty of society which doesn't give freedom to its people, I don't admire those buildings.
So democracy, as difficult as it is, I believe in it.
And of course, at Ground Zero what else?
It's such a complex project.
It's emotional. There is so many interests.
It's political. There is so many parties to this project.
There is so many interests. There's money. There's political power.
There are emotions of the victims.
And yet, in all its messiness, in all its difficulties, I would not have liked somebody to say, "This is the tabula rasa, mister architect -- do whatever you want."
I think nothing good will come out of that.
I think architecture is about consensus.
And it is about the dirty word "compromise." Compromise is not bad.
Compromise, if it's artistic, if it is able to cope with its strategies -- and there is my first sketch and the last rendering -- it's not that far away.
And yet, compromise, consensus, that is what I believe in.
And Ground Zero, despite all its difficulties, it's moving forward.
It's difficult. 2011, 2013. Freedom Tower, the memorial.
And that is where I end.
I was inspired when I came here as an immigrant on a ship like millions of others, looking at America from that point of view.
This is America. This is liberty.
This is what we dream about. Its individuality, demonstrated in the skyline. It's resilience.
And finally, it's the freedom that America represents, not just to me, as an immigrant, but to everyone in the world. Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: I've got a question.
So have you come to peace with the process that happened at Ground Zero and the loss of the original, incredible design that you came up with?
Daniel Libeskind: Look. We have to cure ourselves of the notion that we are authoritarian, that we can determine everything that happens.
We have to rely on others, and shape the process in the best way possible.
I came from the Bronx. I was taught not to be a loser, not to be somebody who just gives up in a fight.
You have to fight for what you believe. You don't always win everything you want to win. But you can steer the process.
And I believe that what will be built at Ground Zero will be meaningful, will be inspiring, will tell other generations of the sacrifices, of the meaning of this event.
Not just for New York, but for the world.
Chris Anderson: Thank you so much, Daniel Libeskind.
(Applause)
Well, as Alexander Graham Bell famously said on his first successful telephone call, "Hello, is that Domino's Pizza?"
(Laughter) I just really want to thank you very much.
As another famous man, Jerry Garcia, said, "What a strange, long trip."
And he should have said, "What a strange, long trip it's about to become."
At this very moment, you are viewing my upper half.
My lower half is appearing at a different conference (Laughter) in a different country.
You can, it turns out, be in two places at once.
But still, I'm sorry I can't be with you in person.
I'll explain at another time.
And though I'm a rock star, I just want to assure you that none of my wishes will include a hot tub.
But what really turns me on about technology is not just the ability to get more songs on MP3 players.
The revolution -- this revolution -- is much bigger than that.
I hope, I believe.
What turns me on about the digital age, what excites me personally, is that you have closed the gap between dreaming and doing.
You see, it used to be that if you wanted to make a record of a song, you needed a studio and a producer.
Now, you need a laptop.
If you wanted to make a film, you needed a mass of equipment and a Hollywood budget.
Now, you need a camera that fits in your palm, and a couple of bucks for a blank DVD.
Imagination has been decoupled from the old constraints.
And that really, really excites me.
I'm excited when I glimpse that kind of thinking writ large.
What I would like to see is idealism decoupled from all constraints.
Political, economic, psychological, whatever.
The geopolitical world has got a lot to learn from the digital world.
From the ease with which you swept away obstacles that no one knew could even be budged.
And that's actually what I'd like to talk about today.
First, though, I should probably explain why, and how, I got to this place.
It's a journey that started 20 years ago.
You may remember that song, "We Are the World," or, "Do They Know It's Christmas?"
Band Aid, Live Aid.
Another very tall, grizzled rock star, my friend Sir Bob Geldof, issued a challenge to "feed the world."
It was a great moment, and it utterly changed my life.
That summer, my wife, Ali, and myself went to Ethiopia.
We went on the quiet to see for ourselves what was going on.
We lived in Ethiopia for a month, working at an orphanage.
The children had a name for me.
They called me, "The girl with the beard."
(Laughter) Don't ask.
Anyway, we found Africa to be a magical place.
Big skies, big hearts, big, shining continent.
Beautiful, royal people.
Anybody who ever gave anything to Africa got a lot more back.
Ethiopia didn't just blow my mind; it opened my mind.
Anyway, on our last day at this orphanage a man handed me his baby and said, "Would you take my son with you?"
He knew, in Ireland, that his son would live, and that in Ethiopia, his son would die.
It was the middle of that awful famine.
Well, I turned him down.
And it was a funny kind of sick feeling, but I turned him down.
And it's a feeling I can't ever quite forget.
And in that moment, I started this journey.
In that moment, I became the worst thing of all: I became a rock star with a cause. (Laughter) Except this isn't the cause, is it?
Six-and-a-half thousand Africans dying every single day from AIDS -- a preventable, treatable disease -- for lack of drugs we can get in any pharmacy.
That's not a cause. That's an emergency.
11 million AIDS orphans in Africa, 20 million by the end of the decade.
That's not a cause. That's an emergency.
Today, every day, 9,000 more Africans will catch HIV because of stigmatization and lack of education.
That's not a cause. That's an emergency.
So what we're talking about here is human rights.
The right to live like a human.
The right to live, period.
And what we're facing in Africa is an unprecedented threat to human dignity and equality.
The next thing I'd like to be clear about is what this problem is, and what this problem isn't.
Because this is not all about charity.
This is about justice. Really.
This is not about charity. This is about justice.
That's right.
And that's too bad, because we're very good at charity.
Americans, like Irish people, are good at it.
Even the poorest neighborhoods give more than they can afford.
We like to give, and we give a lot.
Look at the response to the tsunami -- it's inspiring.
But justice is a tougher standard than charity.
You see, Africa makes a fool of our idea of justice.
It makes a farce of our idea of equality.
It mocks our pieties. It doubts our concern.
It questions our commitment.
Because there is no way we can look at what's happening in Africa, and if we're honest, conclude that it would ever be allowed to happen anywhere else.
As you heard in the film, anywhere else, not here.
Not here, not in America, not in Europe.
In fact, a head of state that you're all familiar with admitted this to me. And it's really true.
There is no chance this kind of hemorrhaging of human life would be accepted anywhere else other than Africa.
Africa is a continent in flames.
And deep down, if we really accepted that Africans were equal to us, we would all do more to put the fire out.
We're standing around with watering cans, when what we really need is the fire brigade.
You see, it's not as dramatic as the tsunami.
It's crazy, really, when you think about it.
Does stuff have to look like an action movie these days to exist in the front of our brain?
The slow extinguishing of countless lives is just not dramatic enough, it would appear.
Catastrophes that we can avert are not as interesting as ones we could avert.
Funny, that.
Anyway, I believe that that kind of thinking offends the intellectual rigor in this room.
Six-and-a-half thousand people dying a day in Africa may be Africa's crisis, but the fact that it's not on the nightly news, that we in Europe, or you in America, are not treating it like an emergency -- I want to argue with you tonight that that's our crisis.
I want to argue that though Africa is not the front line in the war against terror, it could be soon.
Every week, religious extremists take another African village.
They're attempting to bring order to chaos.
Well, why aren't we?
Poverty breeds despair. We know this.
Despair breeds violence. We know this.
In turbulent times, isn't it cheaper, and smarter, to make friends out of potential enemies than to defend yourself against them later?
"The war against terror is bound up in the war against poverty."
And I didn't say that. Colin Powell said that.
Now when the military are telling us that this is a war that cannot be won by military might alone, maybe we should listen.
There's an opportunity here, and it's real.
It's not spin. It's not wishful thinking.
The problems facing the developing world afford us in the developed world a chance to re-describe ourselves to the world.
We will not only transform other people's lives, but we will also transform the way those other lives see us.
And that might be smart in these nervous, dangerous times.
Don't you think that on a purely commercial level, that anti-retroviral drugs are great advertisements for Western ingenuity and technology?
Doesn't compassion look well on us?
And let's cut the crap for a second.
In certain quarters of the world, brand EU, brand USA, is not at its shiniest.
The neon sign is fizzing and cracking.
Someone's put a brick through the window.
The regional branch managers are getting nervous.
Never before have we in the west been so scrutinized.
Our values: do we have any?
Our credibility?
These things are under attack around the world.
Brand USA could use some polishing.
And I say that as a fan, you know?
As a person who buys the products.
But think about it.
More anti-retrovirals make sense.
But that's just the easy part, or ought to be.
But equality for Africa -- that's a big, expensive idea.
You see, the scale of the suffering numbs us into a kind of indifference.
What on earth can we all do about this?
Well, much more than we think.
We can't fix every problem, but the ones we can, I want to argue, we must.
And because we can, we must.
This is the straight truth, the righteous truth.
It is not a theory.
The fact is that ours is the first generation that can look disease and extreme poverty in the eye, look across the ocean to Africa, and say this, and mean it: we do not have to stand for this.
A whole continent written off -- we do not have to stand for this.
(Applause) And let me say this without a trace of irony -- before I back it up to a bunch of ex-hippies.
Forget the '60s. We can change the world.
I can't; you can't, as individuals; but we can change the world.
I really believe that, the people in this room.
Look at the Gates Foundation.
They've done incredible stuff, unbelievable stuff.
But working together, we can actually change the world.
We can turn the inevitable outcomes, and transform the quality of life for millions of lives who look and feel rather like us, when you're up close.
I'm sorry to laugh here, but you do look so different than you did in Haight-Ashbury in the '60s.
(Laughter) But I want to argue that this is the moment that you are designed for.
It is the flowering of the seeds you planted in earlier, headier days.
Ideas that you gestated in your youth.
This is what excites me.
This room was born for this moment, is really what I want to say to you tonight.
Most of you started out wanting to change the world, didn't you?
Most of you did, the digital world.
Well, now, actually because of you, it is possible to change the physical world.
It's a fact.
Economists confirm it, and they know much more than I do.
So why, then, are we not pumping our fists into the air?
Probably because when we admit we can do something about it, we've got to do something about it.
It is a pain in the arse.
This equality business is actually a pain in the arse.
But for the first time in history, we have the technology; we have the know-how; we have the cash; we have the life-saving drugs.
Do we have the will?
I hope this is obvious, but I'm not a hippie.
And I'm not really one for the warm, fuzzy feeling.
I do not have flowers in my hair.
Actually, I come from punk rock.
The Clash wore big army boots, not sandals.
But I know toughness when I see it.
And for all the talk of peace and love on the West Coast, there was muscle to the movement that started out here.
You see, idealism detached from action is just a dream.
But idealism allied with pragmatism, with rolling up your sleeves and making the world bend a bit, is very exciting. It's very real. It's very strong.
And it's very present in a crowd like you.
Last year at DATA, this organization I helped set up, we launched a campaign to summon this spirit in the fight against AIDS and extreme poverty.
We're calling it the ONE Campaign.
It's based on our belief that the action of one person can change a lot, but the actions of many coming together as one can change the world.
Well, we feel that now is the time to prove we're right.
There are moments in history when civilization redefines itself.
We believe this is one.
We believe that this could be the time when the world finally decides that the wanton loss of life in Africa is just no longer acceptable.
This could be the time that we finally get serious about changing the future for most people who live on planet Earth.
Momentum has been building.
Lurching a little, but it's building.
This year is a test for us all, especially the leaders of the G8 nations, who really are on the line here, with all the world in history watching.
I have been, of late, disappointed with the Bush Administration.
They started out with such promise on Africa.
They made some really great promises, and actually have fulfilled a lot of them.
But some of them they haven't.
They don't feel the push from the ground, is the truth.
But my disappointment has much more perspective when I talk to American people, and I hear their worries about the deficit, and the fiscal well being of their country.
I understand that.
But there's much more push from the ground than you'd think, if we got organized.
What I try to communicate, and you can help me if you agree, is that aid for Africa is just great value for money at a time when America really needs it.
Putting it in the crassest possible terms, the investment reaps huge returns.
Not only in lives saved, but in goodwill, stability and security that we'll gain.
So this is what I hope that you will do, if I could be so bold, and not have it deducted from my number of wishes.
(Laughter) What I hope is that beyond individual merciful acts, that you will tell the politicians to do right by Africa, by America and by the world.
Give them permission, if you like, to spend their political capital and your financial capital, your national purse on saving the lives of millions of people.
That's really what I would like you to do.
Because we also need your intellectual capital: your ideas, your skills, your ingenuity.
And you, at this conference, are in a unique position.
Some of the technologies we've been talking about, you invented them, or at least revolutionized the way that they're used.
Together you have changed the zeitgeist from analog to digital, and pushed the boundaries.
And we'd like you to give us that energy.
Give us that kind of dreaming, that kind of doing.
As I say, there're two things on the line here.
There's the continent Africa.
But there's also our sense of ourselves.
People are starting to figure this out.
Movements are springing up.
Artists, politicians, pop stars, priests, CEOs, NGOs, mothers' unions, student unions.
A lot of people are getting together, and working under this umbrella I told you about earlier, the ONE Campaign.
I think they just have one idea in their mind, which is, where you live in the world should not determine whether you live in the world.
(Applause) History, like God, is watching what we do.
When the history books get written, I think our age will be remembered for three things.
Really, it's just three things this whole age will be remembered for.
The digital revolution, yes.
The war against terror, yes.
And what we did or did not do to put out the fires in Africa.
Some say we can't afford to. I say we can't afford not to.
Thank you, thank you very much.
(Applause) Okay, my three wishes.
The ones that TED has offered to grant.
You see, if this is true, and I believe it is, that the digital world you all created has uncoupled the creative imagination from the physical constraints of matter, this should be a piece of piss.
(Laughter) I should add that this started out as a much longer list of wishes.
Most of them impossible, some of them impractical and one or two of them certainly immoral.
(Laughter) This business, it gets to be addictive, you know what I mean, when somebody else is picking up the tab.
Anyway, here's number one.
I wish for you to help build a social movement of more than one million American activists for Africa.
That is my first wish.
I believe it's possible.
A few minutes ago, I talked about all the citizens' campaigns that are springing up.
You know, there's lots out there.
And with this one campaign as our umbrella, my organization, DATA, and other groups, have been tapping into the energy and the enthusiasm that's out there from Hollywood into the heartland of America.
We know there's more than enough energy to power this movement.
We just need your help in making it happen.
We want all of you here, church America, corporate America, Microsoft America, Apple America, Coke America, Pepsi America, nerd America, noisy America.
We can't afford to be cool and sit this one out.
I do believe if we build a movement that's one million Americans strong, we're not going to be denied.
We will have the ear of Congress.
We'll be the first page in Condi Rice's briefing book, and right into the Oval Office.
If there's one million Americans -- and I really know this -- who are ready to make phone calls, who are ready to be on email, I am absolutely sure that we can actually change the course of history, literally, for the continent of Africa.
Anyway, so I'd like your help in getting that signed up.
I know John Gage and Sun Microsystems are already on board for this, but there's lots of you we'd like to talk to.
Right, my second wish, number two.
I would like one media hit for every person on the planet who is living on less than one dollar a day.
That's one billion media hits.
Could be on Google, could be on AOL.
Steve Case, Larry, Sergey -- they've done a lot already.
It could be NBC. It could be ABC.
Actually we're talking to ABC today about the Oscars.
We have a film, produced by Jon Kamen at Radical Media.
But you know, we want, we need some airtime for our ideas.
We need to get the math; we need to get the statistics out to the American people.
I really believe that old Truman line, that if you give the American people the facts, they'll do the right thing.
And, the other thing that's important is that this is not Sally Struthers.
This has to be described as an adventure, not a burden.
(Video): One by one they step forward, a nurse, a teacher, a homemaker, and lives are saved.
The problem is enormous.
Every three seconds one person dies.
Another three seconds, one more.
The situation is so desperate in parts of Africa, Asia, even America, that aid groups, just as they did for the tsunami, are uniting as one, acting as one.
We can beat extreme poverty, starvation, AIDS.
But we need your help.
One more person, letter, voice will mean the difference between life and death for millions of people.
Please join us by working together.
Americans have an unprecedented opportunity.
We can make history.
We can start to make poverty history.
One, by one, by one.
Please visit ONE at this address.
We're not asking for your money. We're asking for your voice.
Bono: All right. I wish for TED to truly show the power of information, its power to rewrite the rules and transform lives, by connecting every hospital, health clinic and school in one African country.
And I would like it to be Ethiopia.
I believe we can connect every school in Ethiopia, every health clinic, every hospital -- we can connect to the Internet.
That is my wish, my third wish.
I think it's possible.
I think we have the money and brains in the room to do that.
And that would be a mind-blowing wish to come true.
I've been to Ethiopia, as I said earlier.
It's actually where it all started for me.
The idea that the Internet, which changed all of our lives, can transform a country -- and a continent that has hardly made it to analog, let alone digital -- blows my mind.
But it didn't start out that way.
The first long-distance line from Boston to New York was used in 1885 on the phone.
It was just nine years later that Addis Ababa was connected by phone to Harare, which is 500 kilometers away.
Since then, not that much has changed.
The average waiting time to get a landline in Ethiopia is actually about seven or eight years.
But wireless technology wasn't dreamt up then.
Anyway, I'm Irish, and as you can see, I know how important talking is.
Communication is very important for Ethiopia -- will transform the country.
Nurses getting better training, pharmacists being able to order supplies, doctors sharing their expertise in all aspects of medicine.
It's a very, very good idea to get them wired.
And that is my third and final wish for you at the TED conference.
Thank you very much once again.
(Applause)
Charles and Ray were a team. They were husband and wife.
Despite the New York Times' and Vanity Fair's best efforts recently, they're not brothers. (Laughter) And they were a lot of fun.
You know, Ray was the one who wore the ampersands in the family.
(Laughter) We are going to focus on Charles today, because it is Charles' 100th birthday.
But when I speak of him, I'm really speaking of both of them as a team.
Here's Charles when he was three. So he would be 100 this June.
We have a lot of cool celebrations that we're going to do.
The thing about their work is that most people come to the door of furniture -- I suspect you probably recognize this chair and some of the others I'm going to show you.
But we're going to first enter through the door of the Big Top.
The whole thing about this, though, is that, you know, why am I showing it?
Is it because Charles and Ray made this film?
This is actually a training film for a clown college that they had.
They also practiced a clown act when the future of furniture was not nearly as auspicious as it turned out to be.
There is a picture of Charles. So let's watch the next clip.
The film that we're about to see is a film they made for the Moscow World's Fair.
Video: This is the land.
It has many contrasts.
It is rough and it is flat.
In places it is cold.
In some it is hot.
Too much rain falls on some areas, and not enough on others.
But people live on this land.
And, as in Russia, they are drawn together into towns and cities.
Here is something of the way they live.
Eames Demetrios: Now, this is a film that was hardly ever seen in the United States.
It was on seven screens and it was 200 feet across.
And it was at the height of the Cold War.
The Nixon-Khrushchev Kitchen Debate happened about 50 feet from where this was shown.
And yet, how did it start?
You know, commonality, the first line in Charles' narration was, "The same stars that shine down on Russia shine down on the United States. From the sky, our cities look much the same."
It was that human connection that Charles and Ray always found in everything.
And you can imagine, and the thing about it is, that they believed that the human mind could handle this number of images because the important thing was to get the gestalt of what the images were about.
So that was just a little snip.
But the thing about Charles and Ray is that they were always modeling stuff.
They were always trying things out.
I think one of the things I am passionate about, my grandparents work, I'm passionate about my work, but on top of all that I'm passionate about a holistic vision of design, where design is a life skill, not a professional skill.
And you know, those of us with kids often want our kids to take music.
I'm no exception.
But it's not about them becoming Bono or Tracy Chapman.
It's about getting that music thing going through their heads and their thinking.
Design is the same way. Design has to become that same way.
And this is a model that they did of that seven-screen presentation.
And Charles just checking it out there.
So now we're going to go through that door of furniture.
This is an unusual installation of airport seating.
So what we're going to see is some of the icons of Eames furniture.
And the thing about their furniture is that they said the role of the designer was essentially that of a good host, anticipating the needs of the guest.
So those are cool images. But these are ones I think are really cool.
These are all the prototypes. These are the mistakes, although I don't think mistakes is the right word in design.
It's just the things you try out to kind of make it work better.
And you know some of them would probably be terrible chairs.
Some of them are kind of cool looking. It's like "Hey, why didn't they try that?"
It was that hands-on iterative process which is so much like vernacular design and folk design in traditional cultures.
And I think that's one of the commonalities between modernism and traditional design. I think it may be a real common ground as we kind of figure out what on earth to do in the next 20 or 30 years.
The other thing that's kind of cool is that you look at this and in the media when people say design, they actually mean style.
And I'm really here to talk about design.
But you know the object is just a pivot.
It's a pivot between a process and a system.
And this is a little film I made about the making of the Eames lounge chair.
The design process for Charles and Ray never ended in manufacturing.
It continued. They were always trying to make thing better and better.
Because it's like as Bill Clinton was saying about Rwandan health clinics.
It's not enough to create one.
You've got to create a system that will work better and better.
So I've always liked this prototype picture.
Because it just kind of, you know, doesn't get any more basic than that.
You try things out.
This is a relatively famous chair.
Its early version had an "X" base. That's what the collectors like.
Charles and Ray liked this one because it was better.
It worked better: "H" base, much more practical.
This is something called a splint.
And I was very touched by Dean Kamen's work for the military, or for the soldiers, because Charles and Ray designed a molded plywood splint. This is it.
And they'd been working on furniture before.
But doing these splints they learned a lot about the manufacturing process, which was incredibly important to them.
I'm trying to show you too much, because I want you to really get a broth of ideas and images.
This is a house that Charles and Ray designed.
My sister is chasing someone else. It's not me.
Although I endorse heartily the fact that he stole her diary, it's not me.
And then this is a film, on the lower left, that Charles and Ray made.
Now look at that plastic chair.
The house is 1949.
The chair is done in 1949.
Charles and Ray, they didn't obsess about style for it's own sake.
They didn't say, "Our style is curves. Let's make the house curvy."
They didn't say, "Our style is grids. Let's make the chair griddy."
They focused on the need.
They tried to solve the design problem.
Charles used to say, "The extent to which you have a design style is the extent to which you have not solved the design problem."
It's kind of a brutal quote.
This is the earlier design of that house.
And again, they managed to figure out a way to make a prototype of a house -- architecture, very expensive medium.
Here's a film we've been hearing things about.
The "Powers of Ten" is a film they made.
If we watch the next clip, you're going to see the first version of "Powers of Ten," upper left.
The familiar one on the lower right.
The Eames' film Tops, lower left.
And a lamp that Charles designed for a church.
Video: Which in turn belongs to a local group of galaxies.
These form part of a grouping system much as the stars do.
They are so many and so varied that from this distance they appear like the stars from Earth.
ED: You've seen that film, and what's so great about this whole conference is that everybody has been talking about scale.
Everybody here is coming at it from a different way.
I want to give you one example.
E.O. Wilson once told me that when he looked at ants -- he loved them, of course, and he wanted to learn more about them -- he consciously looked at them from the standpoint of scale.
So here is the tiny creature.
And yet simply by changing the frame of reference it reveals so much, including what ended up being the TED Prize.
Modeling, they tried modeling all the time. They were always modeling things.
And I think part of that is that they never delegated understanding.
And I think in our family we were very lucky, because we learned about design backwards.
Design was not something other.
It was part of the business of life in general.
It was part of the quality of life.
And here is some family pictures.
And you can see why I'm down on style, with a haircut like that.
But anyway, (Laughter) I remember the cut grapefruit that we would have at the Eames house when I was a kid.
So we're going to watch another film.
This is a film, the one called Toys.
You can see me, I have the same haircut, in the upper right corner.
Upper left is a film they did on toy trains.
Lower right is a solar do-nothing toy.
Lower left is Day-of-the-Dead toys.
Charles used to say that toys are not as innocent as they appear.
They are often the precursor to bigger things.
And these ideas -- that train up there, being about the honest use of materials, is totally the same as the honest use of materials in the plywood.
And now I'm going to test you.
This is a letter that my grandfather sent to my mom when she was five years old.
So can you read it?
Lucia angel, okay, eye.
Audience: Saw many trains.
ED: Awl, also, good that the leather crafter's guild is here.
Also, what is he doing? Row, rowed.
Sun? No. Well is there another name for a sunrise?
Dawn, very good.
Also rode on one. I ...
Audience: You had, I hope you had -- ED: Now you've been to the website Dogs of Saint Louis in the late, in the mid-1930's, then you'd know that was a Great Dane.
So, I hope you had a Audience: Nice time, time -- ED: Time at.
Citizen Kane, rose -- Audience: Rosebud.
ED: No, bud. "D"'s right. At Buddy's -- Audience: Party. Love.
ED: Okay, good.
So, "I saw many trains and also rode on one.
I hope you had a nice time at Buddy's party."
So you guys did pretty good, cool.
So my mom and Charles had this great relationship where they'd send those sorts of things back and forth to one another.
And it's all part of the, you know, they used to say, "Take your pleasure seriously."
These are some images from a project of mine that's called Kymaerica.
It's sort of an alternative universe.
It's kind of a reinterpretation of the landscape.
Those plaques are plaques we've been installing around North America.
We're about to do six in the U.K. next week.
And they honor events in the linear world from the fictional world.
So, of course, since it's bronze it has to be true.
Video: Kymaerica with waterfalls, tumbling through our -- ED: This is one of the traditional Kymaerican songs.
And so we had spelling bees in Paris, Illinois.
Video: Your word is N. Carolina.
Girl: Y-I-N-D-I-A-N-A.
ED: And then Embassy Row is actually a historical site, because in the Kymaerican story this is where the Parisian Diaspora started, where there embassy was.
So you can actually visit and have this three-dimensional fictional experience there.
And the town has really embraced it.
We had the spelling bee in conjunction with the Gwomeus Club.
But what is really cool is that we take our visual environment as inevitable. And it's not.
Other things could have happened. The Japanese could have discovered Monterey.
And we could have been born 100,000 years ago.
And there are a lot of fun things. This is the Museum of the Bench.
They have trading cards and all sorts of cool things.
And you're kind of trapped in the texture of Kymaerica.
The Tahatchabe, the great road building culture.
A guy named Nobu Naga, the so-called Japanese Columbus.
But now I'm going to return you to the real world.
And this is Cranbrook. I've got a real treat for you, which is the first film that Charles ever made.
So let's watch that. Nobody's ever seen it.
Cranbrook is very generous to let us show it for the first time here.
It's a film about Maya Gretel, a famous ceramicist, and a teacher at Cranbrook.
And he made it for the 1939 faculty exhibition.
Silent. We don't have a track for it yet.
Very simple. It's just a start. But it's that learn-by-doing thing.
You want to learn how to make films? Go make a movie.
And you try something out.
But here is what's really great.
See that chair there? The orange one? That's the organic chair. 1940.
At the same time that Charles was doing that chair, he was doing this film.
So my point is that this scope of vision, this holistic vision of design, was with them from the beginning.
It wasn't like "Oh, we made some chairs and got successful.
Now we're going to do some movies."
It was always part of how they looked at the world. And that's what's really powerful.
And I think that all of us in this room, as you move design forward, it's not about just doing one thing.
It's about how you approach problems. And there is this huge, beautiful commonality between design, business and the world.
So we're going to do the last clip.
And I've shown you some of the images. I just want to focus on sound now.
So this is Charles' voice.
Charles Eames: In India, those without, and the lowest in caste, eat very often, particularly in southern India, they eat off of a banana leaf.
And those a little bit up the scale eat off of a sort of a low-fired ceramic dish.
And a little bit higher, why they have a glaze on a thing they call a thali.
If you're up the scale a little bit more, why, a brass thali.
And then things get to be a little questionable.
There are things like silver-plated thalis.
And there is solid silver thalis.
And I suppose some nut has had a gold thali that he's eaten off of.
But you can go beyond that.
And the guys that have not only means, but a certain amount of knowledge and understanding, go to the next step, and they eat off a banana leaf.
And I think that in these times when we fall back and regroup, that somehow or other, the banana leaf parable sort of got to get working there, because I'm not prepared to say that the banana leaf that one eats off of is the same as the other eats off of.
But it is that process that has happened within the man that changes the banana leaf.
ED: I've been looking forward to sharing that quote with you.
Because that's part of where we've got to get to.
And I also want to share this one.
"Beyond the age of information is the age of choices."
And I really think that's where we are.
And it's kind of cool for me to be part of a family and a tradition where he was talking about that in 1978.
And part of why this stuff is important and all the things that we do are important, is that these are the ideas we need.
And I think that this is all part of surrendering to the design journey.
That's what we all need to do.
Design is not just for designers anymore. It's a process. It's not style.
All that great thinking needs to really get about solving pretty key problems.
I really thank you for your time.
(Applause)
Last year at TED we aimed to try to clarify the overwhelming complexity and richness that we experience at the conference in a project called Big Viz.
And the Big Viz is a collection of 650 sketches that were made by two visual artists.
David Sibbet from The Grove, and Kevin Richards, from Autodesk, made 650 sketches that strive to capture the essence of each presenter's ideas.
And the consensus was: it really worked.
These sketches brought to life the key ideas, the portraits, the magic moments that we all experienced last year.
This year we were thinking, "Why does it work?"
What is it about animation, graphics, illustrations, that create meaning?
And this is an important question to ask and answer because the more we understand how the brain creates meaning, the better we can communicate, and, I also think, the better we can think and collaborate together.
So this year we're going to visualize how the brain visualizes.
Cognitive psychologists now tell us that the brain doesn't actually see the world as it is, but instead, creates a series of mental models through a collection of "Ah-ha moments," or moments of discovery, through various processes.
The processing, of course, begins with the eyes.
Light enters, hits the back of the retina, and is circulated, most of which is streamed to the very back of the brain, at the primary visual cortex.
And primary visual cortex sees just simple geometry, just the simplest of shapes.
But it also acts like a kind of relay station that re-radiates and redirects information to many other parts of the brain.
As many as 30 other parts that selectively make more sense, create more meaning through the kind of "Ah-ha" experiences.
We're only going to talk about three of them.
So the first one is called the ventral stream.
It's on this side of the brain.
And this is the part of the brain that will recognize what something is.
It's the "what" detector.
Look at a hand. Look at a remote control. Chair. Book.
So that's the part of the brain that is activated when you give a word to something.
A second part of the brain is called the dorsal stream.
And what it does is locates the object in physical body space.
So if you look around the stage here you'll create a kind of mental map of the stage.
And if you closed your eyes you'd be able to mentally navigate it.
You'd be activating the dorsal stream if you did that.
The third part that I'd like to talk about is the limbic system.
And this is deep inside of the brain. It's very old, evolutionarily.
And it's the part that feels.
It's the kind of gut center, where you see an image and you go, "Oh! I have a strong or emotional reaction to whatever I'm seeing."
So the combination of these processing centers help us make meaning in very different ways.
So what can we learn about this? How can we apply this insight?
Well, again, the schematic view is that the eye visually interrogates what we look at.
The brain processes this in parallel, the figments of information asking a whole bunch of questions to create a unified mental model.
So, for example, when you look at this image a good graphic invites the eye to dart around, to selectively create a visual logic.
So the act of engaging, and looking at the image creates the meaning.
It's the selective logic.
Now we've augmented this and spatialized this information.
Many of you may remember the magic wall that we built in conjunction with Perceptive Pixel where we quite literally create an infinite wall.
And so we can compare and contrast the big ideas.
So the act of engaging and creating interactive imagery enriches meaning.
It activates a different part of the brain.
And then the limbic system is activated when we see motion, when we see color, and there are primary shapes and pattern detectors that we've heard about before.
So the point of this is what?
We make meaning by seeing, by an act of visual interrogation.
The lessons for us are three-fold.
First, use images to clarify what we're trying to communicate.
Secondly make those images interactive so that we engage much more fully.
And the third is to augment memory by creating a visual persistence.
These are techniques that can be used to be -- that can be applied in a wide range of problem solving.
So the low-tech version looks like this.
And, by the way, this is the way in which we develop and formulate strategy within Autodesk, in some of our organizations and some of our divisions.
What we literally do is have the teams draw out the entire strategic plan on one giant wall.
And it's very powerful because everyone gets to see everything else.
There's always a room, always a place to be able to make sense of all of the components in the strategic plan.
This is a time-lapse view of it.
You can ask the question, "Who's the boss?"
You'll be able to figure that out. (Laughter) So the act of collectively and collaboratively building the image transforms the collaboration.
No Powerpoint is used in two days.
But instead the entire team creates a shared mental model that they can all agree on and move forward on.
And this can be enhanced and augmented with some emerging digital technology.
And this is our great unveiling for today.
And this is an emerging set of technologies that use large-screen displays with intelligent calculation in the background to make the invisible visible.
Here what we can do is look at sustainability, quite literally.
So a team can actually look at all the key components that heat the structure and make choices and then see the end result that is visualized on this screen.
So making images meaningful has three components.
The first again, is making ideas clear by visualizing them.
Secondly, making them interactive.
And then thirdly, making them persistent.
And I believe that these three principles can be applied to solving some of the very tough problems that we face in the world today. Thanks so much.
(Applause)
In the grasslands of Mauritania, a gazelle suffering from tuberculosis takes its last breath.
Collapsing near a small pool, the animals corpse threatens to infect the water.
But for the deserts cleanup crew, this body isnt a problem: its a feast.
Weighing up to 10 kilograms and possessing a wingspan of nearly 3 meters, the lappet-faced vulture is the undisputed king of the carcass.
This birds powerful beak and strong neck easily tear through tough hide and muscle tissue, opening entry points for weaker vultures to dig in.
This colossal competition is too dangerous for the tiny Egyptian vulture.
With a wingspan of only 180 centimeters, this vulture migrated to Africa from his family nest in Portugal, using thermal updrafts to stay aloft for hours at a time.
But upon arrival, he finds himself near the bottom of the pecking order.
Fortunately, what he lacks in size, he makes up for in intelligence.
A short distance away, he spots an unguarded ostrich nest, full of immense, but impenetrable eggs.
Using a large rock, he smashes one open for a well-earned meal though hell circle back to the gazelle once the larger birds are gone.
High above the commotion are Ruppells Griffon vultures.
Soaring at an altitude of over 11,000 meters, these birds fly higher than any other animal.
At this height, they cant see individual carcasses.
But the sight of their fellow vultures guides them to the feeding.
Their featherless heads help them regulate the sudden rise in temperature as they descend and keep them clean as they tear into the decaying gazelle.
The carcass is stripped clean in hours, well before the rotting meat infects the water supply.
And the tuberculosis doesnt stand a chance at infecting the vultures.
These birds have evolved the lowest gastric pH in the animal kingdom, allowing them to digest diseased carrion and waste without becoming sick.
In fact, species like the mountain-dwelling bearded vulture have stomachs so acidic, they can digest most bones in just 24 hours.
This adaptation helps smaller vultures supplement their diet with dung, while larger vultures can consume diseased meat up to 3 days old.
Their acidic stomachs protect them from living animals too: their rancid vomit scares off most predators.
These stomachs of steel are essential to removing pathogens like cholera, anthrax, and rabies from the African ecosystem.
But while vultures can easily digest natural waste, man-made chemicals are another story.
Diclofenac, a common veterinary drug used to treat cattle in India, is fatal to vultures.
And because local religious beliefs prohibit eating beef, scavengers often consume cattle carcasses.
Since the 1990s, the drug, along with threats from electricity pylons and habitat loss, has contributed to a 95% decline in the regions vulture population.
In nearby Africa, poachers intentionally poison carcasses to prevent the birds presence from alerting authorities to their location.
One poisoned carcass can kill over 500 vultures.
Today, more than 50% of all vulture species are endangered.
In regions where vultures have gone extinct, corpses take three times longer to decay.
These carcasses contaminate drinking water, while feral dogs and rats carry the diseases into human communities.
The Asian and African Vulture Crisis has led to an epidemic of rabies in India, where infections kill roughly 20,000 people each year.
Fortunately, some communities have already realized how important vultures are.
Conservationists have successfully banned drugs like Diclofenac, while other researchers are working to repopulate vulture communities through breeding programs.
Some regions have even opened vulture restaurants where farmers safely dispose of drug-free livestock.
With help, vultures will be able to continue their role conserving the health of our planet transforming death and decay into life.
In the 8th century CE, Vikings surged across the misty seas.
They came from Scandinavia in Northern Europe but would travel far and wide.
Some plundered and settled in the British Isles and France; others braved Artic exploration or forged clever new trade routes to the Middle East.
With their steely navigational skills, advanced long-ships and fearsome tactics, the Vikings sustained their seafaring for over three hundred years.
But for all their might, they left few monuments.
Instead, fragments of stone, bark, and bone provide the keys to their culture.
Found in graves, bogs, and sites of ancient settlements, many of these objects are inscribed with messages in Old Norse written in runic letters.
But the Vikings also scratched runes into household goods, jewellery, weapons, and even shoes.
Deciphering these messages is no easy task.
Runes are short, straight, and diagonal lines that make up an alphabet called the futhark. All classes of people spoke and wrote this language, in many different dialects.
There was no standard spelling, they wrote the individual runic letters by pronouncing the sounds of their regional accents.
Some of these inscriptions also bore the influence of other cultures the Vikings interacted with the runic inscription love conquers all, for example, is originally a Latin phrase from the poet Virgil.
Many, like the enigmatic Rok runestone, were carved in verse, highlighting the tradition of Old Norse poetry.
So even though modern runologists can read runes, their meaning isnt always obvious.
Still, in spite of the remaining mysteries, many inscriptions memorializing the dead and recording local histories have been deciphered along with some containing magical incantations.
The Ramsund runes in Sweden are carved on a rocky outcrop beside a bridge for travelers passing over swampy ground.
This causeway was commissioned by a prominent local woman named Sigrir.
She proclaimed both her importance and her familys power by carving their names in stone, and even associated herself and her family with mythical heroism by carving illustrations of Sigurd the dragon slayer.
In the town of Jelling in Denmark, two standing stones from the 10th century memorialize different generations of a royal family.
The first was erected by King Gorm the Old in memory of his Queen Thyrvi, and the second by their son, Harald Bluetooth, after Gorms death.
The stones announce the power of this Viking Age dynasty, and they are among the earliest historical documents of Denmark.
They indicate that Denmark was the earliest major Viking Age kingdom, by telling that Harald controlled southern Norway, and that he converted to Christianity.
Today, Harald Bluetooths initials make up the Bluetooth logo.
The 10th century warrior poet Egil was a well-known carver of runes.
According to poetic accounts, he once carved runes on a horn filled with poison, causing the horn to shatter.
In another story, Egil saves a young girls life by placing a piece of whale bone carved with healing runes under her pillow.
Norse poetry tells of runic spells, cast to ensure calm seas, safe childbirth and triumphant battles.
But the exact nature of these spells isnt fully understood many of the inscriptions on swords, axes, and spears are indecipherable.
Other objects, like the Lindholm amulet, have inscriptions that could be incantations, riddles, or religious messages.
While its difficult to pinpoint the end of the Viking era, by 1100 CE their sea-borne expansion had mostly come to an end.
However, people continued to speak versions of Old Norse throughout Scandinavia; and runes remained in use in rural areas into the 19th century.
Today, many runestones remain standing at their original sites.
The inscription on the Danish Glavendrup stone has fearsomely declared for a thousand years: A warlock be he who damages this stone or drags it in memory of another!
A woman in rags emerged from the swamp flanked by seven giant scorpions.
Carrying a baby, she headed for the nearest village to beg for food.
She approached a magnificent mansion, but the mistress of the house took one look at her grimy clothes and unusual companions and slammed the door in her face.
So she continued down the road until she came to a cottage.
The woman there took pity on the stranger and offered her what she could: a simple meal and a bed of straw.
Her guest was no ordinary beggar.
She was Isis, the most powerful goddess in Egypt.
Isis was in hiding from her brother Set, who murdered her husband and wanted to murder her infant son, Horus.
Set was also a powerful god, and he was looking for them.
So to keep her cover, Isis had to be very discreet she couldnt risk using her powers.
But she was not without aid.
Serket, goddess of venomous creatures, had sent seven of her fiercest servants to guard Isis and her son.
As Isis and Horus settled into their humble accommodation, the scorpions fumed at how the wealthy woman had offended their divine mistress.
They all combined their venom and gave it to one of the seven, Tefen.
In the dead of night, Tefen crept over to the mansion.
As he crawled under the door, he saw the owners young son sleeping peacefully and gave him a mighty sting.
Isis and her hostess were soon awakened by loud wailing.
As they peered out of the doorway of the cottage, they saw a mother running through the street, weeping as she cradled her son.
When Isis recognized the woman who had turned her away, she understood what her scorpions had done.
Isis took the boy in her arms and began to recite a powerful spell: "O poison of Tefen, come out of him and fall upon the ground!
Poison of Befen, advance not, penetrate no farther, come out of him, and fall upon the ground!
For I am Isis, the great Enchantress, the Speaker of spells.
Fall down, O poison of Mestet! Hasten not, poison of Mestetef!
Rise not, poison of Petet and Thetet! Approach not, poison of Matet!"
With each name she invoked, that scorpions poison was neutralized.
The child stirred, and his mother wept with gratitude and lamented her earlier callousness, offering all her wealth to Isis in repentance.
The woman who had taken Isis in watched in awe she had had no idea who shed brought under her roof.
And from that day on, the people learned to make a poultice to treat scorpion bites, speaking magical incantations just as the goddess had.
A new drug reduces the risk of heart attacks by 40%.
Shark attacks are up by a factor of two.
Drinking a liter of soda per day doubles your chance of developing cancer.
These are all examples of relative risk, a common way risk is presented in news articles.
Risk evaluation is a complicated tangle of statistical thinking and personal preference.
One common stumbling block is the difference between relative risks like these and what are called absolute risks.
Risk is the likelihood that an event will occur.
It can be expressed as either a percentage for example, that heart attacks occur in 11% of men between the ages of 60 and 79 or as a rate that one in two million divers along Australias western coast will suffer a fatal shark bite each year.
These numbers express the absolute risk of heart attacks and shark attacks in these groups.
Changes in risk can be expressed in relative or absolute terms.
For example, a review in 2009 found that mammography screenings reduced the number of breast cancer deaths from five women in one thousand to four.
The absolute risk reduction was about .1%.
But the relative risk reduction from 5 cases of cancer mortality to four is 20%.
Based on reports of this higher number, people overestimated the impact of screening.
To see why the difference between the two ways of expressing risk matters, lets consider the hypothetical example of a drug that reduces heart attack risk by 40%.
Imagine that out of a group of 1,000 people who didnt take the new drug, 10 would have heart attacks.
The absolute risk is 10 out of 1,000, or 1%.
If a similar group of 1,000 people did take the drug, the number of heart attacks would be six.
In other words, the drug could prevent four out of ten heart attacks a relative risk reduction of 40%.
Meanwhile, the absolute risk only dropped from 1% to 0.6% but the 40% relative risk decrease sounds a lot more significant.
Surely preventing even a handful of heart attacks, or any other negative outcome, is worthwhile isnt it?
Not necessarily.
The problem is that choices that reduce some risks can put you in the path of others.
Suppose the heart-attack drug caused cancer in one half of 1% of patients.
In our group of 1,000 people, four heart attacks would be prevented by taking the drug, but there would be five new cases of cancer.
The relative reduction in heart attack risk sounds substantial and the absolute risk of cancer sounds small, but they work out to about the same number of cases.
In real life, everyones individual evaluation of risk will vary depending on their personal circumstances.
If you know you have a family history of heart disease you might be more strongly motivated to take a medication that would lower your heart-attack risk, even knowing it provided only a small reduction in absolute risk.
Sometimes, we have to decide between exposing ourselves to risks that arent directly comparable.
If, for example, the heart attack drug carried a higher risk of a debilitating, but not life-threatening, side effect like migraines rather than cancer, our evaluation of whether that risk is worth taking might change.
And sometimes there isnt necessarily a correct choice: some might say even a minuscule risk of shark attack is worth avoiding, because all youd miss out on is an ocean swim, while others wouldnt even consider skipping a swim to avoid an objectively tiny risk of shark attack.
For all these reasons, risk evaluation is tricky at baseline, and reporting on risk can be misleading, especially when it shares some numbers in absolute terms and others in relative terms.
Understanding how these measures work will help you cut through some of the confusion and better evaluate risk.
At roughly 4pm on July 20, 1969, mankind was just minutes away from landing on the surface of the moon.
But before the astronauts began their final descent, an emergency alarm lit up.
Something was overloading the computer, and threatened to abort the landing.
Back on Earth, Margaret Hamilton held her breath.
She'd led the team developing the pioneering in-flight software, so she knew this mission had no room for error.
But the nature of this last-second emergency would soon prove her software was working exactly as planned.
Born 33 years earlier in Paoli, Indiana, Hamilton had always been inquisitive.
In college, she studied mathematics and philosophy, before taking a research position at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to pay for grad school.
Here, she encountered her first computer while developing software to support research into the new field of chaos theory.
Next at MIT's Lincoln Laboratory, Hamilton developed software for Americas first air defense system to search for enemy aircraft.
But when she heard that renowned engineer Charles Draper was looking for help sending mankind to the moon, she immediately joined his team.
NASA looked to Draper and his group of over 400 engineers to invent the first compact digital flight computer, the Apollo Guidance Computer.
Using input from astronauts, this device would be responsible for guiding, navigating and controlling the spacecraft.
At a time when unreliable computers filled entire rooms, the AGC needed to operate without any errors, and fit in one cubic foot of space.
Draper divided the lab into two teams, one for designing hardware and one for developing software.
Hamilton led the team that built the on-board flight software for both the Command and Lunar Modules.
This work, for which she coined the term software engineering," was incredibly high stakes.
Human lives were on the line, so every program had to be perfect.
Margarets software needed to quickly detect unexpected errors and recover from them in real time.
But this kind of adaptable program was difficult to build, since early software could only process jobs in a predetermined order.
To solve this problem, Margaret designed her program to be asynchronous, meaning the software's more important jobs would interrupt less important ones.
Her team assigned every task a unique priority to ensure that each job occurred in the correct order and at the right time regardless of any surprises.
After this breakthrough, Margaret realized her software could help the astronauts work in an asynchronous environment as well.
She designed Priority Displays that would interrupt astronauts regularly scheduled tasks to warn them of emergencies.
The astronaut could then communicate with Mission Control to determine the best path forward.
This marked the first time flight software communicated directly and asynchronously with a pilot.
It was these fail safes that triggered the alarms just before the lunar landing.
Buzz Aldrin quickly realized his mistake hed inadvertently flipped the rendezvous radar switch.
This radar would be essential on their journey home, but here it was using up vital computational resources.
Fortunately, the Apollo Guidance Computer was well equipped to manage this.
During the overload, the software restart programs allowed only the highest priority jobs to be processed including the programs necessary for landing.
The Priority Displays gave the astronauts a choice to land or not to land.
With minutes to spare, Mission Control gave the order.
The Apollo 11 landing was about the astronauts, Mission Control, software and hardware all working together as an integrated system of systems.
Hamiltons contributions were essential to the work of engineers and scientists inspired by President John F. Kennedys goal to reach the Moon.
And her life-saving work went far beyond Apollo 11 no bugs were ever found in the in-flight software for any crewed Apollo missions.
After her work on Apollo, Hamilton founded a company that uses its unique universal systems language to create breakthroughs for systems and software.
In 2003, NASA honored her achievements with the largest financial award theyd ever given to an individual.
And 47 years after her software first guided astronauts to the moon, Hamilton was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom for changing the way we think about technology.
I normally teach courses on how to rebuild states after war.
But today I've got a personal story to share with you.
This is a picture of my family, my four siblings -- my mom and I -- taken in 1977.
And we're actually Cambodians.
And this picture is taken in Vietnam.
So how did a Cambodian family end up in Vietnam in 1977?
Well to explain that, I've got a short video clip to explain the Khmer Rouge regime during 1975 and 1979.
Video: April 17th, 1975.
The communist Khmer Rouge enters Phnom Penh to liberate their people from the encroaching conflict in Vietnam, and American bombing campaigns.
Led by peasant-born Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge evacuates people to the countryside in order to create a rural communist utopia, much like Mao Tse-tung's Cultural Revolution in China.
The Khmer Rouge closes the doors to the outside world.
But after four years the grim truth seeps out.
In a country of only seven million people, one and a half million were murdered by their own leaders, their bodies piled in the mass graves of the killing fields.
Sophal Ear: So, notwithstanding the 1970s narration, on April 17th 1975 we lived in Phnom Penh.
And my parents were told by the Khmer Rouge to evacuate the city because of impending American bombing for three days.
And here is a picture of the Khmer Rouge.
They were young soldiers, typically child soldiers.
And this is very normal now, of modern day conflict, because they're easy to bring into wars.
The reason that they gave about American bombing wasn't all that far off.
I mean, from 1965 to 1973 there were more munitions that fell on Cambodia than in all of World War II Japan, including the two nuclear bombs of August 1945.
The Khmer Rouge didn't believe in money.
So the equivalent of the Federal Reserve Bank in Cambodia was bombed.
But not just that, they actually banned money.
I think it's the only precedent in which money has ever been stopped from being used.
And we know money is the root of all evil, but it didn't actually stop evil from happening in Cambodia, in fact.
My family was moved from Phnom Penh to Pursat province.
This is a picture of what Pursat looks like.
It's actually a very pretty area of Cambodia, where rice growing takes place.
And in fact they were forced to work the fields.
So my father and mother ended up in a sort of concentration camp, labor camp.
And it was at that time that my mother got word from the commune chief that the Vietnamese were actually asking for their citizens to go back to Vietnam.
And she spoke some Vietnamese, as a child having grown up with Vietnamese friends.
And she decided, despite the advice of her neighbors, that she would take the chance and claim to be Vietnamese so that we could have a chance to survive, because at this point they're forcing everybody to work.
And they're giving about -- in a modern-day, caloric-restriction diet, I guess -- they're giving porridge, with a few grains of rice.
And at about this time actually my father got very sick.
And he didn't speak Vietnamese.
So he died actually, in January 1976.
And it made it possible, in fact, for us to take on this plan.
So the Khmer Rouge took us from a place called Pursat to Kaoh Tiev, which is across from the border from Vietnam.
And there they had a detention camp where alleged Vietnamese would be tested, language tested.
And my mother's Vietnamese was so bad that to make our story more credible, she'd given all the boys and girls new Vietnamese names.
But she'd given the boys girls' names, and the girls boys' names.
And it wasn't until she met a Vietnamese lady who told her this, and then tutored her for two days intensively, that she was able to go into her exam and -- you know, this was a moment of truth.
If she fails, we're all headed to the gallows; if she passes, we can leave to Vietnam.
And she actually, of course -- I'm here, she passes.
And we end up in Hong Ngu on the Vietnamese side.
And then onwards to Chau Doc.
And this is a picture of Hong Ngu, Vietnam today.
A pretty idyllic place on the Mekong Delta.
But for us it meant freedom.
And freedom from persecution from the Khmer Rouge.
Last year, the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, which the U.N. is helping Cambodia take on, started, and I decided that as a matter of record I should file a Civil Complaint with the Tribunal about my father's passing away.
And I got word last month that the complaint was officially accepted by the Khmer Rouge Tribunal.
And it's for me a matter of justice for history, and accountability for the future, because Cambodia remains a pretty lawless place, at times.
Five years ago my mother and I went back to Chau Doc.
And she was able to return to a place that for her meant freedom, but also fear, because we had just come out of Cambodia.
I'm happy, actually, today, to present her.
She's here today with us in the audience.
Thank you mother.
(Applause)
So it was about four years ago, five years ago, I was sitting on a stage in Philadelphia, I think it was, with a bag similar to this.
And I was pulling a molecule out of this bag.
And I was saying, you don't know this molecule really well, but your body knows it extremely well.
And I was thinking that your body hated it, at the time, because we are very immune to this. This is called alpha-gal epitope.
And the fact that pig heart valves have lots of these on them is the reason that you can't transplant a pig heart valve into a person easily.
Actually our body doesn't hate these.
Our body loves these. It eats them.
I mean, the cells in our immune system are always hungry.
And if an antibody is stuck to one of these things on the cell, it means "that's food."
Now, I was thinking about that and I said, you know, we've got this immune response to this ridiculous molecule that we don't make, and we see it a lot in other animals and stuff.
But I said we can't get rid of it, because all the people who tried to transplant heart valves found out you can't get rid of that immunity.
And I said, why don't you use that?
What if I could stick this molecule, slap it onto a bacteria that was pathogenic to me, that had just invaded my lungs?
I mean I could immediately tap into an immune response that was already there, where it was not going to take five or six days to develop it -- it was going to immediately attack whatever this thing was on.
It was kind of like the same thing that happens when you, like when you're getting stopped for a traffic ticket in L.A., and the cop drops a bag of marijuana in the back of your car, and then charges you for possession of marijuana.
It's like this very fast, very efficient way to get people off the street.
(Laughter) So you can take a bacteria that really doesn't make these things at all, and if you could clamp these on it really well you have it taken off the street.
And for certain bacteria we don't have really efficient ways to do that anymore.
Our antibiotics are running out.
And, I mean, the world apparently is running out too.
So probably it doesn't matter 50 years from now -- streptococcus and stuff like that will be rampant -- because we won't be here. But if we are -- (Laughter) we're going to need something to do with the bacteria.
So I started working with this thing, with a bunch of collaborators.
And trying to attach this to things that were themselves attached to certain specific target zones, bacteria that we don't like.
And I feel now like George Bush.
It's like "mission accomplished."
So I might be doing something dumb, just like he was doing at the time.
But basically what I was talking about there we've now gotten to work.
And it's killing bacteria. It's eating them.
This thing can be stuck, like that little green triangle up there, sort of symbolizing this right now.
You can stick this to something called a DNA aptamer.
And that DNA aptamer will attach specifically to a target that you have selected for it.
So you can find a little feature on a bacterium that you don't like, like Staphylococcus -- I don't like it in particular, because it killed a professor friend of mine last year.
It doesn't respond to antibiotics. So I don't like it.
And I'm making an aptamer that will have this attached to it.
That will know how to find Staph when it's in your body, and will alert your immune system to go after it.
Here's what happened. See that line on the very top with the little dots?
That's a bunch of mice that had been poisoned by our scientist friends down in Texas, at Brooks Air Base, with anthrax.
And they had also been treated with a drug that we made that would attack anthrax in particular, and direct your immune system to it.
You'll notice they all lived, the ones on the top line -- that's a 100 percent survival rate.
And they actually lived another 14 days, or 28 when we finally killed them, and took them apart and figured out what went wrong.
Why did they not die?
And they didn't die because they didn't have anthrax anymore.
So we did it. Okay?
(Applause) Mission accomplished!
(Applause)
Because of what I'm about to say, I really should establish my green credentials.
When I was a small boy, I took my pledge as an American, to save and faithfully defend from waste the natural resources of my country, its air, soil and minerals, its forests, waters and wildlife.
And I've stuck to that.
Stanford, I majored in ecology and evolution.
1968, I put out the Whole Earth Catalog. Was "mister natural" for a while.
And then worked for the Jerry Brown administration.
The Brown administration, and a bunch of my friends, basically leveled the energy efficiency of California, so it's the same now, 30 years later, even though our economy has gone up 80 percent, per capita.
And we are putting out less greenhouse gasses than any other state.
California is basically the equivalent of Europe, in this.
This year, Whole Earth Catalog has a supplement that I'll preview today, called Whole Earth Discipline.
The dominant demographic event of our time is this screamingly rapid urbanization that we have going on.
By mid-century we'll be about 80 percent urban, and that's mostly in the developing world, where that's happening.
It's interesting, because history is driven to a large degree by the size of cities.
The developing world now has all of the biggest cities, and they are developing three times faster than the developed countries, and nine times bigger.
It's qualitatively different.
They are the drivers of history, as we see by looking at history.
1,000 years ago this is what the world looked like.
Well we now have a distribution of urban power similar to what we had 1,000 years ago.
In other words, the rise of the West, dramatic as it was, is over.
The aggregate numbers are absolutely overwhelming: 1.3 million people a week coming to town, decade after decade.
What's really going on?
Well, what's going on is the villages of the world are emptying out.
Subsistence farming is drying up basically.
People are following opportunity into town.
And this is why.
I used to have a very romantic idea about villages, and it's because I never lived in one.
(Laughter) Because in town -- this is the bustling squatter city of Kibera, near Nairobi -- they see action. They see opportunity.
They see a cash economy that they were not able to participate in back in the subsistence farm.
As you go around these places there's plenty of aesthetics.
There is plenty going on.
They are poor, but they are intensely urban. And they are intensely creative.
The aggregate numbers now are that basically squatters, all one billion of them, are building the urban world, which means they're building the world -- personally, one by one, family by family, clan by clan, neighborhood by neighborhood.
They start flimsy and they get substantial as time goes by.
They even build their own infrastructure.
Well, steal their own infrastructure, at first.
Cable TV, water, the whole gamut, all gets stolen.
And then gradually gentrifies.
It is not the case that slums undermine prosperity, not the working slums; they help create prosperity.
So in a town like Mumbai, which is half slums, it's 1/6th of the GDP of India.
Social capital in the slums is at its most urban and dense.
These people are valuable as a group.
And that's how they work.
There is a lot of people who think about all these poor people, "Oh there's terrible things. We've got to fix their housing."
It used to be, "Oh we've got to get them phone service."
Now they're showing us how they do their phone service.
Famine mostly is a rural event now.
There are things they care about.
And this is where we can help.
And the nations they're in can help.
And they are helping each other solve these issues.
And you go to a nice dense place like this slum in Mumbai.
You look at that lane on the right.
And you can ask, "Okay what's going on there?"
The answer is, "Everything."
This is better than a mall. It's much denser.
It's much more interactive.
And the scale is terrific.
The main event is, these are not people crushed by poverty.
These are people busy getting out of poverty just as fast as they can.
They're helping each other do it.
They're doing it through an outlaw thing, the informal economy.
The informal economy, it's sort of like dark energy in astrophysics: it's not supposed to be there, but it's huge.
We don't understand how it works yet, but we have to.
Furthermore, people in the informal economy, the gray economy -- as time goes by, crime is happening around them. And they can join the criminal world, or they can join the legitimate world.
We should be able to make that choice easier for them to get toward the legitimate world, because if we don't, they will go toward the criminal world.
There's all kinds of activity.
In Dharavi the slum performs not only a lot of services for itself, but it performs services for the city at large.
And one of the main events are these ad-hoc schools.
Parents pool their money to hire some local teachers to a private, tiny, unofficial school.
Education is more possible in the cities, and that changes the world.
So you see some interesting, typical, urban things.
So one thing slammed up against another, such as in Sao Paulo here.
That's what cities do. That's how they create value, is by slamming things together.
In this case, supply right next to demand.
So the maids and the gardeners and the guards that live in this lively part of town on the left walk to work, in the boring, rich neighborhood.
Proximity is amazing.
We are learning about how dense proximity can be.
Connectivity between the city and the country is what's going to keep the country good, because the city has interesting ways of doing things.
This is what makes cities -- (Applause) this is what makes cities so green in the developing world.
Because people leave the poverty trap, an ecological disaster of subsistence farms, and head to town.
And when they're gone the natural environment starts to come back very rapidly.
And those who remain in the village can shift over to cash crops to send food to the new growing markets in town.
So if you want to save a village, you do it with a good road, or with a good cell phone connection, and ideally some grid electrical power.
So the event is: we're a city planet. That just happened.
More than half.
The numbers are considerable. A billion live in the squatter cities now.
Another billion is expected.
That's more than a sixth of humanity living a certain way.
And that will determine a lot of how we function.
Now, for us environmentalists, maybe the greenest thing about the cities is they diffuse the population bomb.
People get into town.
The immediately have fewer children.
They don't even have to get rich yet. Just the opportunity of coming up in the world means they will have fewer, higher-quality kids, and the birthrate goes down radically.
Very interesting side effect here, here's a slide from Phillip Longman.
Shows what is happening.
As we have more and more old people, like me, and fewer and fewer babies.
And they are regionally separated.
What you're getting is a world which is old folks, and old cities, going around doing things the old way, in the north.
And young people in brand new cities they're inventing, doing new things, in the south.
Where do you think the action is going to be?
Shift of subject. Quickly drop by climate.
The climate news, I'm sorry to say, is going to keep getting worse than we think, faster than we think.
Climate is a profoundly complex, nonlinear system, full of runaway positive feedbacks, hidden thresholds and irrevocable tipping points.
Here's just a few samples.
We're going to keep being surprised. And almost all the surprises are going to be bad ones.
From your standpoint this means a great increase in climate refugees over the coming decades, and what goes along with that, which is resource wars and chaos wars, as we're seeing in Darfur.
That's what drought does.
It brings carrying capacity down, and there's not enough carrying capacity to support the people. And then you're in trouble.
Shift to the power situation.
Baseload electricity is what it takes to run a city, or a city planet.
So far there is only three sources of baseload electricity: coal, some gas, nuclear and hydro.
Of those, only nuclear and hydro are green.
Coal is what is causing the climate problems.
And everyone will keep burning it because it's so cheap, until governments make it expensive.
Wind and solar can't help, because so far we don't have a way to store that energy.
So with hydro maxed out, coal and lose the climate, or nuclear, which is the current operating low-carbon source, and maybe save the climate.
And if we can eventually get good solar in space, that also could help.
Because remember, this is what drives the prosperity in the developing world in the villages and in the cities.
So, between coal and nuclear, compare their waste products.
If all of the electricity you used in your lifetime was nuclear, the amount of waste that would be added up would fit in a Coke can.
Whereas a coal-burning plant, a normal one gigawatt coal plant, burns 80 rail cars of coal a day, each car having 100 tons.
And it puts 18 thousand tons of carbon dioxide in the air.
So and then when you compare the lifetime emissions of these various energy forms, nuclear is about even with solar and wind, and ahead of solar -- oh, I'm sorry -- with hydro and wind, and ahead of solar.
And does nuclear really compete with coal?
Just ask the coal miners in Australia.
That's where you see some of the source, not from my fellow environmentalists, but from people who feel threatened by nuclear power.
Well the good news is that the developing world, but frankly, the whole world, is busy building, and starting to build, nuclear reactors.
This is good for the atmosphere.
It's good for their prosperity.
I want to point out one interesting thing, which is that environmentalists like the thing we call micropower.
It's supposed to be, I don't know, local solar and wind and cogeneration, and good things like that.
But frankly micro-reactors which are just now coming on, might serve even better.
The Russians, who started this, are building floating reactors, for their new passage, where the ice is melting, north of Russia.
And they're selling these floating reactors, only 35 megawatts, to developing countries.
Here's the design of an early one from Toshiba.
It's interesting, say, to take a 25-megawatt, 25 million watts, and you compare it to the standard big iron of an ordinary Westinghouse or Ariva, which is 1.2, 1.6 billion watts.
These things are way smaller. They're much more adaptable.
Here's an American design from Lawrence Livermore Lab.
Here's another American design that came out of Los Alamos, and is now commercial.
Almost all of these are not only small, they are proliferation-proof.
They're typically buried in the ground.
And the innovation is moving very rapidly.
So I think microreactors is going to be important for the future.
In terms of proliferation, nuclear energy has done more to dismantle nuclear weapons than any other activity.
And that's why 10 percent of the electricity in this room, 20 percent of electricity in this room is probably nuclear.
Half of that is coming from dismantled warheads from Russia, soon to be joined by our dismantled warheads.
And so I would like to see the GNEP program, that was developed in the Bush administration, go forward aggressively.
And I was glad to see that president Obama supported the nuclear fuel bank strategy when he spoke in Prague the other week.
One more subject. Genetically engineered food crops, in my view, as a biologist, have no reason to be controversial.
My fellow environmentalists, on this subject, have been irrational, anti-scientific, and very harmful.
Despite their best efforts, genetically engineered crops are the most rapidly successful agricultural innovation in history.
They're good for the environment because they enable no-till farming, which leaves the soil in place, getting healthier from year to year -- slso keeps less carbon dioxide going from the soil into the atmosphere.
They reduce pesticide use.
And they increase yield, which allows you to have your agricultural area be smaller, and therefore more wild area is freed up.
By the way, this map from 2006 is out of date because it shows Africa still under the thumb of Greenpeace, and Friends of the Earth from Europe, and they're finally getting out from under that.
And biotech is moving rapidly in Africa, at last.
This is a moral issue.
The Nuffield Council on Bioethics met on this issue twice in great detail and said it is a moral imperative to make genetically engineered crops readily available.
Speaking of imperatives, geoengineering is taboo now, especially in government circles, though I think there was a DARPA meeting on it a couple of weeks ago, but it will be on your plate -- not this year but pretty soon, because some harsh realizations are coming along.
This is a list of them.
Basically the news is going to keep getting more scary.
There will be events, like 35,000 people dying of a heat wave, which happened a while back.
Like cyclones coming up toward Bangladesh.
Like wars over water, such as in the Indus.
And as those events keep happening we're going to say, "Okay, what can we do about that really?"
But there's this little problem with geoengineering: what body is going to decide who gets to engineer? How much they do? Where they do it?
Because everybody is downstream, downwind of whatever is done.
And if we just taboo it completely we could lose civilization.
But if we just say "OK, China, you're worried, you go ahead.
You geoengineer your way. We'll geoengineer our way."
That would be considered an act of war by both nations.
So this is very interesting diplomacy coming along.
I should say, it is more practical than people think.
Here is an example that climatologists like a lot, one of the dozens of geoengineering ideas.
This one came from the sulfur dioxide from Mount Pinatubo in 1991 -- cooled the earth by half a degree.
There was so much ice in 1992, the following year, that there was a bumper crop of polar bear cubs who were known as the Pinatubo cubs.
To put sulfur dioxide in the stratosphere would cost on the order of a billion dollars a year.
That's nothing, compared to all of the other things we may be trying to do about energy.
Just to run by another one: this is a plan to brighten the reflectance of ocean clouds, by atomizing seawater; that would brighten the albedo of the whole planet.
A nice one, because it can happen lots of little ways in lots of little places, is by copying the ancient Amazon Indians who made good agricultural soil by pyrolizing, smoldering, plant waste, and biochar fixes large quantities of carbon while it's improving the soil.
So here is where we are.
Nobel Prize-winning climatologist Paul Crutzen calls our geological era the Anthropocene, the human-dominated era. We are stuck with its obligations.
In the Whole Earth Catalog, my first words were, "We are as Gods, and might as well get good at it."
The first words of Whole Earth Discipline are, "We are as Gods, and have to get good at it."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a studio in Berlin -- let me cue on here -- which is down there in this snow, just last weekend.
In the studio we do a lot of experiments.
I would consider the studio more like a laboratory.
I have occasional meetings with scientists.
And I have an academy, a part of the University of Fine Arts in Berlin.
We have an annual gathering of people, and that is called Life in Space.
Life in Space is really not necessarily about how we do things, but why we do things.
Do you mind looking, with me, at that little cross in the center there?
So just keep looking. Don't mind me.
So you will have a yellow circle, and we will do an after-image experiment.
When the circle goes away you will have another color, the complementary color.
I am saying something. And your eyes and your brain are saying something back.
This whole idea of sharing, the idea of constituting reality by overlapping what I say and what you say -- think of a movie.
Since two years now, with some stipends from the science ministry in Berlin, I've been working on these films where we produce the film together.
I don't necessarily think the film is so interesting.
Obviously this is not interesting at all in the sense of the narrative.
But nevertheless, what the potential is -- and just keep looking there -- what the potential is, obviously, is to kind of move the border of who is the author, and who is the receiver.
Who is the consumer, if you want, and who has responsibility for what one sees?
I think there is a socializing dimension in, kind of, moving that border.
Who decides what reality is?
This is the Tate Modern in London.
The show was, in a sense, about that.
It was about a space in which I put half a semi-circular yellow disk.
I also put a mirror in the ceiling, and some fog, some haze.
And my idea was to make the space tangible.
With such a big space, the problem is obviously that there is a discrepancy between what your body can embrace, and what the space, in that sense, is.
So here I had the hope that by inserting some natural elements, if you want -- some fog -- I could make the space tangible.
And what happens is that people, they start to see themselves in this space.
So look at this. Look at the girl.
Of course they have to look through a bloody camera in a museum. Right? That's how museums are working today.
But look at her face there, as she's checking out, looking at herself in the mirror.
"Oh! That was my foot there!"
She wasn't really sure whether she was seeing herself or not.
And in that whole idea, how do we configure the relationship between our body and the space?
How do we reconfigure it?
How do we know that being in a space makes a difference?
Do you see when I said in the beginning, it's about why, rather than how?
The why meant really, "What consequences does it have when I take a step?"
"What does it matter?"
"Does it matter if I am in the world or not?"
"And does it matter whether the kind of actions I take filter into a sense of responsibility?"
Is art about that?
I would say yes. It is obviously about not just about decorating the world, and making it look even better, or even worse, if you ask me.
It's obviously also about taking responsibility, like I did here when throwing some green dye in the river in L.A., Stockholm, Norway and Tokyo, among other places.
The green dye is not environmentally dangerous, but it obviously looks really rather frightening.
And it's on the other side also, I think, quite beautiful, as it somehow shows the turbulence in these kind of downtown areas, in these different places of the world.
The "Green river," as a kind of activist idea, not a part of an exhibition, it was really about showing people, in this city, as they walk by, that space has dimensions. A space has time.
And the water flows through the city with time.
The water has an ability to make the city negotiable, tangible.
Negotiable meaning that it makes a difference whether you do something or not.
It makes a difference whether you say, "I'm a part of this city.
And if I vote it makes a difference.
If I take a stand, it makes a difference."
This whole idea of a city not being a picture is, I think, something that art, in a sense, always was working with.
The idea that art can actually evaluate the relationship between what it means to be in a picture, and what it means to be in a space. What is the difference?
The difference between thinking and doing.
So these are different experiments with that. I won't go into them.
Iceland, lower right corner, my favorite place.
These kinds of experiments, they filter into architectural models.
These are ongoing experiments.
One is an experiment I did for BMW, an attempt to make a car.
It's made out of ice.
A crystalline stackable principle in the center on the top, which I am trying to turn into a concert hall in Iceland.
A sort of a run track, or a walk track, on the top of a museum in Denmark, which is made of colored glass, going all around.
So the movement with your legs will change the color of your horizon.
And two summers ago at the Hyde Park in London, with the Serpentine Gallery: a kind of a temporal pavilion where moving was the only way you could see the pavilion.
This summer, in New York: there is one thing about falling water which is very much about the time it takes for water to fall.
It's quite simple and fundamental.
I've walked a lot in the mountains in Iceland.
And as you come to a new valley, as you come to a new landscape, you have a certain view.
If you stand still, the landscape doesn't necessarily tell you how big it is.
It doesn't really tell you what you're looking at.
The moment you start to move, the mountain starts to move.
The big mountains far away, they move less.
The small mountains in the foreground, they move more.
And if you stop again, you wonder, "Is that a one-hour valley?
Or is that a three-hour hike, or is that a whole day I'm looking at?"
If you have a waterfall in there, right out there at the horizon; you look at the waterfall and you go, "Oh, the water is falling really slowly."
And you go, "My god it's really far away and it's a giant waterfall."
If a waterfall is falling faster, it's a smaller waterfall which is closer by -- because the speed of falling water is pretty constant everywhere.
And your body somehow knows that.
So this means a waterfall is a way of measuring space.
Of course being an iconic city like New York, that has had an interest in somehow playing around with the sense of space, you could say that New York wants to seem as big as possible.
Adding a measurement to that is interesting: the falling water suddenly gives you a sense of, "Oh, Brooklyn is exactly this much -- the distance between Brooklyn and Manhattan, in this case the lower East River is this big."
So it was not just necessarily about putting nature into the cities.
It was also about giving the city a sense of dimension.
And why would we want to do that?
Because I think it makes a difference whether you have a body that feels a part of a space, rather than having a body which is just in front of a picture.
And "Ha-ha, there is a picture and here is I. And what does it matter?"
Is there a sense of consequences?
So if I have a sense of the space, if I feel that the space is tangible, if I feel there is time, if there is a dimension I could call time, I also feel that I can change the space.
And suddenly it makes a difference in terms of making space accessible.
One could say this is about community, collectivity.
It's about being together.
How do we create public space?
What does the word "public" mean today anyway?
So, asked in that way, I think it raises great things about parliamentary ideas, democracy, public space, being together, being individual.
How do we create an idea which is both tolerant to individuality, and also to collectivity, without polarizing the two into two different opposites?
Of course the political agendas in the world has been very obsessed, polarizing the two against each other into different, very normative ideas.
I would claim that art and culture, and this is why art and culture are so incredibly interesting in the times we're living in now, have proven that one can create a kind of a space which is both sensitive to individuality and to collectivity.
It's very much about this causality, consequences.
It's very much about the way we link thinking and doing.
So what is between thinking and doing?
And right in-between thinking and doing, I would say, there is experience.
And experience is not just a kind of entertainment in a non-casual way.
Experience is about responsibility.
Having an experience is taking part in the world.
Taking part in the world is really about sharing responsibility.
So art, in that sense, I think holds an incredible relevance in the world in which we're moving into, particularly right now.
That's all I have. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
If you ask evolutionary biologists when did humans become humans, some of them will say that, well, at some point we started standing on our feet, became biped and became the masters of our environment.
Others will say that because our brain started growing much bigger, that we were able to have much more complex cognitive processes.
And others might argue that it's because we developed language that allowed us to evolve as a species.
Interestingly, those three phenomena are all connected.
We are not sure how or in which order, but they are all linked with the change of shape of a little bone in the back of your neck that changed the angle between our head and our body.
That means we were able to stand upright but also for our brain to evolve in the back and for our voice box to grow from seven centimeters for primates to 11 and up to 17 centimetres for humans.
And this is called the descent of the larynx.
And the larynx is the site of your voice.
When baby humans are born today, their larynx is not descended yet.
That only happens at about three months old.
So, metaphorically, each of us here has relived the evolution of our whole species.
And talking about babies, when you were starting to develop in your mother's womb, the first sensation that you had coming from the outside world, at only three weeks old, when you were about the size of a shrimp, were through the tactile sensation coming from the vibrations of your mother's voice.
So, as we can see, the human voice is quite meaningful and important at the level of the species, at the level of the society -- this is how we communicate and create bonds, and at the personal and interpersonal levels -- with our voice, we share much more than words and data, we share basically who we are.
And our voice is indistinguishable from how other people see us.
It is a mask that we wear in society.
But our relationship with our own voice is far from obvious.
We rarely use our voice for ourselves; we use it as a gift to give to others.
It is how we touch each other.
It's a dialectical grooming.
But what do we think about our own voice?
So please raise your hand if you don't like the sound of your voice when you hear it on a recording machine.
(Laughter) Yeah, thank you, indeed, most people report not liking the sound of their voice recording.
So what does that mean?
Let's try to understand that in the next 10 minutes.
I'm a researcher at the MIT Media Lab, part of the Opera of the Future group, and my research focuses on the relationship people have with their own voice and with the voices of others.
I study what we can learn from listening to voices, from the various fields, from neurology to biology, cognitive sciences, linguistics.
In our group we create tools and experiences to help people gain a better applied understanding of their voice in order to reduce the biases, to become better listeners, to create more healthy relationships or just to understand themselves better.
And this really has to come with a holistic approach on the voice.
Because, think about all the applications and implications that the voice may have, as we discover more about it.
Your voice is a very complex phenomenon.
It requires a synchronization of more than 100 muscles in your body.
And by listening to the voice, we can understand possible failures of what happens inside.
For example: listening to very specific types of turbulences and nonlinearity of the voice can help predict very early stages of Parkinson's, just through a phone call.
Listening to the breathlessness of the voice can help detect heart disease.
And we also know that the changes of tempo inside individual words is a very good marker of depression.
Your voice is also very linked with your hormone levels.
Third parties listening to female voices were able to very accurately place the speaker on their menstrual cycle.
Just with acoustic information.
And now with technology listening to us all the time, Alexa from Amazon Echo might be able to predict if you're pregnant even before you know it.
So think about -- (Laughter) Think about the ethical implications of that.
Your voice is also very linked to how you create relationships.
You have a different voice for every person you talk to.
If I take a little snippet of your voice and I analyze it, I can know whether you're talking to your mother, to your brother, your friend or your boss.
We can also use, as a predictor, the vocal posture.
Meaning, how you decide to place your voice when you talk to someone.
And you vocal posture, when you talk to your spouse, can help predict not only if, but also when you will divorce.
So there is a lot to learn from listening to voices.
And I believe this has to start with understanding that we have more than one voice.
So, I'm going to talk about three voices that most of us posses, in a model of what I call the mask.
So when you look at the mask, what you see is a projection of a character.
Let's call that your outward voice.
This is also the most classic way to think about the voice, it's a way of projecting yourself in the world.
The mechanism for this projection is well understood.
Your lungs contract your diaphragm and that creates a self-sustained vibration of your vocal fold, that creates a sound.
And then the way you open and close the cavities in you mouth, your vocal tract is going to transform the sound.
So everyone has the same mechanism.
But voices are quite unique.
It's because very subtle differences in size, physiology, in hormone levels are going to make very subtle differences in your outward voice.
And your brain is very good at picking up those subtle differences from other people's outward voices.
In our lab, we are working on teaching machines to understand those subtle differences.
And we use deep learning to create a real-time speaker identification system to help raise awareness on the use of the shared vocal space -- so who talks and who never talks during meetings -- to increase group intelligence.
And one of the difficulties with that is that your voice is also not static.
We already said that it changes with every person you talk to but it also changes generally throughout your life.
At the beginning and at the end of the journey, male and female voices are very similar.
It's very hard to distinguish the voice of a very young girl from the voice of a very young boy.
But in between, your voice becomes a marker of your fluid identity.
Generally, for male voices there's a big change at puberty.
And then for female voices, there is a change at each pregnancy and a big change at menopause.
So all of that is the voice other people hear when you talk.
So why is it that we're so unfamiliar with it?
Why is it that it's not the voice that we hear?
So, let's think about it.
When you wear a mask, you actually don't see the mask.
And when you try to observe it, what you will see is inside of the mask.
And that's your inward voice.
So to understand why it's different, let's try to understand the mechanism of perception of this inward voice.
Because your body has many ways of filtering it differently from the outward voice.
So to perceive this voice, it first has to travel to your ears.
And your outward voice travels through the air while your inward voice travels through your bones.
This is called bone conduction.
Because of this, your inward voice is going to sound in a lower register and also more musically harmonical than your outward voice.
Once it travels there, it has to access your inner ear.
And there's this other mechanism taking place here.
It's a mechanical filter, it's a little partition that comes and protects your inner ear each time you produce a sound.
So it also reduces what you hear.
And then there is a third filter, it's a biological filter.
Your cochlea -- it's a part of your inner ear that processes the sound -- is made out of living cells.
And those living cells are going to trigger differently according to how often they hear the sound.
It's a habituation effect.
So because of this, as your voice is the sound you hear the most in your life, you actually hear it less than other sounds.
Finally, we have a fourth filter.
It's a neurological filter.
Neurologists found out recently that when you open your mouth to create a sound, your own auditory cortex shuts down.
So you hear your voice but your brain actually never listens to the sound of your voice.
Well, evolutionarily that might make sense, because we know cognitively what we are going to sound like so maybe we don't need to spend energy analyzing the signal.
And this is called a corollary discharge and it happens for every motion that your body does.
The exact definition of a corollary discharge is a copy of a motor command that is sent by the brain.
This copy doesn't create any motion itself but instead is sent to other regions of the brain to inform them of the impending motion.
And for the voice, this corollary discharge also has a different name.
It is your inner voice.
So let's recapitulate.
We have the mask, the outward voice, the inside of the mask, your inward voice, and then you have your inner voice.
And I like to see this one as the puppeteer that holds the strings of the whole system.
Your inner voice is the one you hear when you read a text silently, when you rehearse for an important conversation.
Sometimes is hard to turn it off, it's really hard to look at the text written in your native language, without having this inner voice read it.
It's also the voice that refuse to stop singing the stupid song you have in your head.
(Laughter) And for some people it's actually impossible to control it.
And that's the case of schizophrenic patients, who have auditory hallucinations.
Who can't distinguish at all between voices coming from inside and outside their head.
So in our lab, we are also working on small devices to help those people make those distinctions and know if a voice is internal or external.
You can also think about the inner voice as the voice that speaks in your dream.
This inner voice can take many forms.
And in your dreams, you actually unleash the potential of this inner voice.
That's another work we are doing in our lab: trying to access this inner voice in dreams.
So even if you can't always control it, the inner voice -- you can always engage with it through dialogue, through inner dialogues.
And you can even see this inner voice as the missing link between thought and actions.
So I hope I've left you with a better appreciation, a new appreciation of all of your voices and the role it plays inside and outside of you -- as your voice is a very critical determinant of what makes you humans and of how you interact with the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm an artist and an engineer.
And lately, I've been thinking a lot about how technology mediates the way we perceive reality.
And it's being done in a superinvisible and nuanced way.
Technology is designed to shape our sense of reality by masking itself as the actual experience of the world.
As a result, we are becoming unconscious and unaware that it is happening at all.
Take the glasses I usually wear, for example.
These have become part of the way I ordinarily experience my surroundings.
I barely notice them, even though they are constantly framing reality for me.
The technology I am talking about is designed to do the same thing: change what we see and think but go unnoticed.
Now, the only time I do notice my glasses is when something happens to draw my attention to it, like when it gets dirty or my prescription changes.
So I asked myself, "As an artist, what can I create to draw the same kind of attention to the ways digital media -- like news organizations, social media platforms, advertising and search engines -- are shaping our reality?"
So I created a series of perceptual machines to help us defamiliarize and question the ways we see the world.
For example, nowadays, many of us have this kind of allergic reaction to ideas that are different from ours.
We may not even realize that we've developed this kind of mental allergy.
So I created a helmet that creates this artificial allergy to the color red.
It simulates this hypersensitivity by making red things look bigger when you are wearing it.
It has two modes: nocebo and placebo.
In nocebo mode, it creates this sensorial experience of hyperallergy.
Whenever I see red, the red expands.
It's similar to social media's amplification effect, like when you look at something that bothers you, you tend to stick with like-minded people and exchange messages and memes, and you become even more angry.
Sometimes, a trivial discussion gets amplified and blown way out of proportion.
Maybe that's even why we are living in the politics of anger.
In placebo mode, it's an artificial cure for this allergy.
Whenever you see red, the red shrinks.
It's a palliative, like in digital media.
When you encounter people with different opinions, we will unfollow them, remove them completely out of our feeds.
It cures this allergy by avoiding it.
But this way of intentionally ignoring opposing ideas makes human community hyperfragmented and separated.
The device inside the helmet reshapes reality and projects into our eyes through a set of lenses to create an augmented reality.
I picked the color red, because it's intense and emotional, it has high visibility and it's political.
So what if we take a look at the last American presidential election map through the helmet?
(Laughter) You can see that it doesn't matter if you're a Democrat or a Republican, because the mediation alters our perceptions.
The allergy exists on both sides.
In digital media, what we see every day is often mediated, but it's also very nuanced.
If we are not aware of this, we will keep being vulnerable to many kinds of mental allergies.
Our perception is not only part of our identities, but in digital media, it's also a part of the value chain.
Our visual field is packed with so much information that our perception has become a commodity with real estate value.
Designs are used to exploit our unconscious biases, algorithms favor content that reaffirms our opinions, so that every little corner of our field of view is being colonized to sell ads.
Like, when this little red dot comes out in your notifications, it grows and expands, and to your mind, it's huge.
So I started to think of ways to put a little dirt, or change the lenses of my glasses, and came up with another project.
Now, keep in mind this is conceptual. It's not a real product.
It's a web browser plug-in that could help us to notice the things that we would usually ignore.
Like the helmet, the plug-in reshapes reality, but this time, directly into the digital media itself.
It shouts out the hidden filtered voices.
What you should be noticing now will be bigger and vibrant, like here, this story about gender bias emerging from the sea of cats.
(Laughter) The plug-in could dilute the things that are being amplified by an algorithm.
Like, here in this comment section, there are lots of people shouting about the same opinions.
The plug-in makes their comments super small.
(Laughter) So now the amount of pixel presence they have on the screen is proportional to the actual value they are contributing to the conversation.
(Laughter) (Applause) The plug-in also shows the real estate value of our visual field and how much of our perception is being commoditized.
Different from ad blockers, for every ad you see on the web page, it shows the amount of money you should be earning.
(Laughter) We are living in a battlefield between reality and commercial distributed reality, so the next version of the plug-in could strike away that commercial reality and show you things as they really are.
(Laughter) (Applause) Well, you can imagine how many directions this could really go.
Believe me, I know the risks are high if this were to become a real product.
And I created this with good intentions to train our perception and eliminate biases.
But the same approach could be used with bad intentions, like forcing citizens to install a plug-in like that to control the public narrative.
It's challenging to make it fair and personal without it just becoming another layer of mediation.
