The reason this matters is today, if you go to look at a copy of "1984" on Amazon.com, the NSA can see a record of that, the Russian intelligence service can see a record of that, the Chinese service can see a record of that, the French service, the German service, the services of Andorra.
They can all see it because it's unencrypted.
The world's library is Amazon.com, but not only do they not support encryption by default, you cannot choose to use encryption when browsing through books.
This is something that we need to change, not just for Amazon, I don't mean to single them out, but they're a great example.
All companies need to move to an encrypted browsing habit by default for all users who haven't taken any action or picked any special methods on their own.
That'll increase the privacy and the rights that people enjoy worldwide.
CA: Ed, come with me to this part of the stage.
I want to show you the next slide here. (Applause) This is a program called Boundless Informant.
What is that?
ES: So, I've got to give credit to the NSA for using appropriate names on this.
This is one of my favorite NSA cryptonyms.
Boundless Informant is a program that the NSA hid from Congress.
The NSA was previously asked by Congress, was there any ability that they had to even give a rough ballpark estimate of the amount of American communications that were being intercepted.
They said no. They said, we don't track those stats, and we can't track those stats.
We can't tell you how many communications we're intercepting around the world, because to tell you that would be to invade your privacy.
Now, I really appreciate that sentiment from them, but the reality, when you look at this slide is, not only do they have the capability, the capability already exists.
It's already in place.
The NSA has its own internal data format that tracks both ends of a communication, and if it says, this communication came from America, they can tell Congress how many of those communications they have today, right now.
And what Boundless Informant tells us is more communications are being intercepted in America about Americans than there are in Russia about Russians.
I'm not sure that's what an intelligence agency should be aiming for.
CA: Ed, there was a story broken in the Washington Post, again from your data.
The headline says, "NSA broke privacy rules thousands of times per year."
Tell us about that.
ES: We also heard in Congressional testimony last year, it was an amazing thing for someone like me who came from the NSA and who's seen the actual internal documents, knows what's in them, to see officials testifying under oath that there had been no abuses, that there had been no violations of the NSA's rules, when we knew this story was coming.
But what's especially interesting about this, about the fact that the NSA has violated their own rules, their own laws thousands of times in a single year, including one event by itself, one event out of those 2,776, that affected more than 3,000 people.
In another event, they intercepted all the calls in Washington, D.C., by accident.
What's amazing about this, this report, that didn't get that much attention, is the fact that not only were there 2,776 abuses, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, Dianne Feinstein, had not seen this report until the Washington Post contacted her asking for comment on the report.
And she then requested a copy from the NSA and received it, but had never seen this before that.
What does that say about the state of oversight in American intelligence when the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee has no idea that the rules are being broken thousands of times every year?
CA: Ed, one response to this whole debate is this: Why should we care about all this surveillance, honestly?
I mean, look, if you've done nothing wrong, you've got nothing to worry about.
What's wrong with that point of view?
ES: Well, so the first thing is, you're giving up your rights.
You're saying hey, you know, I don't think I'm going to need them, so I'm just going to trust that, you know, let's get rid of them, it doesn't really matter, these guys are going to do the right thing.
Your rights matter because you never know when you're going to need them.
Beyond that, it's a part of our cultural identity, not just in America, but in Western societies and in democratic societies around the world.
People should be able to pick up the phone and to call their family, people should be able to send a text message to their loved ones, people should be able to buy a book online, they should be able to travel by train, they should be able to buy an airline ticket without wondering about how these events are going to look to an agent of the government, possibly not even your government years in the future, how they're going to be misinterpreted and what they're going to think your intentions were.
We have a right to privacy.
We require warrants to be based on probable cause or some kind of individualized suspicion because we recognize that trusting anybody, any government authority, with the entirety of human communications in secret and without oversight is simply too great a temptation to be ignored.
CA: Some people are furious at what you've done.
I heard a quote recently from Dick Cheney who said that Julian Assange was a flea bite, Edward Snowden is the lion that bit the head off the dog.
He thinks you've committed one of the worst acts of betrayal in American history.
What would you say to people who think that?
ES: Dick Cheney's really something else.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you. (Laughter) I think it's amazing, because at the time Julian Assange was doing some of his greatest work, Dick Cheney was saying he was going to end governments worldwide, the skies were going to ignite and the seas were going to boil off, and now he's saying it's a flea bite.
So we should be suspicious about the same sort of overblown claims of damage to national security from these kind of officials.
But let's assume that these people really believe this.
I would argue that they have kind of a narrow conception of national security.
The prerogatives of people like Dick Cheney do not keep the nation safe.
The public interest is not always the same as the national interest.
Going to war with people who are not our enemy in places that are not a threat doesn't make us safe, and that applies whether it's in Iraq or on the Internet.
The Internet is not the enemy.
Our economy is not the enemy.
American businesses, Chinese businesses, and any other company out there is a part of our society.
It's a part of our interconnected world.
There are ties of fraternity that bond us together, and if we destroy these bonds by undermining the standards, the security, the manner of behavior, that nations and citizens all around the world expect us to abide by.
CA: But it's alleged that you've stolen 1.7 million documents.
It seems only a few hundred of them have been shared with journalists so far.
Are there more revelations to come?
ES: There are absolutely more revelations to come.
I don't think there's any question that some of the most important reporting to be done is yet to come.
CA: Come here, because I want to ask you about this particular revelation.
Come and take a look at this.
I mean, this is a story which I think for a lot of the techies in this room is the single most shocking thing that they have heard in the last few months.
It's about a program called "Bullrun."
Can you explain what that is?
ES: So Bullrun, and this is again where we've got to thank the NSA for their candor, this is a program named after a Civil War battle.
The British counterpart is called Edgehill, which is a U.K. civil war battle.
And the reason that I believe they're named this way is because they target our own infrastructure.
They're programs through which the NSA intentionally misleads corporate partners.
They tell corporate partners that these are safe standards.
They say hey, we need to work with you to secure your systems, but in reality, they're giving bad advice to these companies that makes them degrade the security of their services.
They're building in backdoors that not only the NSA can exploit, but anyone else who has time and money to research and find it can then use to let themselves in to the world's communications.
And this is really dangerous, because if we lose a single standard, if we lose the trust of something like SSL, which was specifically targeted by the Bullrun program, we will live a less safe world overall.
We won't be able to access our banks and we won't be able to access commerce without worrying about people monitoring those communications or subverting them for their own ends.
CA: And do those same decisions also potentially open America up to cyberattacks from other sources?
ES: Absolutely.
One of the problems, one of the dangerous legacies that we've seen in the post-9/11 era, is that the NSA has traditionally worn two hats.
They've been in charge of offensive operations, that is hacking, but they've also been in charge of defensive operations, and traditionally they've always prioritized defense over offense based on the principle that American secrets are simply worth more.
If we hack a Chinese business and steal their secrets, if we hack a government office in Berlin and steal their secrets, that has less value to the American people than making sure that the Chinese can't get access to our secrets.
So by reducing the security of our communications, they're not only putting the world at risk, they're putting America at risk in a fundamental way, because intellectual property is the basis, the foundation of our economy, and if we put that at risk through weak security, we're going to be paying for it for years.
CA: But they've made a calculation that it was worth doing this as part of America's defense against terrorism.
Surely that makes it a price worth paying.
ES: Well, when you look at the results of these programs in stopping terrorism, you will see that that's unfounded, and you don't have to take my word for it, because we've had the first open court, the first federal court that's reviewed this, outside the secrecy arrangement, called these programs Orwellian and likely unconstitutional.
Congress, who has access to be briefed on these things, and now has the desire to be, has produced bills to reform it, and two independent White House panels who reviewed all of the classified evidence said these programs have never stopped a single terrorist attack that was imminent in the United States.
So is it really terrorism that we're stopping?
Do these programs have any value at all?
I say no, and all three branches of the American government say no as well.
CA: I mean, do you think there's a deeper motivation for them than the war against terrorism?
ES: I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you, say again?
CA: Sorry. Do you think there's a deeper motivation for them other than the war against terrorism?
ES: Yeah. The bottom line is that terrorism has always been what we in the intelligence world would call a cover for action.
Terrorism is something that provokes an emotional response that allows people to rationalize authorizing powers and programs that they wouldn't give otherwise.
The Bullrun and Edgehill-type programs, the NSA asked for these authorities back in the 1990s.
They asked the FBI to go to Congress and make the case.
The FBI went to Congress and did make the case.
But Congress and the American people said no.
They said, it's not worth the risk to our economy.
They said it's worth too much damage to our society to justify the gains.
But what we saw is, in the post-9/11 era, they used secrecy and they used the justification of terrorism to start these programs in secret without asking Congress, without asking the American people, and it's that kind of government behind closed doors that we need to guard ourselves against, because it makes us less safe, and it offers no value.
CA: Okay, come with me here for a sec, because I've got a more personal question for you.
Speaking of terror, most people would find the situation you're in right now in Russia pretty terrifying.
You obviously heard what happened, what the treatment that Bradley Manning got, Chelsea Manning as now is, and there was a story in Buzzfeed saying that there are people in the intelligence community who want you dead.
How are you coping with this?
How are you coping with the fear?
ES: It's no mystery that there are governments out there that want to see me dead.
I've made clear again and again and again that I go to sleep every morning thinking about what I can do for the American people.
I don't want to harm my government.
I want to help my government, but the fact that they are willing to completely ignore due process, they're willing to declare guilt without ever seeing a trial, these are things that we need to work against as a society, and say hey, this is not appropriate.
We shouldn't be threatening dissidents.
We shouldn't be criminalizing journalism.
And whatever part I can do to see that end, I'm happy to do despite the risks.
CA: So I'd actually like to get some feedback from the audience here, because I know there's widely differing reactions to Edward Snowden.
Suppose you had the following two choices, right?
You could view what he did as fundamentally a reckless act that has endangered America or you could view it as fundamentally a heroic act that will work towards America and the world's long-term good?
Those are the two choices I'll give you.
I'm curious to see who's willing to vote with the first of those, that this was a reckless act?
There are some hands going up.
Some hands going up.
It's hard to put your hand up when the man is standing right here, but I see them.
ES: I can see you. (Laughter) CA: And who goes with the second choice, the fundamentally heroic act?
(Applause) (Cheers) And I think it's true to say that there are a lot of people who didn't show a hand and I think are still thinking this through, because it seems to me that the debate around you doesn't split along traditional political lines.
It's not left or right, it's not really about pro-government, libertarian, or not just that.
Part of it is almost a generational issue.
You're part of a generation that grew up with the Internet, and it seems as if you become offended at almost a visceral level when you see something done that you think will harm the Internet.
Is there some truth to that?
ES: It is. I think it's very true.
This is not a left or right issue.
Our basic freedoms, and when I say our, I don't just mean Americans, I mean people around the world, it's not a partisan issue.
These are things that all people believe, and it's up to all of us to protect them, and to people who have seen and enjoyed a free and open Internet, it's up to us to preserve that liberty for the next generation to enjoy, and if we don't change things, if we don't stand up to make the changes we need to do to keep the Internet safe, not just for us but for everyone, we're going to lose that, and that would be a tremendous loss, not just for us, but for the world.
CA: Well, I have heard similar language recently from the founder of the world wide web, who I actually think is with us, Sir Tim Berners-Lee.
Tim, actually, would you like to come up and say, do we have a microphone for Tim?
(Applause) Tim, good to see you. Come up there.
Which camp are you in, by the way, traitor, hero? I have a theory on this, but -- Tim Berners-Lee: I've given much longer answers to that question, but hero, if I have to make the choice between the two.
CA: And Ed, I think you've read the proposal that Sir Tim has talked about about a new Magna Carta to take back the Internet.
Is that something that makes sense?
ES: Absolutely. I mean, my generation, I grew up not just thinking about the Internet, but I grew up in the Internet, and although I never expected to have the chance to defend it in such a direct and practical manner and to embody it in this unusual, almost avatar manner, I think there's something poetic about the fact that one of the sons of the Internet has actually become close to the Internet as a result of their political expression.
And I believe that a Magna Carta for the Internet is exactly what we need.
We need to encode our values not just in writing but in the structure of the Internet, and it's something that I hope, I invite everyone in the audience, not just here in Vancouver but around the world, to join and participate in.
CA: Do you have a question for Ed?
TBL: Well, two questions, a general question — CA: Ed, can you still hear us?
ES: Yes, I can hear you. CA: Oh, he's back.
TBL: The wiretap on your line got a little interfered with for a moment.
(Laughter) ES: It's a little bit of an NSA problem.
TBL: So, from the 25 years, stepping back and thinking, what would you think would be the best that we could achieve from all the discussions that we have about the web we want?
ES: When we think about in terms of how far we can go, I think that's a question that's really only limited by what we're willing to put into it.
I think the Internet that we've enjoyed in the past has been exactly what we as not just a nation but as a people around the world need, and by cooperating, by engaging not just the technical parts of society, but as you said, the users, the people around the world who contribute through the Internet, through social media, who just check the weather, who rely on it every day as a part of their life, to champion that.
We'll get not just the Internet we've had, but a better Internet, a better now, something that we can use to build a future that'll be better not just than what we hoped for but anything that we could have imagined.
CA: It's 30 years ago that TED was founded, 1984.
A lot of the conversation since then has been along the lines that actually George Orwell got it wrong.
It's not Big Brother watching us.
We, through the power of the web, and transparency, are now watching Big Brother.
Your revelations kind of drove a stake through the heart of that rather optimistic view, but you still believe there's a way of doing something about that.
And you do too.
ES: Right, so there is an argument to be made that the powers of Big Brother have increased enormously.
There was a recent legal article at Yale that established something called the Bankston-Soltani Principle, which is that our expectation of privacy is violated when the capabilities of government surveillance have become cheaper by an order of magnitude, and each time that occurs, we need to revisit and rebalance our privacy rights.
Now, that hasn't happened since the government's surveillance powers have increased by several orders of magnitude, and that's why we're in the problem that we're in today, but there is still hope, because the power of individuals have also been increased by technology.
I am living proof that an individual can go head to head against the most powerful adversaries and the most powerful intelligence agencies around the world and win, and I think that's something that we need to take hope from, and we need to build on to make it accessible not just to technical experts but to ordinary citizens around the world.
Journalism is not a crime, communication is not a crime, and we should not be monitored in our everyday activities.
CA: I'm not quite sure how you shake the hand of a bot, but I imagine it's, this is the hand right here. TBL: That'll come very soon.
ES: Nice to meet you, and I hope my beam looks as nice as my view of you guys does.
CA: Thank you, Tim.
(Applause) I mean, The New York Times recently called for an amnesty for you.
Would you welcome the chance to come back to America?
ES: Absolutely. There's really no question, the principles that have been the foundation of this project have been the public interest and the principles that underly the journalistic establishment in the United States and around the world, and I think if the press is now saying, we support this, this is something that needed to happen, that's a powerful argument, but it's not the final argument, and I think that's something that public should decide.
But at the same time, the government has hinted that they want some kind of deal, that they want me to compromise the journalists with which I've been working, to come back, and I want to make it very clear that I did not do this to be safe.
I did this to do what was right, and I'm not going to stop my work in the public interest just to benefit myself.
(Applause) CA: In the meantime, courtesy of the Internet and this technology, you're here, back in North America, not quite the U.S., Canada, in this form.
I'm curious, how does that feel?
ES: Canada is different than what I expected.
It's a lot warmer.
(Laughter) CA: At TED, the mission is "ideas worth spreading."
If you could encapsulate it in a single idea, what is your idea worth spreading right now at this moment?
ES: I would say the last year has been a reminder that democracy may die behind closed doors, but we as individuals are born behind those same closed doors, and we don't have to give up our privacy to have good government.
We don't have to give up our liberty to have security.
And I think by working together we can have both open government and private lives, and I look forward to working with everyone around the world to see that happen.
Thank you very much.
CA: Ed, thank you.
(Applause)
What's the scariest thing you've ever done?
Or another way to say it is, what's the most dangerous thing that you've ever done?
And why did you do it?
I know what the most dangerous thing is that I've ever done because NASA does the math.
You look back to the first five shuttle launches, the odds of a catastrophic event during the first five shuttle launches was one in nine.
And even when I first flew in the shuttle back in 1995, 74 shuttle flight, the odds were still now that we look back about one in 38 or so -- one in 35, one in 40.
Not great odds, so it's a really interesting day when you wake up at the Kennedy Space Center and you're going to go to space that day because you realize by the end of the day you're either going to be floating effortlessly, gloriously in space, or you'll be dead.
You go into, at the Kennedy Space Center, the suit-up room, the same room that our childhood heroes got dressed in, that Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin got suited in to go ride the Apollo rocket to the moon.
And I got my pressure suit built around me and rode down outside in the van heading out to the launchpad -- in the Astro van -- heading out to the launchpad, and as you come around the corner at the Kennedy Space Center, it's normally predawn, and in the distance, lit up by the huge xenon lights, is your spaceship -- the vehicle that is going to take you off the planet.
The crew is sitting in the Astro van sort of hushed, almost holding hands, looking at that as it gets bigger and bigger.
We ride the elevator up and we crawl in, on your hands and knees into the spaceship, one at a time, and you worm your way up into your chair and plunk yourself down on your back.
And the hatch is closed, and suddenly, what has been a lifetime of both dreams and denial is becoming real, something that I dreamed about, in fact, that I chose to do when I was nine years old, is now suddenly within not too many minutes of actually happening.
In the astronaut business -- the shuttle is a very complicated vehicle; it's the most complicated flying machine ever built.
And in the astronaut business, we have a saying, which is, there is no problem so bad that you can't make it worse.
(Laughter) And so you're very conscious in the cockpit; you're thinking about all of the things that you might have to do, all the switches and all the wickets you have to go through.
And as the time gets closer and closer, this excitement is building.
And then about three and a half minutes before launch, the huge nozzles on the back, like the size of big church bells, swing back and forth and the mass of them is such that it sways the whole vehicle, like the vehicle is alive underneath you, like an elephant getting up off its knees or something.
And then about 30 seconds before launch, the vehicle is completely alive -- it is ready to go -- the APUs are running, the computers are all self-contained, it's ready to leave the planet.
And 15 seconds before launch, this happens: (Video) Voice: 12, 11, 10, nine, eight, seven, six -- (Space shuttle preparing for takeoff) -- start, two, one, booster ignition, and liftoff of the space shuttle Discovery, returning to the space station, paving the way ...
(Space shuttle taking off) Chris Hadfield: It is incredibly powerful to be on board one of these things.
You are in the grip of something that is vastly more powerful than yourself.
It's shaking you so hard you can't focus on the instruments in front of you.
It's like you're in the jaws of some enormous dog and there's a foot in the small of your back pushing you into space, accelerating wildly straight up, shouldering your way through the air, and you're in a very complex place -- paying attention, watching the vehicle go through each one of its wickets with a steadily increasing smile on your face.
After two minutes, those solid rockets explode off and then you just have the liquid engines, the hydrogen and oxygen, and it's as if you're in a dragster with your foot to the floor and accelerating like you've never accelerated.
You get lighter and lighter, the force gets on us heavier and heavier.
It feels like someone's pouring cement on you or something.
Until finally, after about eight minutes and 40 seconds or so, we are finally at exactly the right altitude, exactly the right speed, the right direction, the engine shut off, and we're weightless.
And we're alive.
It's an amazing experience.
But why would we take that risk?
Why would you do something that dangerous?
In my case the answer is fairly straightforward.
I was inspired as a youngster that this was what I wanted to do.
I watched the first people walk on the moon and to me, it was just an obvious thing -- I want to somehow turn myself into that.
But the real question is, how do you deal with the danger of it and the fear that comes from it?
How do you deal with fear versus danger?
And having the goal in mind, thinking about where it might lead, directed me to a life of looking at all of the small details to allow this to become possible, to be able to launch and go help build a space station where you are on board a million-pound creation that's going around the world at five miles a second, eight kilometers a second, around the world 16 times a day, with experiments on board that are teaching us what the substance of the universe is made of and running 200 experiments inside.
But maybe even more importantly, allowing us to see the world in a way that is impossible through any other means, to be able to look down and have -- if your jaw could drop, it would -- the jaw-dropping gorgeousness of the turning orb like a self-propelled art gallery of fantastic, constantly changing beauty that is the world itself.
And you see, because of the speed, a sunrise or a sunset every 45 minutes for half a year.
And the most magnificent part of all that is to go outside on a spacewalk.
You are in a one-person spaceship that is your spacesuit, and you're going through space with the world.
It's an entirely different perspective, you're not looking up at the universe, you and the Earth are going through the universe together.
And you're holding on with one hand, looking at the world turn beside you.
It's roaring silently with color and texture as it pours by mesmerizingly next to you.
And if you can tear your eyes away from that and you look under your arm down at the rest of everything, it's unfathomable blackness, with a texture you feel like you could stick your hand into.
and you are holding on with one hand, one link to the other seven billion people.
And I was outside on my first spacewalk when my left eye went blind, and I didn't know why.
Suddenly my left eye slammed shut in great pain and I couldn't figure out why my eye wasn't working.
I was thinking, what do I do next?
I thought, well maybe that's why we have two eyes, so I kept working.
But unfortunately, without gravity, tears don't fall.
So you just get a bigger and bigger ball of whatever that is mixed with your tears on your eye until eventually, the ball becomes so big that the surface tension takes it across the bridge of your nose like a tiny little waterfall and goes "goosh" into your other eye, and now I was completely blind outside the spaceship.
So what's the scariest thing you've ever done?
(Laughter) Maybe it's spiders.
A lot of people are afraid of spiders.
I think you should be afraid of spiders -- spiders are creepy and they've got long, hairy legs, and spiders like this one, the brown recluse -- it's horrible. If a brown recluse bites you, you end with one of these horrible, big necrotic things on your leg and there might be one right now sitting on the chair behind you, in fact.
And how do you know?
And so a spider lands on you, and you go through this great, spasmy attack because spiders are scary.
But then you could say, well is there a brown recluse sitting on the chair beside me or not?
I don't know. Are there brown recluses here?
So if you actually do the research, you find out that in the world there are about 50,000 different types of spiders, and there are about two dozen that are venomous out of 50,000.
And if you're in Canada, because of the cold winters here in B.C., there's about 720, 730 different types of spiders and there's one -- one -- that is venomous, and its venom isn't even fatal, it's just kind of like a nasty sting.
And that spider -- not only that, but that spider has beautiful markings on it, it's like "I'm dangerous. I got a big radiation symbol on my back, it's the black widow."
So, if you're even slightly careful you can avoid running into the one spider -- and it lives close the ground, you're walking along, you are never going to go through a spider web where a black widow bites you.
Spider webs like this, it doesn't build those, it builds them down in the corners.
And its a black widow because the female spider eats the male; it doesn't care about you.
So in fact, the next time you walk into a spiderweb, you don't need to panic and go with your caveman reaction.
The danger is entirely different than the fear.
How do you get around it, though?
How do you change your behavior?
Well, next time you see a spiderweb, have a good look, make sure it's not a black widow spider, and then walk into it.
And then you see another spiderweb and walk into that one.
It's just a little bit of fluffy stuff. It's not a big deal.
And the spider that may come out is no more threat to you than a lady bug or a butterfly.
And then I guarantee you if you walk through 100 spiderwebs you will have changed your fundamental human behavior, your caveman reaction, and you will now be able to walk in the park in the morning and not worry about that spiderweb -- or into your grandma's attic or whatever, into your own basement.
And you can apply this to anything.
If you're outside on a spacewalk and you're blinded, your natural reaction would be to panic, I think.
It would make you nervous and worried.
But we had considered all the venom, and we had practiced with a whole variety of different spiderwebs.
We knew everything there is to know about the spacesuit and we trained underwater thousands of times.
And we don't just practice things going right, we practice things going wrong all the time, so that you are constantly walking through those spiderwebs.
And not just underwater, but also in virtual reality labs with the helmet and the gloves so you feel like it's realistic.
So when you finally actually get outside on a spacewalk, it feels much different than it would if you just went out first time.
And even if you're blinded, your natural, panicky reaction doesn't happen.
Instead you kind of look around and go, "Okay, I can't see, but I can hear, I can talk, Scott Parazynski is out here with me.
He could come over and help me."
We actually practiced incapacitated crew rescue, so he could float me like a blimp and stuff me into the airlock if he had to.
I could find my own way back.
It's not nearly as big a deal.
And actually, if you keep on crying for a while, whatever that gunk was that's in your eye starts to dilute and you can start to see again, and Houston, if you negotiate with them, they will let you then keep working.
We finished everything on the spacewalk and when we came back inside, Jeff got some cotton batting and took the crusty stuff around my eyes, and it turned out it was just the anti-fog, sort of a mixture of oil and soap, that got in my eye.
And now we use Johnson's No More Tears, which we probably should've been using right from the very beginning. (Laughter) But the key to that is by looking at the difference between perceived danger and actual danger, where is the real risk?
What is the real thing that you should be afraid of?
Not just a generic fear of bad things happening.
You can fundamentally change your reaction to things so that it allows you to go places and see things and do things that otherwise would be completely denied to you ...
where you could see the hardpan south of the Sahara, or you can see New York City in a way that is almost dreamlike, or the unconscious gingham of Eastern Europe fields or the Great Lakes as a collection of small puddles.
You can see the fault lines of San Francisco and the way the water pours out under the bridge, just entirely different than any other way that you could have if you had not found a way to conquer your fear.
You see a beauty that otherwise never would have happened.
It's time to come home at the end.
This is our spaceship, the Soyuz, that little one.
Three of us climb in, and then this spaceship detaches from the station and falls into the atmosphere.
These two parts here actually melt, we jettison them and they burn up in the atmosphere.
The only part that survives is the little bullet that we're riding in, and it falls into the atmosphere, and in essence you are riding a meteorite home, and riding meteorites is scary, and it ought to be.
But instead of riding into the atmosphere just screaming, like you would if suddenly you found yourself riding a meteorite back to Earth -- (Laughter) -- instead, 20 years previously we had started studying Russian, and then once you learn Russian, then we learned orbital mechanics in Russian, and then we learned vehicle control theory, and then we got into the simulator and practiced over and over and over again.
And in fact, you can fly this meteorite and steer it and land in about a 15-kilometer circle anywhere on the Earth.
So in fact, when our crew was coming back into the atmosphere inside the Soyuz, we weren't screaming, we were laughing; it was fun.
And when the great big parachute opened, we knew that if it didn't open there's a second parachute, and it runs on a nice little clockwork mechanism.
So we came back, we came thundering back to Earth and this is what it looked like to land in a Soyuz, in Kazakhstan.
(Video) Reporter: And you can see one of those search and recovery helicopters, once again that helicopter part of dozen such Russian Mi-8 helicopters.
Touchdown -- 3:14 and 48 seconds, a.m. Central Time.
CH: And you roll to a stop as if someone threw your spaceship at the ground and it tumbles end over end, but you're ready for it you're in a custom-built seat, you know how the shock absorber works.
And then eventually the Russians reach in, drag you out, plunk you into a chair, and you can now look back at what was an incredible experience.
You have taken the dreams of that nine-year-old boy, which were impossible and dauntingly scary, dauntingly terrifying, and put them into practice, and figured out a way to reprogram yourself, to change your primal fear so that it allowed you to come back with a set of experiences and a level of inspiration for other people that never could have been possible otherwise.
Just to finish, they asked me to play that guitar.
I know this song, and it's really a tribute to the genius of David Bowie himself, but it's also, I think, a reflection of the fact that we are not machines exploring the universe, we are people, and we're taking that ability to adapt and that ability to understand and the ability to take our own self-perception into a new place.
(Music) ♫ This is Major Tom to ground control ♫ ♫ I've left forevermore ♫ ♫ And I'm floating in a most peculiar way ♫ ♫ And the stars look very different today ♫ ♫ For here am I floating in the tin can ♫ ♫ A last glimpse of the world ♫ ♫ Planet Earth is blue and there's so much left to do ♫ (Music) Fear not.
(Applause) That's very nice of you. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: We had Edward Snowden here a couple days ago, and this is response time.
And several of you have written to me with questions to ask our guest here from the NSA.
So Richard Ledgett is the 15th deputy director of the National Security Agency, and he's a senior civilian officer there, acts as its chief operating officer, guiding strategies, setting internal policies, and serving as the principal advisor to the director.
And all being well, welcome, Rick Ledgett, to TED.
(Applause) Richard Ledgett: I'm really thankful for the opportunity to talk to folks here.
I look forward to the conversation, so thanks for arranging for that.
CA: Thank you, Rick.
We appreciate you joining us.
It's certainly quite a strong statement that the NSA is willing to reach out and show a more open face here.
You saw, I think, the talk and interview that Edward Snowden gave here a couple days ago.
What did you make of it?
RL: So I think it was interesting.
We didn't realize that he was going to show up there, so kudos to you guys for arranging a nice surprise like that.
I think that, like a lot of the things that have come out since Mr. Snowden started disclosing classified information, there were some kernels of truth in there, but a lot of extrapolations and half-truths in there, and I'm interested in helping to address those.
I think this is a really important conversation that we're having in the United States and internationally, and I think it is important and of import, and so given that, we need to have that be a fact-based conversation, and we want to help make that happen.
CA: So the question that a lot of people have here is, what do you make of Snowden's motivations for doing what he did, and did he have an alternative way that he could have gone?
RL: He absolutely did have alternative ways that he could have gone, and I actually think that characterizing him as a whistleblower actually hurts legitimate whistleblowing activities.
So what if somebody who works in the NSA -- and there are over 35,000 people who do.
They're all great citizens.
They're just like your husbands, fathers, sisters, brothers, neighbors, nephews, friends and relatives, all of whom are interested in doing the right thing for their country and for our allies internationally, and so there are a variety of venues to address if folks have a concern.
First off, there's their supervisor, and up through the supervisory chain within their organization.
If folks aren't comfortable with that, there are a number of inspectors general.
In the case of Mr. Snowden, he had the option of the NSA inspector general, the Navy inspector general, the Pacific Command inspector general, the Department of Defense inspector general, and the intelligence community inspector general, any of whom would have both kept his concerns in classified channels and been happy to address them.
(CA and RL speaking at once) He had the option to go to congressional committees, and there are mechanisms to do that that are in place, and so he didn't do any of those things.
CA: Now, you had said that Ed Snowden had other avenues for raising his concerns.
The comeback on that is a couple of things: one, that he certainly believes that as a contractor, the avenues that would have been available to him as an employee weren't available, two, there's a track record of other whistleblowers, like [Thomas Andrews Drake] being treated pretty harshly, by some views, and thirdly, what he was taking on was not one specific flaw that he'd discovered, but programs that had been approved by all three branches of government.
I mean, in that circumstance, couldn't you argue that what he did was reasonable?
RL: No, I don't agree with that.
I think that the — sorry, I'm getting feedback through the microphone there — the actions that he took were inappropriate because of the fact that he put people's lives at risk, basically, in the long run, and I know there's been a lot of talk in public by Mr. Snowden and some of the journalists that say that the things that have been disclosed have not put national security and people at risk, and that is categorically not true.
They actually do.
I think there's also an amazing arrogance to the idea that he knows better than the framers of the Constitution in how the government should be designed and work for separation of powers and the fact that the executive and the legislative branch have to work together and they have checks and balances on each other, and then the judicial branch, which oversees the entire process.
I think that's extremely arrogant on his part.
CA: Can you give a specific example of how he put people's lives at risk?
RL: Yeah, sure.
So the things that he's disclosed, the capabilities, and the NSA is a capabilities-based organization, so when we have foreign intelligence targets, legitimate things of interest -- like, terrorists is the iconic example, but it includes things like human traffickers, drug traffickers, people who are trying to build advanced weaponry, nuclear weapons, and build delivery systems for those, and nation-states who might be executing aggression against their immediate neighbors, which you may have some visibility into some of that that's going on right now, the capabilities are applied in very discrete and measured and controlled ways.
So the unconstrained disclosure of those capabilities means that as adversaries see them and recognize, "Hey, I might be vulnerable to this," they move away from that, and we have seen targets in terrorism, in the nation-state area, in smugglers of various types, and other folks who have, because of the disclosures, moved away from our ability to have insight into what they're doing.
The net effect of that is that our people who are overseas in dangerous places, whether they're diplomats or military, and our allies who are in similar situations, are at greater risk because we don't see the threats that are coming their way.
CA: So that's a general response saying that because of his revelations, access that you had to certain types of information has been shut down, has been closed down.
But the concern is that the nature of that access was not necessarily legitimate in the first place.
I mean, describe to us this Bullrun program where it's alleged that the NSA specifically weakened security in order to get the type of access that you've spoken of.
RL: So there are, when our legitimate foreign intelligence targets of the type that I described before, use the global telecommunications system as their communications methodology, and they do, because it's a great system, it's the most complex system ever devised by man, and it is a wonder, and lots of folks in the room there are responsible for the creation and enhancement of that, and it's just a wonderful thing.
But it's also used by people who are working against us and our allies.
And so if I'm going to pursue them, I need to have the capability to go after them, and again, the controls are in how I apply that capability, not that I have the capability itself.
Otherwise, if we could make it so that all the bad guys used one corner of the Internet, we could have a domain, badguy.com.
That would be awesome, and we could just concentrate all our efforts there.
That's not how it works.
They're trying to hide from the government's ability to isolate and interdict their actions, and so we have to swim in that same space.
But I will tell you this.
So NSA has two missions.
One is the Signals Intelligence mission that we've unfortunately read so much about in the press.
The other one is the Information Assurance mission, which is to protect the national security systems of the United States, and by that, that's things like the communications that the president uses, the communications that control our nuclear weapons, the communications that our military uses around the world, and the communications that we use with our allies, and that some of our allies themselves use.
And so we make recommendations on standards to use, and we use those same standards, and so we are invested in making sure that those communications are secure for their intended purposes.
CA: But it sounds like what you're saying is that when it comes to the Internet at large, any strategy is fair game if it improves America's safety.
And I think this is partly where there is such a divide of opinion, that there's a lot of people in this room and around the world who think very differently about the Internet.
They think of it as a momentous invention of humanity, kind of on a par with the Gutenberg press, for example.
It's the bringer of knowledge to all.
It's the connector of all.
And it's viewed in those sort of idealistic terms.
And from that lens, what the NSA has done is equivalent to the authorities back in Germany inserting some device into every printing press that would reveal which books people bought and what they read.
Can you understand that from that viewpoint, it feels outrageous?
RL: I do understand that, and I actually share the view of the utility of the Internet, and I would argue it's bigger than the Internet.
It is a global telecommunications system.
The Internet is a big chunk of that, but there is a lot more.
And I think that people have legitimate concerns about the balance between transparency and secrecy.
That's sort of been couched as a balance between privacy and national security.
I don't think that's the right framing.
I think it really is transparency and secrecy.
And so that's the national and international conversation that we're having, and we want to participate in that, and want people to participate in it in an informed way.
So there are things, let me talk there a little bit more, there are things that we need to be transparent about: our authorities, our processes, our oversight, who we are.
We, NSA, have not done a good job of that, and I think that's part of the reason that this has been so revelational and so sensational in the media.
Nobody knew who we were. We were the No Such Agency, the Never Say Anything.
There's takeoffs of our logo of an eagle with headphones on around it.
And so that's the public characterization.
And so we need to be more transparent about those things.
What we don't need to be transparent about, because it's bad for the U.S., it's bad for all those other countries that we work with and that we help provide information that helps them secure themselves and their people, it's bad to expose operations and capabilities in a way that allows the people that we're all working against, the generally recognized bad guys, to counter those.
CA: But isn't it also bad to deal a kind of body blow to the American companies that have essentially given the world most of the Internet services that matter?
RL: It is. It's really the companies are in a tough position, as are we, because the companies, we compel them to provide information, just like every other nation in the world does.
Every industrialized nation in the world has a lawful intercept program where they are requiring companies to provide them with information that they need for their security, and the companies that are involved have complied with those programs in the same way that they have to do when they're operating in Russia or the U.K.
or China or India or France, any country that you choose to name.
And so the fact that these revelations have been broadly characterized as "you can't trust company A because your privacy is suspect with them" is actually only accurate in the sense that it's accurate with every other company in the world that deals with any of those countries in the world.
And so it's being picked up by people as a marketing advantage, and it's being marketed that way by several countries, including some of our allied countries, where they are saying, "Hey, you can't trust the U.S., but you can trust our telecom company, because we're safe."
And they're actually using that to counter the very large technological edge that U.S. companies have in areas like the cloud and Internet-based technologies.
CA: You're sitting there with the American flag, and the American Constitution guarantees freedom from unreasonable search and seizure.
How do you characterize the American citizen's right to privacy?
Is there such a right?
RL: Yeah, of course there is.
And we devote an inordinate amount of time and pressure, inordinate and appropriate, actually I should say, amount of time and effort in order to ensure that we protect that privacy.
and beyond that, the privacy of citizens around the world, it's not just Americans.
Several things come into play here.
First, we're all in the same network.
My communications, I'm a user of a particular Internet email service that is the number one email service of choice by terrorists around the world, number one.
So I'm there right beside them in email space in the Internet.
And so we need to be able to pick that apart and find the information that's relevant.
In doing so, we're going to necessarily encounter Americans and innocent foreign citizens who are just going about their business, and so we have procedures in place that shreds that out, that says, when you find that, not if you find it, when you find it, because you're certain to find it, here's how you protect that.
These are called minimization procedures.
They're approved by the attorney general and constitutionally based.
And so we protect those.
And then, for people, citizens of the world who are going about their lawful business on a day-to-day basis, the president on his January 17 speech, laid out some additional protections that we are providing to them.
So I think absolutely, folks do have a right to privacy, and that we work very hard to make sure that that right to privacy is protected.
CA: What about foreigners using American companies' Internet services?
Do they have any privacy rights?
RL: They do. They do, in the sense of, the only way that we are able to compel one of those companies to provide us information is when it falls into one of three categories: We can identify that this particular person, identified by a selector of some kind, is associated with counterterrorist or proliferation or other foreign intelligence target.
CA: Much has been made of the fact that a lot of the information that you've obtained through these programs is essentially metadata.
It's not necessarily the actual words that someone has written in an email or given on a phone call.
It's who they wrote to and when, and so forth.
But it's been argued, and someone here in the audience has talked to a former NSA analyst who said metadata is actually much more invasive than the core data, because in the core data you present yourself as you want to be presented.
With metadata, who knows what the conclusions are that are drawn?
Is there anything to that?
RL: I don't really understand that argument.
I think that metadata's important for a couple of reasons.
Metadata is the information that lets you find connections that people are trying to hide.
So when a terrorist is corresponding with somebody else who's not known to us but is engaged in doing or supporting terrorist activity, or someone who's violating international sanctions by providing nuclear weapons-related material to a country like Iran or North Korea, is trying to hide that activity because it's illicit activity.
What metadata lets you do is connect that.
The alternative to that is one that's much less efficient and much more invasive of privacy, which is gigantic amounts of content collection.
So metadata, in that sense, actually is privacy-enhancing.
And we don't, contrary to some of the stuff that's been printed, we don't sit there and grind out metadata profiles of average people.
If you're not connected to one of those valid intelligence targets, you are not of interest to us.
CA: So in terms of the threats that face America overall, where would you place terrorism?
RL: I think terrorism is still number one.
I think that we have never been in a time where there are more places where things are going badly and forming the petri dish in which terrorists take advantage of the lack of governance.
An old boss of mine, Tom Fargo, Admiral Fargo, used to describe it as arcs of instability.
And so you have a lot of those arcs of instability in the world right now, in places like Syria, where there's a civil war going on and you have massive numbers, thousands and thousands of foreign fighters who are coming into Syria to learn how to be terrorists and practice that activity, and lots of those people are Westerners who hold passports to European countries or in some cases the United States, and so they are basically learning how to do jihad and have expressed intent to go out and do that later on in their home countries.
You've got places like Iraq, which is suffering from a high level of sectarian violence, again a breeding ground for terrorism.
And you have the activity in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel area of Africa.
Again, lots of weak governance which forms a breeding ground for terrorist activity.
So I think it's very serious. I think it's number one.
I think number two is cyber threat.
I think cyber is a threat in three ways: One way, and probably the most common way that people have heard about it, is due to the theft of intellectual property, so basically, foreign countries going in, stealing companies' secrets, and then providing that information to state-owned enterprises or companies connected to the government to help them leapfrog technology or to gain business intelligence that's then used to win contracts overseas.
That is a hugely costly set of activities that's going on right now.
Several nation-states are doing it.
Second is the denial-of-service attacks.
You're probably aware that there have been a spate of those directed against the U.S. financial sector since 2012.
Again, that's a nation-state who is executing those attacks, and they're doing that as a semi-anonymous way of reprisal.
And the last one is destructive attacks, and those are the ones that concern me the most.
Those are on the rise.
You have the attack against Saudi Aramco in 2012, August of 2012.
It took down about 35,000 of their computers with a Wiper-style virus.
You had a follow-on a week later to a Qatari company.
You had March of 2013, you had a South Korean attack that was attributed in the press to North Korea that took out thousands of computers.
Those are on the rise, and we see people expressing interest in those capabilities and a desire to employ them.
CA: Okay, so a couple of things here, because this is really the core of this, almost.
I mean, first of all, a lot of people who look at risk and look at the numbers don't understand this belief that terrorism is still the number one threat.
Apart from September 11, I think the numbers are that in the last 30 or 40 years about 500 Americans have died from terrorism, mostly from homegrown terrorists.
The chance in the last few years of being killed by terrorism is far less than the chance of being killed by lightning.
I guess you would say that a single nuclear incident or bioterrorism act or something like that would change those numbers.
Would that be the point of view?
RL: Well, I'd say two things.
One is, the reason that there hasn't been a major attack in the United States since 9/11, that is not an accident.
That's a lot of hard work that we have done, that other folks in the intelligence community have done, that the military has done, and that our allies around the globe have done.
You've heard the numbers about the tip of the iceberg in terms of numbers of terrorist attacks that NSA programs contributed to stopping was 54, 25 of those in Europe, and of those 25, 18 of them occurred in three countries, some of which are our allies, and some of which are beating the heck out of us over the NSA programs, by the way.
So that's not an accident that those things happen.
That's hard work. That's us finding intelligence on terrorist activities and interdicting them through one way or another, through law enforcement, through cooperative activities with other countries and sometimes through military action.
The other thing I would say is that your idea of nuclear or chem-bio-threat is not at all far-fetched and in fact there are a number of groups who have for several years expressed interest and desire in obtaining those capabilities and work towards that.
CA: It's also been said that, of those 54 alleged incidents, that as few as zero of them were actually anything to do with these controversial programs that Mr. Snowden revealed, that it was basically through other forms of intelligence, that you're looking for a needle in a haystack, and the effects of these programs, these controversial programs, is just to add hay to the stack, not to really find the needle.
The needle was found by other methods.
Isn't there something to that?
RL: No, there's actually two programs that are typically implicated in that discussion.
One is the section 215 program, the U.S. telephony metadata program, and the other one is popularly called the PRISM program, and it's actually section 702 of the FISA Amendment Act.
But the 215 program is only relevant to threats that are directed against the United States, and there have been a dozen threats where that was implicated.
Now what you'll see people say publicly is there is no "but for" case, and so there is no case where, but for that, the threat would have happened.
But that actually indicates a lack of understanding of how terrorist investigations actually work.
You think about on television, you watch a murder mystery.
What do you start with? You start with a body, and then they work their way from there to solve the crime.
We're actually starting well before that, hopefully before there are any bodies, and we're trying to build the case for who the people are, what they're trying to do, and that involves massive amounts of information.
Think of it is as mosaic, and it's hard to say that any one piece of a mosaic was necessary to building the mosaic, but to build the complete picture, you need to have all the pieces of information.
On the other, the non-U.S.-related threats out of those 54, the other 42 of them, the PRISM program was hugely relevant to that, and in fact was material in contributing to stopping those attacks.
CA: Snowden said two days ago that terrorism has always been what is called in the intelligence world "a cover for action," that it's something that, because it invokes such a powerful emotional response in people, it allows the initiation of these programs to achieve powers that an organization like yours couldn't otherwise have.
Is there any internal debate about that?
RL: Yeah.
I mean, we debate these things all the time, and there is discussion that goes on in the executive branch and within NSA itself and the intelligence community about what's right, what's proportionate, what's the correct thing to do.
And it's important to note that the programs that we're talking about were all authorized by two different presidents, two different political parties, by Congress twice, and by federal judges 16 different times, and so this is not NSA running off and doing its own thing.
This is a legitimate activity of the United States foreign government that was agreed to by all the branches of the United States government, and President Madison would have been proud.
CA: And yet, when congressmen discovered what was actually being done with that authorization, many of them were completely shocked.
Or do you think that is not a legitimate reaction, that it's only because it's now come out publicly, that they really knew exactly what you were doing with the powers they had granted you?
RL: Congress is a big body.
There's 535 of them, and they change out frequently, in the case of the House, every two years, and I think that the NSA provided all the relevant information to our oversight committees, and then the dissemination of that information by the oversight committees throughout Congress is something that they manage.
I think I would say that Congress members had the opportunity to make themselves aware, and in fact a significant number of them, the ones who are assigned oversight responsibility, did have the ability to do that.
And you've actually had the chairs of those committees say that in public.
CA: Now, you mentioned the threat of cyberattacks, and I don't think anyone in this room would disagree that that is a huge concern, but do you accept that there's a tradeoff between offensive and defensive strategies, and that it's possible that the very measures taken to, "weaken encryption," and allow yourself to find the bad guys, might also open the door to forms of cyberattack?
RL: So I think two things.
One is, you said weaken encryption. I didn't.
And the other one is that the NSA has both of those missions, and we are heavily biased towards defense, and, actually, the vulnerabilities that we find in the overwhelming majority of cases, we disclose to the people who are responsible for manufacturing or developing those products.
We have a great track record of that, and we're actually working on a proposal right now to be transparent and to publish transparency reports in the same way that the Internet companies are being allowed to publish transparency reports for them.
We want to be more transparent about that.
So again, we eat our own dog food.
We use the standards, we use the products that we recommend, and so it's in our interest to keep our communications protected in the same way that other people's need to be.
CA: Edward Snowden, when, after his talk, was wandering the halls here in the bot, and I heard him say to a couple of people, they asked him about what he thought of the NSA overall, and he was very complimentary about the people who work with you, said that it's a really impassioned group of employees who are seeking to do the right thing, and that the problems have come from just some badly conceived policies.
He came over certainly very reasonably and calmly.
He didn't come over like a crazy man.
Would you accept that at least, even if you disagree with how he did it, that he has opened a debate that matters?
RL: So I think that the discussion is an important one to have.
I do not like the way that he did it.
I think there were a number of other ways that he could have done that that would have not endangered our people and the people of other nations through losing visibility into what our adversaries are doing.
But I do think it's an important conversation.
CA: It's been reported that there's almost a difference of opinion with you and your colleagues over any scenario in which he might be offered an amnesty deal.
I think your boss, General Keith Alexander, has said that that would be a terrible example for others; you can't negotiate with someone who's broken the law in that way.
But you've been quoted as saying that, if Snowden could prove that he was surrendering all undisclosed documents, that a deal maybe should be considered.
Do you still think that?
RL: Yeah, so actually, this is my favorite thing about that "60 Minutes" interview was all the misquotes that came from that.
What I actually said, in response to a question about, would you entertain any discussions of mitigating action against Snowden, I said, yeah, it's worth a conversation.
This is something that the attorney general of the United States and the president also actually have both talked about this, and I defer to the attorney general, because this is his lane.
But there is a strong tradition in American jurisprudence of having discussions with people who have been charged with crimes in order to, if it benefits the government, to get something out of that, that there's always room for that kind of discussion.
So I'm not presupposing any outcome, but there is always room for discussion.
CA: To a lay person it seems like he has certain things to offer the U.S., the government, you, others, in terms of putting things right and helping figure out a smarter policy, a smarter way forward for the future.
Do you see, has that kind of possibility been entertained at all?
RL: So that's out of my lane.
That's not an NSA thing.
That would be a Department of Justice sort of discussion.
I'll defer to them.
CA: Rick, when Ed Snowden ended his talk, I offered him the chance to share an idea worth spreading.
What would be your idea worth spreading for this group?
RL: So I think, learn the facts.
This is a really important conversation, and it impacts, it's not just NSA, it's not just the government, it's you, it's the Internet companies.
The issue of privacy and personal data is much bigger than just the government, and so learn the facts.
Don't rely on headlines, don't rely on sound bites, don't rely on one-sided conversations.
So that's the idea, I think, worth spreading.
We have a sign, a badge tab, we wear badges at work with lanyards, and if I could make a plug, my badge lanyard at work says, "Dallas Cowboys."
Go Dallas.
I've just alienated half the audience, I know.
So the lanyard that our people who work in the organization that does our crypto-analytic work have a tab that says, "Look at the data."
So that's the idea worth spreading.
Look at the data.
CA: Rick, it took a certain amount of courage, I think, actually, to come and speak openly to this group.
It's not something the NSA has done a lot of in the past, and plus the technology has been challenging.
We truly appreciate you doing that and sharing in this very important conversation.
Thank you so much.
RL: Thanks, Chris.
(Applause)
Charlie Rose: So Larry sent me an email and he basically said, we've got to make sure that we don't seem like we're a couple of middle-aged boring men.
I said, I'm flattered by that -- (Laughter) — because I'm a bit older, and he has a bit more net worth than I do.
Larry Page: Well, thank you.
CR: So we'll have a conversation about the Internet, and we'll have a conversation Google, and we'll have a conversation about search and privacy, and also about your philosophy and a sense of how you've connected the dots and how this journey that began some time ago has such interesting prospects.
Mainly we want to talk about the future.
So my first question: Where is Google and where is it going?
LP: Well, this is something we think about a lot, and our mission we defined a long time ago is to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful.
And people always say, is that really what you guys are still doing?
And I always kind of think about that myself, and I'm not quite sure.
But actually, when I think about search, it's such a deep thing for all of us, to really understand what you want, to understand the world's information, and we're still very much in the early stages of that, which is totally crazy.
We've been at it for 15 years already, but it's not at all done.
CR: When it's done, how will it be?
LP: Well, I guess, in thinking about where we're going -- you know, why is it not done? -- a lot of it is just computing's kind of a mess.
You know, your computer doesn't know where you are, it doesn't know what you're doing, it doesn't know what you know, and a lot we've been trying to do recently is just make your devices work, make them understand your context.
Google Now, you know, knows where you are, knows what you may need.
So really having computing work and understand you and understand that information, we really haven't done that yet.
It's still very, very clunky.
CR: Tell me, when you look at what Google is doing, where does Deep Mind fit?
LP: Yeah, so Deep Mind is a company we just acquired recently.
It's in the U.K.
First, let me tell you the way we got there, which was looking at search and really understanding, trying to understand everything, and also make the computers not clunky and really understand you -- like, voice was really important.
So what's the state of the art on speech recognition?
It's not very good.
It doesn't really understand you.
So we started doing machine learning research to improve that.
That helped a lot.
And we started just looking at things like YouTube.
Can we understand YouTube?
But we actually ran machine learning on YouTube and it discovered cats, just by itself.
Now, that's an important concept.
And we realized there's really something here.
If we can learn what cats are, that must be really important.
So I think Deep Mind, what's really amazing about Deep Mind is that it can actually -- they're learning things in this unsupervised way.
They started with video games, and really just, maybe I can show the video, just playing video games, and learning how to do that automatically.
CR: Take a look at the video games and how machines are coming to be able to do some remarkable things.
LP: The amazing thing about this is this is, I mean, obviously, these are old games, but the system just sees what you see, the pixels, and it has the controls and it has the score, and it's learned to play all of these games, same program.
It's learned to play all of these games with superhuman performance.
We've not been able to do things like this with computers before.
And maybe I'll just narrate this one quickly.
This is boxing, and it figures out it can sort of pin the opponent down.
The computer's on the left, and it's just racking up points.
So imagine if this kind of intelligence were thrown at your schedule, or your information needs, or things like that.
We're really just at the beginning of that, and that's what I'm really excited about.
CR: When you look at all that's taken place with Deep Mind and the boxing, also a part of where we're going is artificial intelligence.
Where are we, when you look at that?
LP: Well, I think for me, this is kind of one of the most exciting things I've seen in a long time.
The guy who started this company, Demis, has a neuroscience and a computer science background.
He went back to school to get his Ph.D. to study the brain.
And so I think we're seeing a lot of exciting work going on that sort of crosses computer science and neuroscience in terms of really understanding what it takes to make something smart and do really interesting things.
CR: But where's the level of it now?
And how fast do you think we are moving?
LP: Well, this is the state of the art right now, understanding cats on YouTube and things like that, improving voice recognition.
We used a lot of machine learning to improve things incrementally, but I think for me, this example's really exciting, because it's one program that can do a lot of different things.
CR: I don't know if we can do this, but we've got the image of the cat.
It would be wonderful to see this.
This is how machines looked at cats and what they came up with.
Can we see that image?
LP: Yeah. CR: There it is. Can you see the cat?
Designed by machines, seen by machines.
LP: That's right.
So this is learned from just watching YouTube.
And there's no training, no notion of a cat, but this concept of a cat is something important that you would understand, and now that the machines can kind of understand.
Maybe just finishing also on the search part, it started with search, really understanding people's context and their information.
I did have a video I wanted to show quickly on that that we actually found.
(Video) ["Soy, Kenya"] Zack Matere: Not long ago, I planted a crop of potatoes.
Then suddenly they started dying one after the other.
I checked out the books and they didn't tell me much.
So, I went and I did a search.
["Zack Matere, Farmer"] Potato diseases.
One of the websites told me that ants could be the problem.
It said, sprinkle wood ash over the plants.
Then after a few days the ants disappeared.
I got excited about the Internet.
I have this friend who really would like to expand his business.
So I went with him to the cyber cafe and we checked out several sites.
When I met him next, he was going to put a windmill at the local school.
I felt proud because something that wasn't there before was suddenly there.
I realized that not everybody can be able to access what I was able to access.
I thought that I need to have an Internet that my grandmother can use.
So I thought about a notice board.
A simple wooden notice board.
When I get information on my phone, I'm able to post the information on the notice board.
So it's basically like a computer.
I use the Internet to help people.
I think I am searching for a better life for me and my neighbors.
So many people have access to information, but there's no follow-up to that.
I think the follow-up to that is our knowledge.
When people have the knowledge, they can find solutions without having to helped out.
Information is powerful, but it is how we use it that will define us.
(Applause) LP: Now, the amazing thing about that video, actually, was we just read about it in the news, and we found this gentlemen, and made that little clip.
CR: When I talk to people about you, they say to me, people who know you well, say, Larry wants to change the world, and he believes technology can show the way.
And that means access to the Internet.
It has to do with languages.
It also means how people can get access and do things that will affect their community, and this is an example.
LP: Yeah, that's right, and I think for me, I have been focusing on access more, if we're talking about the future.
We recently released this Loon Project which is using balloons to do it.
It sounds totally crazy.
We can show the video here.
Actually, two out of three people in the world don't have good Internet access now.
We actually think this can really help people sort of cost-efficiently.
CR: It's a balloon. LP: Yeah, get access to the Internet.
CR: And why does this balloon give you access to the Internet?
Because there was some interesting things you had to do to figure out how to make balloons possible, they didn't have to be tethered.
LP: Yeah, and this is a good example of innovation.
Like, we've been thinking about this idea for five years or more before we started working on it, but it was just really, how do we get access points up high, cheaply?
You normally have to use satellites and it takes a long time to launch them.
But you saw there how easy it is to launch a balloon and get it up, and actually again, it's the power of the Internet, I did a search on it, and I found, 30, 40 years ago, someone had put up a balloon and it had gone around the Earth multiple times.
And I thought, why can't we do that today?
And that's how this project got going.
CR: But are you at the mercy of the wind?
LP: Yeah, but it turns out, we did some weather simulations which probably hadn't really been done before, and if you control the altitude of the balloons, which you can do by pumping air into them and other ways, you can actually control roughly where they go, and so I think we can build a worldwide mesh of these balloons that can cover the whole planet.
CR: Before I talk about the future and transportation, where you've been a nerd for a while, and this fascination you have with transportation and automated cars and bicycles, let me talk a bit about what's been the subject here earlier with Edward Snowden.
It is security and privacy.
You have to have been thinking about that.
LP: Yeah, absolutely.
I saw the picture of Sergey with Edward Snowden yesterday.
Some of you may have seen it.
But I think, for me, I guess, privacy and security are a really important thing.
We think about it in terms of both things, and I think you can't have privacy without security, so let me just talk about security first, because you asked about Snowden and all of that, and then I'll say a little bit about privacy.
I think for me, it's tremendously disappointing that the government secretly did all this stuff and didn't tell us.
I don't think we can have a democracy if we're having to protect you and our users from the government for stuff that we've never had a conversation about.
And I don't mean we have to know what the particular terrorist attack is they're worried about protecting us from, but we do need to know what the parameters of it is, what kind of surveillance the government's going to do and how and why, and I think we haven't had that conversation.
So I think the government's actually done itself a tremendous disservice by doing all that in secret.
CR: Never coming to Google to ask for anything.
LP: Not Google, but the public.
I think we need to have a debate about that, or we can't have a functioning democracy.
It's just not possible.
So I'm sad that Google's in the position of protecting you and our users from the government doing secret thing that nobody knows about.
It doesn't make any sense.
CR: Yeah. And then there's a privacy side of it.
LP: Yes. The privacy side, I think it's -- the world is changing.
You carry a phone. It knows where you are.
There's so much more information about you, and that's an important thing, and it makes sense why people are asking difficult questions.
We spend a lot of time thinking about this and what the issues are.
I'm a little bit -- I think the main thing that we need to do is just provide people choice, show them what data's being collected -- search history, location data.
We're excited about incognito mode in Chrome, and doing that in more ways, just giving people more choice and more awareness of what's going on.
I also think it's very easy.
What I'm worried is that we throw out the baby with the bathwater.
And I look at, on your show, actually, I kind of lost my voice, and I haven't gotten it back.
I'm hoping that by talking to you I'm going to get it back.
CR: If I could do anything, I would do that.
LP: All right. So get out your voodoo doll and whatever you need to do.
But I think, you know what, I look at that, I made that public, and I got all this information.
We got a survey done on medical conditions with people who have similar issues, and I look at medical records, and I say, wouldn't it be amazing if everyone's medical records were available anonymously to research doctors?
And when someone accesses your medical record, a research doctor, they could see, you could see which doctor accessed it and why, and you could maybe learn about what conditions you have.
I think if we just did that, we'd save 100,000 lives this year.
CR: Absolutely. Let me go — (Applause) LP: So I guess I'm just very worried that with Internet privacy, we're doing the same thing we're doing with medical records, is we're throwing out the baby with the bathwater, and we're not really thinking about the tremendous good that can come from people sharing information with the right people in the right ways.
CR: And the necessary condition that people have to have confidence that their information will not be abused.
LP: Yeah, and I had this problem with my voice stuff.
I was scared to share it.
Sergey encouraged me to do that, and it was a great thing to do.
CR: And the response has been overwhelming.
LP: Yeah, and people are super positive.
We got thousands and thousands of people with similar conditions, which there's no data on today.
So it was a really good thing.
CR: So talking about the future, what is it about you and transportation systems?
LP: Yeah. I guess I was just frustrated with this when I was at college in Michigan.
I had to get on the bus and take it and wait for it.
And it was cold and snowing.
I did some research on how much it cost, and I just became a bit obsessed with transportation systems.
CR: And that began the idea of an automated car.
LP: Yeah, about 18 years ago I learned about people working on automated cars, and I became fascinated by that, and it takes a while to get these projects going, but I'm super excited about the possibilities of that improving the world.
There's 20 million people or more injured per year.
It's the leading cause of death for people under 34 in the U.S.
CR: So you're talking about saving lives.
LP: Yeah, and also saving space and making life better.
Los Angeles is half parking lots and roads, half of the area, and most cities are not far behind, actually.
It's just crazy that that's what we use our space for.
CR: And how soon will we be there?
LP: I think we can be there very, very soon.
We've driven well over 100,000 miles now totally automated.
I'm super excited about getting that out quickly.
CR: But it's not only you're talking about automated cars.
You also have this idea for bicycles.
LP: Well at Google, we got this idea that we should just provide free bikes to everyone, and that's been amazing, most of the trips.
You see bikes going everywhere, and the bikes wear out.
They're getting used 24 hours a day.
CR: But you want to put them above the street, too.
LP: Well I said, how do we get people using bikes more?
CR: We may have a video here.
LP: Yeah, let's show the video.
I just got excited about this.
(Music) So this is actually how you might separate bikes from cars with minimal cost.
Anyway, it looks totally crazy, but I was actually thinking about our campus, working with the Zippies and stuff, and just trying to get a lot more bike usage, and I was thinking about, how do you cost-effectively separate the bikes from traffic?
And I went and searched, and this is what I found.
And we're not actually working on this, that particular thing, but it gets your imagination going.
CR: Let me close with this.
Give me a sense of the philosophy of your own mind.
You have this idea of [Google X].
You don't simply want to go in some small, measurable arena of progress.
LP: Yeah, I think many of the things we just talked about are like that, where they're really -- I almost use the economic concept of additionality, which means that you're doing something that wouldn't happen unless you were actually doing it.
And I think the more you can do things like that, the bigger impact you have, and that's about doing things that people might not think are possible.
And I've been amazed, the more I learn about technology, the more I realize I don't know, and that's because this technological horizon, the thing that you can see to do next, the more you learn about technology, the more you learn what's possible.
You learn that the balloons are possible because there's some material that will work for them.
CR: What's interesting about you too, though, for me, is that, we have lots of people who are thinking about the future, and they are going and looking and they're coming back, but we never see the implementation.
I think of somebody you knew and read about, Tesla.
The principle of that for you is what?
LP: Well, I think invention is not enough.
If you invent something, Tesla invented electric power that we use, but he struggled to get it out to people.
That had to be done by other people.
It took a long time.
And I think if we can actually combine both things, where we have an innovation and invention focus, plus the ability to really -- a company that can really commercialize things and get them to people in a way that's positive for the world and to give people hope.
You know, I'm amazed with the Loon Project just how excited people were about that, because it gave them hope for the two thirds of the world that doesn't have Internet right now that's any good.
CR: Which is a second thing about corporations.
You are one of those people who believe that corporations are an agent of change if they are run well.
LP: Yeah. I'm really dismayed most people think companies are basically evil.
They get a bad rap.
And I think that's somewhat correct.
Companies are doing the same incremental thing that they did 50 years ago or 20 years ago.
That's not really what we need.
We need, especially in technology, we need revolutionary change, not incremental change.
CR: You once said, actually, as I think I've got this about right, that you might consider, rather than giving your money, if you were leaving it to some cause, just simply giving it to Elon Musk, because you had confidence that he would change the future, and that you would therefore — LP: Yeah, if you want to go Mars, he wants to go to Mars, to back up humanity, that's a worthy goal, but it's a company, and it's philanthropical.
So I think we aim to do kind of similar things.
And I think, you ask, we have a lot of employees at Google who have become pretty wealthy.
People make a lot of money in technology.
A lot of people in the room are pretty wealthy.
You're working because you want to change the world.
You want to make it better.
Why isn't the company that you work for worthy not just of your time but your money as well?
I mean, but we don't have a concept of that.
That's not how we think about companies, and I think it's sad, because companies are most of our effort.
They're where most of people's time is, where a lot of the money is, and so I think I'd like for us to help out more than we are.
CR: When I close conversations with lots of people, I always ask this question: What state of mind, what quality of mind is it that has served you best?
People like Rupert Murdoch have said curiosity, and other people in the media have said that.
Bill Gates and Warren Buffett have said focus.
What quality of mind, as I leave this audience, has enabled you to think about the future and at the same time change the present?
LP: You know, I think the most important thing -- I looked at lots of companies and why I thought they don't succeed over time.
We've had a more rapid turnover of companies.
And I said, what did they fundamentally do wrong?
What did those companies all do wrong?
And usually it's just that they missed the future.
And so I think, for me, I just try to focus on that and say, what is that future really going to be and how do we create it, and how do we cause our organization, to really focus on that and drive that at a really high rate?
And so that's been curiosity, it's been looking at things people might not think about, working on things that no one else is working on, because that's where the additionality really is, and be willing to do that, to take that risk.
Look at Android.
I felt guilty about working on Android when it was starting.
It was a little startup we bought.
It wasn't really what we were really working on.
And I felt guilty about spending time on that.
That was stupid.
That was the future, right?
That was a good thing to be working on.
CR: It is great to see you here.
It's great to hear from you, and a pleasure to sit at this table with you.
Thanks, Larry.
LP: Thank you.
(Applause) CR: Larry Page.
If I asked you to name a microbe that's living in your gut, many of you would probably say E. coli.
A lot of people say this. It's the best-known of the gut microbes.
But it turns out that E. coli is outnumbered in your gut about a thousand to one by other species, many of which you probably haven't heard of.
These are Bacteroides; Prevotella is another example.
Those are the two that dominate the modern human gut.
There are about a hundred trillion microbes living inside you.
We call this your microbiome, so it's like a little world living inside you -- actually more like a universe.
A hundred trillion means if you took a blade of grass and planted it for every microbe living in your gut, that could fill a million football fields.
So it's incredibly complex.
But interestingly, as our bodies have been adapting to life in modern society, we're losing some of our normal microbes, and at the same time, there are quite a few diseases related to the gut that are skyrocketing in developed nations all around the world.
And many of you probably know someone who suffers from obesity, diabetes, Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, allergies and asthma.
Every one of these diseases and many others related to metabolism and autoimmunity are linked to a loss of healthy diversity in the gut.
My lab got our first indication of this when actually we were studying non-human primates.
We wanted to find out what happens to a monkey's microbiome when they move from the jungle to a zoo.
Does their microbiome change? Do they pick up new bugs?
Do they lose some? Does it get better or worse?
We tracked two different species in the jungle, one in Vietnam, one in Costa Rica, and then we sequenced the DNA from their stool.
This is how we study the microbiome in my research lab.
And what we found in the DNA is that in the wild, these two species had totally different sets of microbes.
It was like a fingerprint for the species.
But in the zoo, they had lost most of that diversity and had acquired some other set of microbes.
So this was very curious.
We've got these two different microbiomes.
In the wild, picture a lush tropical rainforest living the guts of these monkeys.
That's the kind of diversity that we're talking about.
Then in the zoo, they've lost diversity.
Picture a rainforest that's been burned to the ground and taken over by a few invasive species.
That's more like the microbiome in a captive primate.
Now, in the meantime, many of the animals in the zoo are not doing so well.
They have issues with obesity, wasting, gastroenteritis, diarrhea, bloating, and some of them were barely holding onto their lives.
Now, of course, we were very interested to find out what are these so-called invasive species that are taking over in the zoo.
So we went back to the DNA, and what the DNA told us is that every monkey in the zoo had become dominated by Bacteroides and Prevotella, the same microbes that we all have in our guts as modern humans.
We wanted to find a way to visualize this, and we used some tools from multivariate ecology to put all of the microbiomes we were studying onto an axis.
And what you're seeing here is a distance plot where every point is a different animal's microbiome.
So every point represents a whole zoo of microbes.
And the microbiomes that have a lot of microbes in common are close to each other.
The ones that are very different are farther apart.
So this is showing you that the two groups of wild monkeys are over on the left.
The top left are these highly endangered monkeys called the red-shanked douc in Vietnam.
And at the bottom left are monkeys from Costa Rica.
So you can see that they have totally different microbiomes in the wild.
And then the same two species of monkey in the zoo are converging, so their microbiomes change and they become much more similar to each other, even though these are zoos on different continents, different geographical regions, and they're eating different diets.
Now, we did study some other species of primate.
What species of primate do you think is even more divergent from the wild primates than the captive primates?
Modern humans.
These are humans living in developing nations.
So they were more different from the wild primates than those in the zoo.
And the final group that we studied, all the way on the right, is people living in the USA.
And when I saw this figure, the hairs raised up on the back of my neck, because one way to think about it is, "Oh, that's interesting, captive monkeys are sort of on their way to becoming like Americans."
(Laughter) But the other way to think about it is that Americans are like super-captive monkeys.
And I was actually looking at this figure on my computer screen when I got the news that four of the red-shanked doucs had died in the zoo of gut-related issues.
So for some of these animals, having the right microbes living inside them may be a matter of survival.
Now this brings us to the human part of the story.
Obviously, the microbiomes in the USA aren't causing premature death as frequently as in the zoo, but we have major risk of obesity, diabetes, a number of these other diseases.
And this applies not just to people who have been living in the USA for many generations, but also to immigrants and refugees, who, for most immigrant and refugee groups, arrive in the USA metabolically healthy, and then within a few years, they become just as high-risk for obesity and diabetes as other Americans.
And we discussed this issue with two groups that have been coming to the USA from Southeast Asia: the Hmong, who started coming in the mid-1970s as refugees from the Vietnam War and the US secret war in Laos; and the Karen, who have been coming more recently as refugees from Myanmar.
So we've been working for a few years with these local communities and clinicians to study what happens to the Hmong and Karen microbiomes when people move from refugee camps and villages in Thailand to the USA.
And what we found is that when people come to the USA from these groups, they lose a large fraction of their microbiome, somewhere around 20 percent, and those who come to the USA and become obese lose about a third of their microbes.
So we know that moving to the USA is sufficient to cause a dramatic change in your microbiome, probably not for the better.
Are these microbes actually causing the obesity, or is the obesity causing a change in the microbes?
This is something that we're following up on, and the evidence we have now in my lab combined with evidence from a number of labs around the world tells us that certain changes in the microbiome do lead to obesity, and a number of other modern, kind of Westernized diseases.
The good news is that your microbiome can actually change.
Unlike your own genome, it's a living, breathing thing, and there's a broad front of research happening right now to better understand how we can restore our microbiomes when something goes wrong, using diet, using live microbes.
And in fact, one of the next steps for us is collecting and preserving microbes from healthy people around the world so that they can be kept as cultural assets for those groups to potentially protect them as they adapt to modern society, and to protect future generations who are currently growing up to have increased risk of these diseases with every generation.
I'm looking forward to a future where we have the tools that we need to restore and replenish our microbiomes, and in that world, the monkeys will live happier and healthier lives, and so will we.
(Applause)
In many patriarchal societies and tribal societies, fathers are usually known by their sons, but I'm one of the few fathers who is known by his daughter, and I am proud of it.
(Applause) Malala started her campaign for education and stood for her rights in 2007, and when her efforts were honored in 2011, and she was given the national youth peace prize, and she became a very famous, very popular young girl of her country.
Before that, she was my daughter, but now I am her father.
Ladies and gentlemen, if we glance to human history, the story of women is the story of injustice, inequality, violence and exploitation.
You see, in patriarchal societies, right from the very beginning, when a girl is born, her birth is not celebrated.
She is not welcomed, neither by father nor by mother.
The neighborhood comes and commiserates with the mother, and nobody congratulates the father.
And a mother is very uncomfortable for having a girl child.
When she gives birth to the first girl child, first daughter, she is sad.
When she gives birth to the second daughter, she is shocked, and in the expectation of a son, when she gives birth to a third daughter, she feels guilty like a criminal.
Not only the mother suffers, but the daughter, the newly born daughter, when she grows old, she suffers too.
At the age of five, while she should be going to school, she stays at home and her brothers are admitted in a school.
Until the age of 12, somehow, she has a good life.
She can have fun.
She can play with her friends in the streets, and she can move around in the streets like a butterfly.
But when she enters her teens, when she becomes 13 years old, she is forbidden to go out of her home without a male escort.
She is confined under the four walls of her home.
She is no more a free individual.
She becomes the so-called honor of her father and of her brothers and of her family, and if she transgresses the code of that so-called honor, she could even be killed.
And it is also interesting that this so-called code of honor, it does not only affect the life of a girl, it also affects the life of the male members of the family.
I know a family of seven sisters and one brother, and that one brother, he has migrated to the Gulf countries, to earn a living for his seven sisters and parents, because he thinks that it will be humiliating if his seven sisters learn a skill and they go out of the home and earn some livelihood.
So this brother, he sacrifices the joys of his life and the happiness of his sisters at the altar of so-called honor.
And there is one more norm of the patriarchal societies that is called obedience.
A good girl is supposed to be very quiet, very humble and very submissive.
It is the criteria.
The role model good girl should be very quiet.
She is supposed to be silent and she is supposed to accept the decisions of her father and mother and the decisions of elders, even if she does not like them.
If she is married to a man she doesn't like or if she is married to an old man, she has to accept, because she does not want to be dubbed as disobedient.
If she is married very early, she has to accept.
Otherwise, she will be called disobedient.
And what happens at the end?
In the words of a poetess, she is wedded, bedded, and then she gives birth to more sons and daughters.
And it is the irony of the situation that this mother, she teaches the same lesson of obedience to her daughter and the same lesson of honor to her sons.
And this vicious cycle goes on, goes on.
Ladies and gentlemen, this plight of millions of women could be changed if we think differently, if women and men think differently, if men and women in the tribal and patriarchal societies in the developing countries, if they can break a few norms of family and society, if they can abolish the discriminatory laws of the systems in their states, which go against the basic human rights of the women.
Dear brothers and sisters, when Malala was born, and for the first time, believe me, I don't like newborn children, to be honest, but when I went and I looked into her eyes, believe me, I got extremely honored.
And long before she was born, I thought about her name, and I was fascinated with a heroic legendary freedom fighter in Afghanistan.
Her name was Malalai of Maiwand, and I named my daughter after her.
A few days after Malala was born, my daughter was born, my cousin came -- and it was a coincidence -- he came to my home and he brought a family tree, a family tree of the Yousafzai family, and when I looked at the family tree, it traced back to 300 years of our ancestors.
But when I looked, all were men, and I picked my pen, drew a line from my name, and wrote, "Malala."
And when she grow old, when she was four and a half years old, I admitted her in my school.
You will be asking, then, why should I mention about the admission of a girl in a school?
Yes, I must mention it.
It may be taken for granted in Canada, in America, in many developed countries, but in poor countries, in patriarchal societies, in tribal societies, it's a big event for the life of girl.
Enrollment in a school means recognition of her identity and her name.
Admission in a school means that she has entered the world of dreams and aspirations where she can explore her potentials for her future life.
I have five sisters, and none of them could go to school, and you will be astonished, two weeks before, when I was filling out the Canadian visa form, and I was filling out the family part of the form, I could not recall the surnames of some of my sisters.
And the reason was that I have never, never seen the names of my sisters written on any document.
That was the reason that I valued my daughter.
What my father could not give to my sisters and to his daughters, I thought I must change it.
I used to appreciate the intelligence and the brilliance of my daughter.
I encouraged her to sit with me when my friends used to come.
I encouraged her to go with me to different meetings.
And all these good values, I tried to inculcate in her personality.
And this was not only she, only Malala.
I imparted all these good values to my school, girl students and boy students as well.
I used education for emancipation.
I taught my girls, I taught my girl students, to unlearn the lesson of obedience.
I taught my boy students to unlearn the lesson of so-called pseudo-honor.
Dear brothers and sisters, we were striving for more rights for women, and we were struggling to have more, more and more space for the women in society.
But we came across a new phenomenon.
It was lethal to human rights and particularly to women's rights.
It was called Talibanization.
It means a complete negation of women's participation in all political, economical and social activities.
Hundreds of schools were lost.
Girls were prohibited from going to school.
Women were forced to wear veils and they were stopped from going to the markets.
Musicians were silenced, girls were flogged and singers were killed.
Millions were suffering, but few spoke, and it was the most scary thing when you have all around such people who kill and who flog, and you speak for your rights.
It's really the most scary thing.
At the age of 10, Malala stood, and she stood for the right of education.
She wrote a diary for the BBC blog, she volunteered herself for the New York Times documentaries, and she spoke from every platform she could.
And her voice was the most powerful voice.
It spread like a crescendo all around the world.
And that was the reason the Taliban could not tolerate her campaign, and on October 9 2012, she was shot in the head at point blank range.
It was a doomsday for my family and for me.
The world turned into a big black hole.
While my daughter was on the verge of life and death, I whispered into the ears of my wife, "Should I be blamed for what happened to my daughter and your daughter?"
And she abruptly told me, "Please don't blame yourself.
You stood for the right cause.
You put your life at stake for the cause of truth, for the cause of peace, and for the cause of education, and your daughter in inspired from you and she joined you.
You both were on the right path and God will protect her."
These few words meant a lot to me, and I didn't ask this question again.
When Malala was in the hospital, and she was going through the severe pains and she had had severe headaches because her facial nerve was cut down, I used to see a dark shadow spreading on the face of my wife.
But my daughter never complained.
She used to tell us, "I'm fine with my crooked smile and with my numbness in my face.
I'll be okay. Please don't worry."
She was a solace for us, and she consoled us.
Dear brothers and sisters, we learned from her how to be resilient in the most difficult times, and I'm glad to share with you that despite being an icon for the rights of children and women, she is like any 16-year old girl.
She cries when her homework is incomplete.
She quarrels with her brothers, and I am very happy for that.
People ask me, what special is in my mentorship which has made Malala so bold and so courageous and so vocal and poised?
I tell them, don't ask me what I did.
Ask me what I did not do.
I did not clip her wings, and that's all.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause)
A herd of wildebeests, a shoal of fish, a flock of birds.
Many animals gather in large groups that are among the most wonderful spectacles in the natural world.
But why do these groups form?
The common answers include things like seeking safety in numbers or hunting in packs or gathering to mate or breed, and all of these explanations, while often true, make a huge assumption about animal behavior, that the animals are in control of their own actions, that they are in charge of their bodies.
And that is often not the case.
This is Artemia, a brine shrimp.
You probably know it better as a sea monkey.
It's small, and it typically lives alone, but it can gather in these large red swarms that span for meters, and these form because of a parasite.
These shrimp are infected with a tapeworm.
A tapeworm is effectively a long, living gut with genitals at one end and a hooked mouth at the other.
As a freelance journalist, I sympathize.
(Laughter) The tapeworm drains nutrients from Artemia's body, but it also does other things.
It castrates them, it changes their color from transparent to bright red, it makes them live longer, and as biologist Nicolas Rode has found, it makes them swim in groups.
Why? Because the tapeworm, like many other parasites, has a complicated life cycle involving many different hosts.
The shrimp are just one step on its journey.
Its ultimate destination is this, the greater flamingo.
Only in a flamingo can the tapeworm reproduce, so to get there, it manipulates its shrimp hosts into forming these conspicuous colored swarms that are easier for a flamingo to spot and to devour, and that is the secret of the Artemia swarm.
They aren't sociable through their own volition, but because they are being controlled.
It's not safety in numbers.
It's actually the exact opposite.
The tapeworm hijacks their brains and their bodies, turning them into vehicles for getting itself into a flamingo.
And here is another example of a parasitic manipulation.
This is a suicidal cricket.
This cricket swallowed the larvae of a Gordian worm, or horsehair worm.
The worm grew to adult size within it, but it needs to get into water in order to mate, and it does that by releasing proteins that addle the cricket's brain, causing it to behave erratically.
When the cricket nears a body of water, such as this swimming pool, it jumps in and drowns, and the worm wriggles out of its suicidal corpse.
Crickets are really roomy. Who knew?
The tapeworm and the Gordian worm are not alone.
They are part of an entire cavalcade of mind-controlling parasites, of fungi, viruses, and worms and insects and more that all specialize in subverting and overriding the wills of their hosts.
Now, I first learned about this way of life through David Attenborough's "Trials of Life" about 20 years ago, and then later through a wonderful book called "Parasite Rex" by my friend Carl Zimmer.
And I've been writing about these creatures ever since.
Few topics in biology enthrall me more.
It's like the parasites have subverted my own brain.
Because after all, they are always compelling and they are delightfully macabre.
When you write about parasites, your lexicon swells with phrases like "devoured alive" and "bursts out of its body."
(Laughter) But there's more to it than that.
I'm a writer, and fellow writers in the audience will know that we love stories.
Parasites invite us to resist the allure of obvious stories.
Their world is one of plot twists and unexpected explanations.
Why, for example, does this caterpillar start violently thrashing about when another insect gets close to it and those white cocoons that it seems to be standing guard over?
Is it maybe protecting its siblings?
No.
This caterpillar was attacked by a parasitic wasp which laid eggs inside it.
The eggs hatched and the young wasps devoured the caterpillar alive before bursting out of its body.
See what I mean?
Now, the caterpillar didn't die.
Some of the wasps seemed to stay behind and controlled it into defending their siblings which are metamorphosing into adults within those cocoons.
This caterpillar is a head-banging zombie bodyguard defending the offspring of the creature that killed it.
(Applause) We have a lot to get through. I only have 13 minutes. (Laughter) Now, some of you are probably just desperately clawing for some solace in the idea that these things are oddities of the natural world, that they are outliers, and that point of view is understandable, because by their nature, parasites are quite small and they spend a lot of their time inside the bodies of other things.
They're easy to overlook, but that doesn't mean that they aren't important.
A few years back, a man called Kevin Lafferty took a group of scientists into three Californian estuaries and they pretty much weighed and dissected and recorded everything they could find, and what they found were parasites in extreme abundance.
Especially common were trematodes, tiny worms that specialize in castrating their hosts like this unfortunate snail.
Now, a single trematode is tiny, microscopic, but collectively they weighed as much as all the fish in the estuaries and three to nine times more than all the birds.
And remember the Gordian worm that I showed you, the cricket thing?
One Japanese scientist called Takuya Sato found that in one stream, these things drive so many crickets and grasshoppers into the water that the drowned insects make up some 60 percent of the diet of local trout.
Manipulation is not an oddity.
It is a critical and common part of the world around us, and scientists have now found hundreds of examples of such manipulators, and more excitingly, they're starting to understand exactly how these creatures control their hosts.
And this is one of my favorite examples.
This is Ampulex compressa, the emerald cockroach wasp, and it is a truth universally acknowledged that an emerald cockroach wasp in possession of some fertilized eggs must be in want of a cockroach.
When she finds one, she stabs it with a stinger that is also a sense organ.
This discovery came out three weeks ago.
She stabs it with a stinger that is a sense organ equipped with small sensory bumps that allow her to feel the distinctive texture of a roach's brain.
So like a person blindly rooting about in a bag, she finds the brain, and she injects it with venom into two very specific clusters of neurons.
Israeli scientists Frederic Libersat and Ram Gal found that the venom is a very specific chemical weapon.
It doesn't kill the roach, nor does it sedate it.
The roach could walk away or fly or run if it chose to, but it doesn't choose to, because the venom nixes its motivation to walk, and only that.
The wasp basically un-checks the escape-from-danger box in the roach's operating system, allowing her to lead her helpless victim back to her lair by its antennae like a person walking a dog.
And once there, she lays an egg on it, egg hatches, devoured alive, bursts out of body, yadda yadda yadda, you know the drill.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now I would argue that, once stung, the cockroach isn't a roach anymore.
It's more of an extension of the wasp, just like the cricket was an extension of the Gordian worm.
These hosts won't get to survive or reproduce.
They have as much control over their own fates as my car.
Once the parasites get in, the hosts don't get a say.
Now humans, of course, are no stranger to manipulation.
We take drugs to shift the chemistries of our brains and to change our moods, and what are arguments or advertising or big ideas if not an attempt to influence someone else's mind?
But our attempts at doing this are crude and blundering compared to the fine-grained specificity of the parasites.
Don Draper only wishes he was as elegant and precise as the emerald cockroach wasp.
Now, I think this is part of what makes parasites so sinister and so compelling.
We place such a premium on our free will and our independence that the prospect of losing those qualities to forces unseen informs many of our deepest societal fears.
Orwellian dystopias and shadowy cabals and mind-controlling supervillains -- these are tropes that fill our darkest fiction, but in nature, they happen all the time.
Which leads me to an obvious and disquieting question: Are there dark, sinister parasites that are influencing our behavior without us knowing about it, besides the NSA?
If there are any — (Laughter) (Applause) I've got a red dot on my forehead now, don't I?
(Laughter) If there are any, this is a good candidate for them.
This is Toxoplasma gondii, or Toxo, for short, because the terrifying creature always deserves a cute nickname.
Toxo infects mammals, a wide variety of mammals, but it can only sexually reproduce in a cat.
And scientists like Joanne Webster have shown that if Toxo gets into a rat or a mouse, it turns the rodent into a cat-seeking missile.
If the infected rat smells the delightful odor of cat piss, it runs towards the source of the smell rather than the more sensible direction of away.
The cat eats the rat. Toxo gets to have sex.
It's a classic tale of Eat, Prey, Love.
(Laughter) (Applause) You're very charitable, generous people.
Hi, Elizabeth, I loved your talk.
How does the parasite control its host in this way?
We don't really know.
We know that Toxo releases an enzyme that makes dopamine, a substance involved in reward and motivation.
We know it targets certain parts of a rodent's brain, including those involved in sexual arousal.
But how those puzzle pieces fit together is not immediately clear.
What is clear is that this thing is a single cell.
This has no nervous system.
It has no consciousness.
It doesn't even have a body.
But it's manipulating a mammal?
We are mammals.
We are more intelligent than a mere rat, to be sure, but our brains have the same basic structure, the same types of cells, the same chemicals running through them, and the same parasites.
Estimates vary a lot, but some figures suggest that one in three people around the world have Toxo in their brains.
Now typically, this doesn't lead to any overt illness.
The parasite holds up in a dormant state for a long period of time.
But there's some evidence that those people who are carriers score slightly differently on personality questionnaires than other people, that they have a slightly higher risk of car accidents, and there's some evidence that people with schizophrenia are more likely to be infected.
Now, I think this evidence is still inconclusive, and even among Toxo researchers, opinion is divided as to whether the parasite is truly influencing our behavior.
But given the widespread nature of such manipulations, it would be completely implausible for humans to be the only species that weren't similarly affected.
And I think that this capacity to constantly subvert our way of thinking about the world makes parasites amazing.
They're constantly inviting us to look at the natural world sideways, and to ask if the behaviors we're seeing, whether they're simple and obvious or baffling and puzzling, are not the results of individuals acting through their own accord but because they are being bent to the control of something else.
And while that idea may be disquieting, and while parasites' habits may be very grisly, I think that ability to surprise us makes them as wonderful and as charismatic as any panda or butterfly or dolphin.
At the end of "On the Origin of Species," Charles Darwin writes about the grandeur of life, and of endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful, and I like to think he could easily have been talking about a tapeworm that makes shrimp sociable or a wasp that takes cockroaches for walks.
But perhaps, that's just a parasite talking.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Good morning.
When I was a little boy, I had an experience that changed my life, and is in fact why I'm here today.
That one moment profoundly affected how I think about art, design and engineering.
As background, I was fortunate enough to grow up in a family of loving and talented artists in one of the world's great cities.
My dad, John Ferren, who died when I was 15, was an artist by both passion and profession, as is my mom, Rae.
He was one of the New York School abstract expressionists who, together with his contemporaries, invented American modern art, and contributed to moving the American zeitgeist towards modernism in the 20th century.
Isn't it remarkable that, after thousands of years of people doing mostly representational art, that modern art, comparatively speaking, is about 15 minutes old, yet now pervasive.
As with many other important innovations, those radical ideas required no new technology, just fresh thinking and a willingness to experiment, plus resiliency in the face of near-universal criticism and rejection.
In our home, art was everywhere.
It was like oxygen, around us and necessary for life.
As I watched him paint, Dad taught me that art was not about being decorative, but was a different way of communicating ideas, and in fact one that could bridge the worlds of knowledge and insight.
Given this rich artistic environment, you'd assume that I would have been compelled to go into the family business, but no.
I followed the path of most kids who are genetically programmed to make their parents crazy.
I had no interest in becoming an artist, certainly not a painter.
What I did love was electronics and machines -- taking them apart, building new ones, and making them work.
Fortunately, my family also had engineers in it, and with my parents, these were my first role models.
What they all had in common was they worked very, very hard.
My grandpa owned and operated a sheet metal kitchen cabinet factory in Brooklyn.
On weekends, we would go together to Cortlandt Street, which was New York City's radio row.
There we would explore massive piles of surplus electronics, and for a few bucks bring home treasures like Norden bombsights and parts from the first IBM tube-based computers.
I found these objects both useful and fascinating.
I learned about engineering and how things worked, not at school but by taking apart and studying these fabulously complex devices.
I did this for hours every day, apparently avoiding electrocution.
Life was good.
However, every summer, sadly, the machines got left behind while my parents and I traveled overseas to experience history, art and design.
We visited the great museums and historic buildings of both Europe and the Middle East, but to encourage my growing interest in science and technology, they would simply drop me off in places like the London Science Museum, where I would wander endlessly for hours by myself studying the history of science and technology.
Then, when I was about nine years old, we went to Rome.
On one particularly hot summer day, we visited a drum-shaped building that from the outside was not particularly interesting.
My dad said it was called the Pantheon, a temple for all of the gods.
It didn't look all that special from the outside, as I said, but when we walked inside, I was immediately struck by three things: First of all, it was pleasantly cool despite the oppressive heat outside.
It was very dark, the only source of light being an big open hole in the roof.
Dad explained that this wasn't a big open hole, but it was called the oculus, an eye to the heavens.
And there was something about this place, I didn't know why, that just felt special.
As we walked to the center of the room, I looked up at the heavens through the oculus.
This was the first church that I'd been to that provided an unrestricted view between God and man.
But I wondered, what about when it rained?
Dad may have called this an oculus, but it was, in fact, a big hole in the roof.
I looked down and saw floor drains had been cut into the stone floor.
As I became more accustomed to the dark, I was able to make out details of the floor and the surrounding walls.
No big deal here, just the same statuary stuff that we'd seen all over Rome.
In fact, it looked like the Appian Way marble salesman showed up with his sample book, showed it to Hadrian, and Hadrian said, "We'll take all of it."
(Laughter) But the ceiling was amazing.
It looked like a Buckminster Fuller geodesic dome.
I'd seen these before, and Bucky was friends with my dad.
It was modern, high-tech, impressive, a huge 142-foot clear span which, not coincidentally, was exactly its height.
I loved this place.
It was really beautiful and unlike anything I'd ever seen before, so I asked my dad, "When was this built?"
He said, "About 2,000 years ago."
And I said, "No, I mean, the roof."
You see, I assumed that this was a modern roof that had been put on because the original was destroyed in some long-past war.
He said, "It's the original roof."
That moment changed my life, and I can remember it as if it were yesterday.
For the first time, I realized people were smart 2,000 years ago. (Laughter) This had never crossed my mind.
I mean, to me, the pyramids at Giza, we visited those the year before, and sure they're impressive, nice enough design, but look, give me an unlimited budget, 20,000 to 40,000 laborers, and about 10 to 20 years to cut and drag stone blocks across the countryside, and I'll build you pyramids too.
But no amount of brute force gets you the dome of the Pantheon, not 2,000 years ago, nor today.
And incidentally, it is still the largest unreinforced concrete dome that's ever been built.
To build the Pantheon took some miracles.
By miracles, I mean things that are technically barely possible, very high-risk, and might not be actually accomplishable at this moment in time, certainly not by you.
For example, here are some of the Pantheon's miracles.
To make it even structurally possible, they had to invent super-strong concrete, and to control weight, varied the density of the aggregate as they worked their way up the dome.
For strength and lightness, the dome structure used five rings of coffers, each of diminishing size, which imparts a dramatic forced perspective to the design.
It was wonderfully cool inside because of its huge thermal mass, natural convection of air rising up through the oculus, and a Venturi effect when wind blows across the top of the building.
I discovered for the first time that light itself has substance.
The shaft of light beaming through the oculus was both beautiful and palpable, and I realized for the first time that light could be designed.
Further, that of all of the forms of design, visual design, they were all kind of irrelevant without it, because without light, you can't see any of them.
I also realized that I wasn't the first person to think that this place was really special.
It survived gravity, barbarians, looters, developers and the ravages of time to become what I believe is the longest continuously occupied building in history.
Largely because of that visit, I came to understand that, contrary to what I was being told in school, the worlds of art and design were not, in fact, incompatible with science and engineering.
I realized, when combined, you could create things that were amazing that couldn't be done in either domain alone.
But in school, with few exceptions, they were treated as separate worlds, and they still are.
My teachers told me that I had to get serious and focus on one or the other.
However, urging me to specialize only caused me to really appreciate those polymaths like Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Benjamin Franklin, people who did exactly the opposite.
And this led me to embrace and want to be in both worlds.
So then how do these projects of unprecedented creative vision and technical complexity like the Pantheon actually happen?
Someone themselves, perhaps Hadrian, needed a brilliant creative vision.
They also needed the storytelling and leadership skills necessary to fund and execute it, and a mastery of science and technology with the ability and knowhow to push existing innovations even farther.
It is my belief that to create these rare game changers requires you to pull off at least five miracles.
The problem is, no matter how talented, rich or smart you are, you only get one to one and a half miracles.
That's it. That's the quota.
Then you run out of time, money, enthusiasm, whatever.
Remember, most people can't even imagine one of these technical miracles, and you need at least five to make a Pantheon.
In my experience, these rare visionaries who can think across the worlds of art, design and engineering have the ability to notice when others have provided enough of the miracles to bring the goal within reach.
Driven by the clarity of their vision, they summon the courage and determination to deliver the remaining miracles and they often take what other people think to be insurmountable obstacles and turn them into features.
Take the oculus of the Pantheon.
By insisting that it be in the design, it meant you couldn't use much of the structural technology that had been developed for Roman arches.
However, by instead embracing it and rethinking weight and stress distribution, they came up with a design that only works if there's a big hole in the roof.
That done, you now get the aesthetic and design benefits of light, cooling and that critical direct connection with the heavens.
Not bad.
These people not only believed that the impossible can be done, but that it must be done.
Enough ancient history.
What are some recent examples of innovations that combine creative design and technological advances in a way so profound that they will be remembered a thousand years from now?
Well, putting a man on the moon was a good one, and returning him safely to Earth wasn't bad either.
Talk about one giant leap: It's hard to imagine a more profound moment in human history than when we first left our world to set foot on another.
So what came after the moon?
One is tempted to say that today's pantheon is the Internet, but I actually think that's quite wrong, or at least it's only part of the story.
The Internet isn't a Pantheon.
It's more like the invention of concrete: important, absolutely necessary to build the Pantheon, and enduring, but entirely insufficient by itself.
However, just as the technology of concrete was critical in realization of the Pantheon, new designers will use the technologies of the Internet to create novel concepts that will endure.
The smartphone is a perfect example.
Soon the majority of people on the planet will have one, and the idea of connecting everyone to both knowledge and each other will endure.
So what's next?
What imminent advance will be the equivalent of the Pantheon?
Thinking about this, I rejected many very plausible and dramatic breakthroughs to come, such as curing cancer.
Why? Because Pantheons are anchored in designed physical objects, ones that inspire by simply seeing and experiencing them, and will continue to do so indefinitely.
It is a different kind of language, like art.
These other vital contributions that extend life and relieve suffering are, of course, critical, and fantastic, but they're part of the continuum of our overall knowledge and technology, like the Internet.
So what is next?
Perhaps counterintuitively, I'm guessing it's a visionary idea from the late 1930s that's been revived every decade since: autonomous vehicles.
Now you're thinking, give me a break.
How can a fancy version of cruise control be profound?
Look, much of our world has been designed around roads and transportation.
These were as essential to the success of the Roman Empire as the interstate highway system to the prosperity and development of the United States.
Today, these roads that interconnect our world are dominated by cars and trucks that have remained largely unchanged for 100 years.
Although perhaps not obvious today, autonomous vehicles will be the key technology that enables us to redesign our cities and, by extension, civilization.
Here's why: Once they become ubiquitous, each year, these vehicles will save tens of thousands of lives in the United States alone and a million globally.
Automotive energy consumption and air pollution will be cut dramatically.
Much of the road congestion in and out of our cities will disappear.
They will enable compelling new concepts in how we design cities, work, and the way we live.
We will get where we're going faster and society will recapture vast amounts of lost productivity now spent sitting in traffic basically polluting.
But why now? Why do we think this is ready?
Because over the last 30 years, people from outside the automotive industry have spent countless billions creating the needed miracles, but for entirely different purposes.
It took folks like DARPA, universities, and companies completely outside of the automotive industry to notice that if you were clever about it, autonomy could be done now.
So what are the five miracles needed for autonomous vehicles?
One, you need to know where you are and exactly what time it is.
This was solved neatly by the GPS system, Global Positioning System, that the U.S. Government put in place.
You need to know where all the roads are, what the rules are, and where you're going.
The various needs of personal navigation systems, in-car navigation systems, and web-based maps address this.
You must have near-continuous communication with high-performance computing networks and with others nearby to understand their intent.
The wireless technologies developed for mobile devices, with some minor modifications, are completely suitable to solve this.
You'll probably want some restricted roadways to get started that both society and its lawyers agree are safe to use for this.
This will start with the HOV lanes and move from there.
But finally, you need to recognize people, signs and objects.
Machine vision, special sensors, and high-performance computing can do a lot of this, but it turns out a lot is not good enough when your family is on board.
Occasionally, humans will need to do sense-making.
For this, you might actually have to wake up your passenger and ask them what the hell that big lump is in the middle of the road.
Not so bad, and it will give us a sense of purpose in this new world.
Besides, once the first drivers explain to their confused car that the giant chicken at the fork in the road is actually a restaurant, and it's okay to keep driving, every other car on the surface of the Earth will know that from that point on.
Five miracles, mostly delivered, and now you just need a clear vision of a better world filled with autonomous vehicles with seductively beautiful and new functional designs plus a lot of money and hard work to bring it home.
The beginning is now only a handful of years away, and I predict that autonomous vehicles will permanently change our world over the next several decades.
In conclusion, I've come to believe that the ingredients for the next Pantheons are all around us, just waiting for visionary people with the broad knowledge, multidisciplinary skills, and intense passion to harness them to make their dreams a reality.
But these people don't spontaneously pop into existence.
They need to be nurtured and encouraged from when they're little kids.
We need to love them and help them discover their passions.
We need to encourage them to work hard and help them understand that failure is a necessary ingredient for success, as is perseverance.
We need to help them to find their own role models, and give them the confidence to believe in themselves and to believe that anything is possible, and just as my grandpa did when he took me shopping for surplus, and just as my parents did when they took me to science museums, we need to encourage them to find their own path, even if it's very different from our own.
But a cautionary note: We also need to periodically pry them away from their modern miracles, the computers, phones, tablets, game machines and TVs, take them out into the sunlight so they can experience both the natural and design wonders of our world, our planet and our civilization.
If we don't, they won't understand what these precious things are that someday they will be resopnsible for protecting and improving.
We also need them to understand something that doesn't seem adequately appreciated in our increasingly tech-dependent world, that art and design are not luxuries, nor somehow incompatible with science and engineering.
They are in fact essential to what makes us special.
Someday, if you get the chance, perhaps you can take your kids to the actual Pantheon, as we will our daughter Kira, to experience firsthand the power of that astonishing design, which on one otherwise unremarkable day in Rome, reached 2,000 years into the future to set the course for my life.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If you remember that first decade of the web, it was really a static place.
You could go online, you could look at pages, and they were put up either by organizations who had teams to do it or by individuals who were really tech-savvy for the time.
And with the rise of social media and social networks in the early 2000s, the web was completely changed to a place where now the vast majority of content we interact with is put up by average users, either in YouTube videos or blog posts or product reviews or social media postings.
And it's also become a much more interactive place, where people are interacting with others, they're commenting, they're sharing, they're not just reading.
So Facebook is not the only place you can do this, but it's the biggest, and it serves to illustrate the numbers.
Facebook has 1.2 billion users per month.
So half the Earth's Internet population is using Facebook.
They are a site, along with others, that has allowed people to create an online persona with very little technical skill, and people responded by putting huge amounts of personal data online.
So the result is that we have behavioral, preference, demographic data for hundreds of millions of people, which is unprecedented in history.
And as a computer scientist, what this means is that I've been able to build models that can predict all sorts of hidden attributes for all of you that you don't even know you're sharing information about.
As scientists, we use that to help the way people interact online, but there's less altruistic applications, and there's a problem in that users don't really understand these techniques and how they work, and even if they did, they don't have a lot of control over it.
So what I want to talk to you about today is some of these things that we're able to do, and then give us some ideas of how we might go forward to move some control back into the hands of users.
So this is Target, the company.
I didn't just put that logo on this poor, pregnant woman's belly.
You may have seen this anecdote that was printed in Forbes magazine where Target sent a flyer to this 15-year-old girl with advertisements and coupons for baby bottles and diapers and cribs two weeks before she told her parents that she was pregnant.
Yeah, the dad was really upset.
He said, "How did Target figure out that this high school girl was pregnant before she told her parents?"
It turns out that they have the purchase history for hundreds of thousands of customers and they compute what they call a pregnancy score, which is not just whether or not a woman's pregnant, but what her due date is.
And they compute that not by looking at the obvious things, like, she's buying a crib or baby clothes, but things like, she bought more vitamins than she normally had, or she bought a handbag that's big enough to hold diapers.
And by themselves, those purchases don't seem like they might reveal a lot, but it's a pattern of behavior that, when you take it in the context of thousands of other people, starts to actually reveal some insights.
So that's the kind of thing that we do when we're predicting stuff about you on social media.
We're looking for little patterns of behavior that, when you detect them among millions of people, lets us find out all kinds of things.
So in my lab and with colleagues, we've developed mechanisms where we can quite accurately predict things like your political preference, your personality score, gender, sexual orientation, religion, age, intelligence, along with things like how much you trust the people you know and how strong those relationships are.
We can do all of this really well.
And again, it doesn't come from what you might think of as obvious information.
So my favorite example is from this study that was published this year in the Proceedings of the National Academies.
If you Google this, you'll find it.
It's four pages, easy to read.
And they looked at just people's Facebook likes, so just the things you like on Facebook, and used that to predict all these attributes, along with some other ones.
And in their paper they listed the five likes that were most indicative of high intelligence.
And among those was liking a page for curly fries. (Laughter) Curly fries are delicious, but liking them does not necessarily mean that you're smarter than the average person.
So how is it that one of the strongest indicators of your intelligence is liking this page when the content is totally irrelevant to the attribute that's being predicted?
And it turns out that we have to look at a whole bunch of underlying theories to see why we're able to do this.
One of them is a sociological theory called homophily, which basically says people are friends with people like them.
So if you're smart, you tend to be friends with smart people, and if you're young, you tend to be friends with young people, and this is well established for hundreds of years.
We also know a lot about how information spreads through networks.
It turns out things like viral videos or Facebook likes or other information spreads in exactly the same way that diseases spread through social networks.
So this is something we've studied for a long time.
We have good models of it.
And so you can put those things together and start seeing why things like this happen.
So if I were to give you a hypothesis, it would be that a smart guy started this page, or maybe one of the first people who liked it would have scored high on that test.
And they liked it, and their friends saw it, and by homophily, we know that he probably had smart friends, and so it spread to them, and some of them liked it, and they had smart friends, and so it spread to them, and so it propagated through the network to a host of smart people, so that by the end, the action of liking the curly fries page is indicative of high intelligence, not because of the content, but because the actual action of liking reflects back the common attributes of other people who have done it.
So this is pretty complicated stuff, right?
It's a hard thing to sit down and explain to an average user, and even if you do, what can the average user do about it?
How do you know that you've liked something that indicates a trait for you that's totally irrelevant to the content of what you've liked?
There's a lot of power that users don't have to control how this data is used.
And I see that as a real problem going forward.
So I think there's a couple paths that we want to look at if we want to give users some control over how this data is used, because it's not always going to be used for their benefit.
An example I often give is that, if I ever get bored being a professor, I'm going to go start a company that predicts all of these attributes and things like how well you work in teams and if you're a drug user, if you're an alcoholic.
We know how to predict all that.
And I'm going to sell reports to H.R. companies and big businesses that want to hire you.
We totally can do that now.
I could start that business tomorrow, and you would have absolutely no control over me using your data like that.
That seems to me to be a problem.
So one of the paths we can go down is the policy and law path.
And in some respects, I think that that would be most effective, but the problem is we'd actually have to do it.
Observing our political process in action makes me think it's highly unlikely that we're going to get a bunch of representatives to sit down, learn about this, and then enact sweeping changes to intellectual property law in the U.S.
so users control their data.
We could go the policy route, where social media companies say, you know what? You own your data.
You have total control over how it's used.
The problem is that the revenue models for most social media companies rely on sharing or exploiting users' data in some way.
It's sometimes said of Facebook that the users aren't the customer, they're the product.
And so how do you get a company to cede control of their main asset back to the users?
It's possible, but I don't think it's something that we're going to see change quickly.
So I think the other path that we can go down that's going to be more effective is one of more science.
It's doing science that allowed us to develop all these mechanisms for computing this personal data in the first place.
And it's actually very similar research that we'd have to do if we want to develop mechanisms that can say to a user, "Here's the risk of that action you just took."
By liking that Facebook page, or by sharing this piece of personal information, you've now improved my ability to predict whether or not you're using drugs or whether or not you get along well in the workplace.
And that, I think, can affect whether or not people want to share something, keep it private, or just keep it offline altogether.
We can also look at things like allowing people to encrypt data that they upload, so it's kind of invisible and worthless to sites like Facebook or third party services that access it, but that select users who the person who posted it want to see it have access to see it.
This is all super exciting research from an intellectual perspective, and so scientists are going to be willing to do it.
So that gives us an advantage over the law side.
One of the problems that people bring up when I talk about this is, they say, you know, if people start keeping all this data private, all those methods that you've been developing to predict their traits are going to fail.
And I say, absolutely, and for me, that's success, because as a scientist, my goal is not to infer information about users, it's to improve the way people interact online.
And sometimes that involves inferring things about them, but if users don't want me to use that data, I think they should have the right to do that.
I want users to be informed and consenting users of the tools that we develop.
And so I think encouraging this kind of science and supporting researchers who want to cede some of that control back to users and away from the social media companies means that going forward, as these tools evolve and advance, means that we're going to have an educated and empowered user base, and I think all of us can agree that that's a pretty ideal way to go forward.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My job at Twitter is to ensure user trust, protect user rights and keep users safe, both from each other and, at times, from themselves.
Let's talk about what scale looks like at Twitter.
Back in January 2009, we saw more than two million new tweets each day on the platform.
January 2014, more than 500 million.
We were seeing two million tweets in less than six minutes.
That's a 24,900-percent increase.
Now, the vast majority of activity on Twitter puts no one in harm's way.
There's no risk involved.
My job is to root out and prevent activity that might.
Sounds straightforward, right?
You might even think it'd be easy, given that I just said the vast majority of activity on Twitter puts no one in harm's way.
Why spend so much time searching for potential calamities in innocuous activities?
Given the scale that Twitter is at, a one-in-a-million chance happens 500 times a day.
It's the same for other companies dealing at this sort of scale.
For us, edge cases, those rare situations that are unlikely to occur, are more like norms.
Say 99.999 percent of tweets pose no risk to anyone.
There's no threat involved.
Maybe people are documenting travel landmarks like Australia's Heart Reef, or tweeting about a concert they're attending, or sharing pictures of cute baby animals.
After you take out that 99.999 percent, that tiny percentage of tweets remaining works out to roughly 150,000 per month.
The sheer scale of what we're dealing with makes for a challenge.
You know what else makes my role particularly challenging?
People do weird things.
(Laughter) And I have to figure out what they're doing, why, and whether or not there's risk involved, often without much in terms of context or background.
I'm going to show you some examples that I've run into during my time at Twitter -- these are all real examples — of situations that at first seemed cut and dried, but the truth of the matter was something altogether different.
The details have been changed to protect the innocent and sometimes the guilty.
We'll start off easy.
["Yo bitch"] If you saw a Tweet that only said this, you might think to yourself, "That looks like abuse."
After all, why would you want to receive the message, "Yo, bitch."
Now, I try to stay relatively hip to the latest trends and memes, so I knew that "yo, bitch" was also often a common greeting between friends, as well as being a popular "Breaking Bad" reference.
I will admit that I did not expect to encounter a fourth use case.
It turns out it is also used on Twitter when people are role-playing as dogs.
(Laughter) And in fact, in that case, it's not only not abusive, it's technically just an accurate greeting.
(Laughter) So okay, determining whether or not something is abusive without context, definitely hard.
Let's look at spam.
Here's an example of an account engaged in classic spammer behavior, sending the exact same message to thousands of people.
While this is a mockup I put together using my account, we see accounts doing this all the time.
Seems pretty straightforward.
We should just automatically suspend accounts engaging in this kind of behavior.
Turns out there's some exceptions to that rule.
Turns out that that message could also be a notification you signed up for that the International Space Station is passing overhead because you wanted to go outside and see if you could see it.
You're not going to get that chance if we mistakenly suspend the account thinking it's spam.
Okay. Let's make the stakes higher.
Back to my account, again exhibiting classic behavior.
This time it's sending the same message and link.
This is often indicative of something called phishing, somebody trying to steal another person's account information by directing them to another website.
That's pretty clearly not a good thing.
We want to, and do, suspend accounts engaging in that kind of behavior.
So why are the stakes higher for this?
Well, this could also be a bystander at a rally who managed to record a video of a police officer beating a non-violent protester who's trying to let the world know what's happening.
We don't want to gamble on potentially silencing that crucial speech by classifying it as spam and suspending it.
That means we evaluate hundreds of parameters when looking at account behaviors, and even then, we can still get it wrong and have to reevaluate.
Now, given the sorts of challenges I'm up against, it's crucial that I not only predict but also design protections for the unexpected.
And that's not just an issue for me, or for Twitter, it's an issue for you.
It's an issue for anybody who's building or creating something that you think is going to be amazing and will let people do awesome things.
So what do I do?
I pause and I think, how could all of this go horribly wrong?
I visualize catastrophe.
And that's hard. There's a sort of inherent cognitive dissonance in doing that, like when you're writing your wedding vows at the same time as your prenuptial agreement.
(Laughter) But you still have to do it, particularly if you're marrying 500 million tweets per day.
What do I mean by "visualize catastrophe?"
I try to think of how something as benign and innocuous as a picture of a cat could lead to death, and what to do to prevent that.
Which happens to be my next example.
This is my cat, Eli.
We wanted to give users the ability to add photos to their tweets.
A picture is worth a thousand words.
You only get 140 characters.
You add a photo to your tweet, look at how much more content you've got now.
There's all sorts of great things you can do by adding a photo to a tweet.
My job isn't to think of those.
It's to think of what could go wrong.
How could this picture lead to my death?
Well, here's one possibility.
There's more in that picture than just a cat.
There's geodata.
When you take a picture with your smartphone or digital camera, there's a lot of additional information saved along in that image.
In fact, this image also contains the equivalent of this, more specifically, this.
Sure, it's not likely that someone's going to try to track me down and do me harm based upon image data associated with a picture I took of my cat, but I start by assuming the worst will happen.
That's why, when we launched photos on Twitter, we made the decision to strip that geodata out.
(Applause) If I start by assuming the worst and work backwards, I can make sure that the protections we build work for both expected and unexpected use cases.
Given that I spend my days and nights imagining the worst that could happen, it wouldn't be surprising if my worldview was gloomy.
(Laughter) It's not.
The vast majority of interactions I see -- and I see a lot, believe me -- are positive, people reaching out to help or to connect or share information with each other.
It's just that for those of us dealing with scale, for those of us tasked with keeping people safe, we have to assume the worst will happen, because for us, a one-in-a-million chance is pretty good odds.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Looking deeply inside nature, through the magnifying glass of science, designers extract principles, processes and materials that are forming the very basis of design methodology.
From synthetic constructs that resemble biological materials, to computational methods that emulate neural processes, nature is driving design.
Design is also driving nature.
In realms of genetics, regenerative medicine and synthetic biology, designers are growing novel technologies, not foreseen or anticipated by nature.
Bionics explores the interplay between biology and design.
As you can see, my legs are bionic.
Today, I will tell human stories of bionic integration; how electromechanics attached to the body, and implanted inside the body are beginning to bridge the gap between disability and ability, between human limitation and human potential.
Bionics has defined my physicality.
In 1982, both of my legs were amputated due to tissue damage from frostbite, incurred during a mountain-climbing accident.
At that time, I didn't view my body as broken.
I reasoned that a human being can never be "broken."
Technology is broken.
Technology is inadequate.
This simple but powerful idea was a call to arms, to advance technology for the elimination of my own disability, and ultimately, the disability of others.
I began by developing specialized limbs that allowed me to return to the vertical world of rock and ice climbing.
I quickly realized that the artificial part of my body is malleable; able to take on any form, any function -- a blank slate for which to create, perhaps, structures that could extend beyond biological capability.
I made my height adjustable.
I could be as short as five feet or as tall as I'd like.
(Laughter) So when I was feeling bad about myself, insecure, I would jack my height up.
(Laughter) But when I was feeling confident and suave, I would knock my height down a notch, just to give the competition a chance.
(Laughter) (Applause) Narrow-edged feet allowed me to climb steep rock fissures, where the human foot cannot penetrate, and spiked feet enabled me to climb vertical ice walls, without ever experiencing muscle leg fatigue.
Through technological innovation, I returned to my sport, stronger and better.
Technology had eliminated my disability, and allowed me a new climbing prowess.
As a young man, I imagined a future world where technology so advanced could rid the world of disability, a world in which neural implants would allow the visually impaired to see.
A world in which the paralyzed could walk, via body exoskeletons.
Sadly, because of deficiencies in technology, disability is rampant in the world.
This gentleman is missing three limbs.
As a testimony to current technology, he is out of the wheelchair, but we need to do a better job in bionics, to allow, one day, full rehabilitation for a person with this level of injury.
At the MIT Media Lab, we've established the Center for Extreme Bionics.
The mission of the center is to put forth fundamental science and technological capability that will allow the biomechatronic and regenerative repair of humans, across a broad range of brain and body disabilities.
Today, I'm going to tell you how my legs function, how they work, as a case in point for this center.
Now, I made sure to shave my legs last night, because I knew I'd be showing them off.
(Laughter) Bionics entails the engineering of extreme interfaces.
There's three extreme interfaces in my bionic limbs: mechanical, how my limbs are attached to my biological body; dynamic, how they move like flesh and bone; and electrical, how they communicate with my nervous system.
I'll begin with mechanical interface.
In the area of design, we still do not understand how to attach devices to the body mechanically.
It's extraordinary to me that in this day and age, one of the most mature, oldest technologies in the human timeline, the shoe, still gives us blisters.
How can this be?
We have no idea how to attach things to our bodies.
This is the beautifully lyrical design work of Professor Neri Oxman at the MIT Media Lab, showing spatially varying exoskeletal impedances, shown here by color variation in this 3D-printed model.
Imagine a future where clothing is stiff and soft where you need it, when you need it, for optimal support and flexibility, without ever causing discomfort.
My bionic limbs are attached to my biological body via synthetic skins with stiffness variations, that mirror my underlying tissue biomechanics.
To achieve that mirroring, we first developed a mathematical model of my biological limb.
To that end, we used imaging tools such as MRI, to look inside my body, to figure out the geometries and locations of various tissues.
We also took robotic tools -- here's a 14-actuator circle that goes around the biological limb.
The actuators come in, find the surface of the limb, measure its unloaded shape, and then they push on the tissues to measure tissue compliances at each anatomical point.
We combine these imaging and robotic data to build a mathematical description of my biological limb, shown on the left.
You see a bunch of points, or nodes?
At each node, there's a color that represents tissue compliance.
We then do a mathematical transformation to the design of the synthetic skin, shown on the right.
And we've discovered optimality is: where the body is stiff, the synthetic skin should be soft, where the body is soft, the synthetic skin is stiff, and this mirroring occurs across all tissue compliances.
With this framework, we've produced bionic limbs that are the most comfortable limbs I've ever worn.
Clearly, in the future, our clothing, our shoes, our braces, our prostheses, will no longer be designed and manufactured using artisan strategies, but rather, data-driven quantitative frameworks.
In that future, our shoes will no longer give us blisters.
We're also embedding sensing and smart materials into the synthetic skins.
This is a material developed by SRI International, California.
Under electrostatic effect, it changes stiffness.
So under zero voltage, the material is compliant, it's floppy like paper.
Then the button's pushed, a voltage is applied, and it becomes stiff as a board.
(Tapping sounds) We embed this material into the synthetic skin that attaches my bionic limb to my biological body.
When I walk here, it's no voltage.
My interface is soft and compliant.
The button's pushed, voltage is applied, and it stiffens, offering me a greater maneuverability over the bionic limb.
We're also building exoskeletons.
This exoskeleton becomes stiff and soft in just the right areas of the running cycle, to protect the biological joints from high impacts and degradation.
In the future, we'll all be wearing exoskeletons in common activities, such as running.
Next, dynamic interface.
How do my bionic limbs move like flesh and bone?
At my MIT lab, we study how humans with normal physiologies stand, walk and run.
What are the muscles doing, and how are they controlled by the spinal cord?
This basic science motivates what we build.
We're building bionic ankles, knees and hips.
We're building body parts from the ground up.
The bionic limbs that I'm wearing are called BiOMs.
They've been fitted to nearly 1,000 patients, 400 of which have been wounded U.S. soldiers.
How does it work?
At heel strike, under computer control, the system controls stiffness, to attenuate the shock of the limb hitting the ground.
Then at mid-stance, the bionic limb outputs high torques and powers to lift the person into the walking stride, comparable to how muscles work in the calf region.
This bionic propulsion is very important clinically to patients.
So on the left, you see the bionic device worn by a lady, on the right, a passive device worn by the same lady, that fails to emulate normal muscle function, enabling her to do something everyone should be able to do: go up and down their steps at home.
Bionics also allows for extraordinary athletic feats.
Here's a gentleman running up a rocky pathway.
This is Steve Martin -- not the comedian -- who lost his legs in a bomb blast in Afghanistan.
We're also building exoskeletal structures using these same principles, that wrap around the biological limb.
This gentleman does not have any leg condition, any disability.
He has a normal physiology, so these exoskeletons are applying muscle-like torques and powers, so that his own muscles need not apply those torques and powers.
This is the first exoskeleton in history that actually augments human walking.
It significantly reduces metabolic cost.
It's so profound in its augmentation, that when a normal, healthy person wears the device for 40 minutes and then takes it off, their own biological legs feel ridiculously heavy and awkward.
We're beginning the age in which machines attached to our bodies will make us stronger and faster and more efficient.
Moving on to electrical interface: How do my bionic limbs communicate with my nervous system?
Across my residual limb are electrodes that measure the electrical pulse of my muscles.
That's communicated to the bionic limb, so when I think about moving my phantom limb, the robot tracks those movement desires.
This diagram shows fundamentally how the bionic limb is controlled.
So we model the missing biological limb, and we've discovered what reflexes occurred, how the reflexes of the spinal cord are controlling the muscles.
And that capability is embedded in the chips of the bionic limb.
What we've done, then, is we modulate the sensitivity of the reflex, the modeled spinal reflex, with the neural signal, so when I relax my muscles in my residual limb, I get very little torque and power, but the more I fire my muscles, the more torque I get, and I can even run.
And that was the first demonstration of a running gait under neural command.
Feels great.
(Applause) We want to go a step further.
We want to actually close the loop between the human and the bionic external limb.
We're doing experiments where we're growing nerves, transected nerves, through channels, or micro-channel arrays.
On the other side of the channel, the nerve then attaches to cells, skin cells and muscle cells.
In the motor channels, we can sense how the person wishes to move.
That can be sent out wirelessly to the bionic limb, then [sensory information] on the bionic limb can be converted to stimulations in adjacent channels, sensory channels.
So when this is fully developed and for human use, persons like myself will not only have synthetic limbs that move like flesh and bone, but actually feel like flesh and bone.
This video shows Lisa Mallette, shortly after being fitted with two bionic limbs.
Indeed, bionics is making a profound difference in people's lives.
(Video) Lisa Mallette: Oh my God.
LM: Oh my God, I can't believe it!
(Video) (Laughter) LM: It's just like I've got a real leg!
Woman: Now, don't start running.
Man: Now turn around, and do the same thing walking up, but get on your heel to toe, like you would normally just walk on level ground.
Try to walk right up the hill.
LM: Oh my God.
Man: Is it pushing you up?
LM: Yes! I'm not even -- I can't even describe it.
Man: It's pushing you right up.
Hugh Herr: Next week, I'm visiting the Center -- Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Next week I'm visiting the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and I'm going to try to convince CMS to grant appropriate code language and pricing, so this technology can be made available to the patients that need it.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) It's not well appreciated, but over half of the world's population suffers from some form of cognitive, emotional, sensory or motor condition, and because of poor technology, too often, conditions result in disability and a poorer quality of life.
Basic levels of physiological function should be a part of our human rights.
Every person should have the right to live life without disability if they so choose -- the right to live life without severe depression; the right to see a loved one, in the case of seeing-impaired; or the right to walk or to dance, in the case of limb paralysis or limb amputation.
As a society, we can achieve these human rights, if we accept the proposition that humans are not disabled.
A person can never be broken.
Our built environment, our technologies, are broken and disabled.
We the people need not accept our limitations, but can transcend disability through technological innovation.
Indeed, through fundamental advances in bionics in this century, we will set the technological foundation for an enhanced human experience, and we will end disability.
I'd like to finish up with one more story, a beautiful story.
The story of Adrianne Haslet-Davis.
Adrianne lost her left leg in the Boston terrorist attack.
I met Adrianne when this photo was taken, at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital.
Adrianne is a dancer, a ballroom dancer.
Adrianne breathes and lives dance.
It is her expression. It is her art form.
Naturally, when she lost her limb in the Boston terrorist attack, she wanted to return to the dance floor.
After meeting her and driving home in my car, I thought, I'm an MIT professor. I have resources.
Let's build her a bionic limb, to enable her to go back to her life of dance.
I brought in MIT scientists with expertise in prosthetics, robotics, machine learning and biomechanics, and over a 200-day research period, we studied dance.
We brought in dancers with biological limbs, and we studied how they move, what forces they apply on the dance floor, and we took those data, and we put forth fundamental principles of dance, reflexive dance capability, and we embedded that intelligence into the bionic limb.
Bionics is not only about making people stronger and faster.
Our expression, our humanity can be embedded into electromechanics.
It was 3.5 seconds between the bomb blasts in the Boston terrorist attack.
In 3.5 seconds, the criminals and cowards took Adrianne off the dance floor.
In 200 days, we put her back.
We will not be intimidated, brought down, diminished, conquered or stopped by acts of violence.
(Applause) Ladies and gentlemen, please allow me to introduce Adrianne Haslet-Davis, her first performance since the attack.
She's dancing with Christian Lightner.
(Applause) (Music: "Ring My Bell" performed by Enrique Iglesias) (Applause) Ladies and gentlemen, members of the research team: Elliott Rouse and Nathan Villagaray-Carski.
Elliott and Nathan.
(Applause)
Ladies and gentlemen, the history of music and television on the Internet in three minutes.
A TED medley -- a TEDley.
♫ It's nine o' clock on a Saturday ♫ ♫ The record store's closed for the night ♫ ♫ So I fire up the old iTunes music store ♫ ♫ And soon I am feelin' all right ♫ ♫ I know Steve Jobs can find me a melody ♫ ♫ With one dollar pricing that rocks ♫ ♫ I can type in the track and get album names back ♫ ♫ While still in my PJs and socks ♫ ♫ Sell us a song, you're the music man ♫ ♫ My iPod's still got 10 gigs to go ♫ ♫ Yes, we might prefer more compatibility ♫ ♫ But Steve likes to run the whole show ♫ ♫ I heard "Desperate Housewives" was great last night ♫ ♫ But I had a bad piece of cod ♫ ♫ As I threw up my meal, I thought, "It's no big deal" ♫ ♫ I'll watch it tonight on my 'Pod ♫ ♫ And now all of the networks are joining in ♫ ♫ Two bucks a show without ads ♫ ♫ It's a business those guys always wanted to try ♫ ♫ But only Steve Jobs had the 'nads ♫ ♫ They say we're young, don't watch TV ♫ ♫ They say the Internet is all we see ♫ ♫ But that's not true; they've got it wrong ♫ ♫ See, all our shows are just two minutes long ♫ ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ I got YouTube ♫ ♫ I got YouTube ♫ And now, ladies and gentlemen, a tribute to the Recording Industry Association of America -- the RIAA!
♫ Young man, you were surfin' along ♫ ♫ And then, young man, you downloaded a song ♫ ♫ And then, dumb man, copied it to your 'Pod ♫ ♫ Then a phone call came to tell you ... ♫ ♫ You've just been sued by the R-I-A-A ♫ ♫ You've just been screwed by the R-I-A-A ♫ ♫ Their attorneys say you committed a crime ♫ ♫ And there'd better not be a next time ♫ ♫ They've lost their minds at the R-I-A-A ♫ ♫ Justice is blind at the R-I-A-A ♫ ♫ You're depriving the bands ♫ ♫ You are learning to steal ♫ ♫ You can't do whatever you feel ♫ ♫ CD sales have dropped every year ♫ ♫ They're not greedy, they're just quaking with fear ♫ ♫ Yes indeedy, what if their end is near ♫ ♫ And we download all our music ♫ ♫ Yeah, that would piss off the R-I-A-A ♫ ♫ No plastic discs from the R-I-A-A ♫ ♫ What a way to make friends ♫ ♫ It's a plan that can't fail ♫ ♫ All your customers off to jail ♫ ♫ Who'll be next for the R-I-A-A? ♫ ♫ What else is vexing the R-I-A-A? ♫ ♫ Maybe whistling a tune ♫ ♫ Maybe humming along ♫ ♫ Maybe mocking 'em in a song ♫
So a chip, a poet and a boy.
It's just about 20 years ago, June 1994, when Intel announced that there was a flaw at the core of their Pentium chip.
Deep in the code of the SRT algorithm to calculate intermediate quotients necessary for iterative floating points of divisions -- I don't know what that means, but it's what it says on Wikipedia — there was a flaw and an error that meant that there was a certain probability that the result of the calculation would be an error, and the probability was one out of every 360 billion calculations.
So Intel said your average spreadsheet would be flawed once every 27,000 years.
They didn't think it was significant, but there was an outrage in the community.
The community, the techies, said, this flaw has to be addressed.
They were not going to stand by quietly as Intel gave them these chips.
So there was a revolution across the world.
People marched to demand -- okay, not really exactly like that — but they rose up and they demanded that Intel fix the flaw.
And Intel set aside 475 million dollars to fund the replacement of millions of chips to fix the flaw.
So billions of dollars in our society was spent to address a problem which would come once out of every 360 billion calculations.
Number two, a poet.
This is Martin Niemöller.
You're familiar with his poetry.
Around the height of the Nazi period, he started repeating the verse, "First they came for the communists, and I did nothing, did not speak out because I was not a communist.
Then they came for the socialists.
Then they came for the trade unions.
Then they came for the Jews.
And then they came for me.
But there was no one left to speak for me."
Now, Niemöller is offering a certain kind of insight.
This is an insight at the core of intelligence.
We could call it cluefulness.
It's a certain kind of test: Can you recognize an underlying threat and respond?
Can you save yourself or save your kind?
Turns out ants are pretty good at this.
Cows, not so much.
So can you see the pattern?
Can you see a pattern and then recognize and do something about it? Number two.
Number three, a boy.
This is my friend Aaron Swartz.
He's Tim's friend.
He's friends of many of you in this audience, and seven years ago, Aaron came to me with a question.
It was just before I was going to give my first TED Talk.
I was so proud. I was telling him about my talk, "Laws that choke creativity."
And Aaron looked at me and was a little impatient, and he said, "So how are you ever going to solve the problems you're talking about?
Copyright policy, Internet policy, how are you ever going to address those problems so long as there's this fundamental corruption in the way our government works?"
So I was a little put off by this.
He wasn't sharing in my celebration.
And I said to him, "You know, Aaron, it's not my field, not my field."
He said, "You mean as an academic, it's not your field?"
I said, "Yeah, as an academic, it's not my field."
He said, "What about as a citizen?
As a citizen."
Now, this is the way Aaron was.
He didn't tell. He asked questions.
But his questions spoke as clearly as my four-year-old's hug.
He was saying to me, "You've got to get a clue.
You have got to get a clue, because there is a flaw at the core of the operating system of this democracy, and it's not a flaw every one out of 360 billion times our democracy tries to make a decision.
It is every time, every single important issue.
We've got to end the bovinity of this political society.
We've got to adopt, it turns out, the word is fourmi-formatic attitude -- that's what the Internet tells me the word is -- the ant's appreciative attitude that gets us to recognize this flaw, save our kind and save our demos.
Now if you know Aaron Swartz, you know that we lost him just over a year ago.
It was about six weeks before I gave my TED Talk, and I was so grateful to Chris that he asked me to give this TED Talk, not because I had the chance to talk to you, although that was great, but because it pulled me out of an extraordinary depression.
I couldn't begin to describe the sadness.
Because I had to focus.
I had to focus on, what was I going to say to you?
It saved me.
But after the buzz, the excitement, the power that comes from this community, I began to yearn for a less sterile, less academic way to address these issues, the issues that I was talking about.
We'd begun to focus on New Hampshire as a target for this political movement, because the primary in New Hampshire is so incredibly important.
It was a group called the New Hampshire Rebellion that was beginning to talk about, how would we make this issue of this corruption central in 2016?
But it was another soul that caught my imagination, a woman named Doris Haddock, aka Granny D.
On January 1, 1999, 15 years ago, at the age of 88, Granny D started a walk.
She started in Los Angeles and began to walk to Washington, D.C.
with a single sign on her chest that said, "campaign finance reform."
Eighteen months later, at the age of 90, she arrived in Washington with hundreds following her, including many congressmen who had gotten in a car and driven out about a mile outside of the city to walk in with her.
(Laughter) Now, I don't have 13 months to walk across the country.
I've got three kids who hate to walk, and a wife who, it turns out, still hates when I'm not there for mysterious reasons, so this was not an option, but the question I asked, could we remix Granny D a bit?
What about a walk not of 3,200 miles but of 185 miles across New Hampshire in January?
So on January 11, the anniversary of Aaron's death, we began a walk that ended on January 24th, the day that Granny D was born.
A total of 200 people joined us across this walk, as we went from the very top to the very bottom of New Hampshire talking about this issue.
And what was astonishing to me, something I completely did not expect to find, was the passion and anger that there was among everyone that we talked to about this issue.
We had found in a poll that 96 percent of Americans believe it important to reduce the influence of money in politics.
Now politicians and pundits tell you, there's nothing we can do about this issue, Americans don't care about it, but the reason for that is that 91 percent of Americans think there's nothing that can be done about this issue.
And it's this gap between 96 and 91 that explains our politics of resignation.
I mean, after all, at least 96 percent of us wish we could fly like Superman, but because at least 91 percent of us believe we can't, we don't leap off of tall buildings every time we have that urge.
That's because we accept our limits, and so too with this reform.
But when you give people the sense of hope, you begin to thaw that absolute sense of impossibility.
As Harvey Milk said, if you give 'em hope, you give 'em a chance, a way to think about how this change is possible.
Hope.
And hope is the one thing that we, Aaron's friends, failed him with, because we let him lose that sense of hope.
I loved that boy like I love my son.
But we failed him.
And I love my country, and I'm not going to fail that.
I'm not going to fail that.
That sense of hope, we're going to hold, and we're going to fight for, however impossible this battle looks.
What's next?
Well, we started with this march with 200 people, and next year, there will be 1,000 on different routes that march in the month of January and meet in Concord to celebrate this cause, and then in 2016, before the primary, there will be 10,000 who march across that state, meeting in Concord to celebrate this cause.
And as we have marched, people around the country have begun to say, "Can we do the same thing in our state?"
So we've started a platform called G.D. Walkers, that is, Granny D walkers, and Granny D walkers across the country will be marching for this reform. Number one.
Number two, on this march, one of the founders of Thunderclap, David Cascino, was with us, and he said, "Well what can we do?"
And so they developed a platform, which we are announcing today, that allows us to pull together voters who are committed to this idea of reform.
Regardless of where you are, in New Hampshire or outside of New Hampshire, you can sign up and directly be informed where the candidates are on this issue so you can decide who to vote for as a function of which is going to make this possibility real.
And then finally number three, the hardest.
We're in the age of the Super PAC.
Indeed yesterday, Merriam announced that Merriam-Webster will have Super PAC as a word.
It is now an official word in the dictionary.
So on May 1, aka May Day, we're going to try an experiment.
We're going to try a launching of what we can think of as a Super PAC to end all Super PACs.
And the basic way this works is this.
For the last year, we have been working with analysts and political experts to calculate, how much would it cost to win enough votes in the United States Congress to make fundamental reform possible?
What is that number? Half a billion? A billion?
What is that number?
And then whatever that number is, we are going to kickstart, sort of, because you can't use KickStarter for political work, but anyway, kickstart, sort of, first a bottom-up campaign where people will make small dollar commitments contingent on reaching very ambitious goals, and when those goals have been reached, we will turn to the large dollar contributors, to get them to contribute to make it possible for us to run the kind of Super PAC necessary to win this issue, to change the way money influences politics, so that on November 8, which I discovered yesterday is the day that Aaron would have been 30 years old, on November 8, we will celebrate 218 representatives in the House and 60 Senators in the United States Senate who have committed to this idea of fundamental reform.
So last night, we heard about wishes.
Here's my wish.
May one.
May the ideals of one boy unite one nation behind one critical idea that we are one people, we are the people who were promised a government, a government that was promised to be dependent upon the people alone, the people, who, as Madison told us, meant not the rich more than the poor.
May one.
And then may you, may you join this movement, not because you're a politician, not because you're an expert, not because this is your field, but because if you are, you are a citizen.
Aaron asked me that.
Now I've asked you.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The world makes you something that you're not, but you know inside what you are, and that question burns in your heart: How will you become that?
I may be somewhat unique in this, but I am not alone, not alone at all.
So when I became a fashion model, I felt that I'd finally achieved the dream that I'd always wanted since I was a young child.
My outside self finally matched my inner truth, my inner self.
For complicated reasons which I'll get to later, when I look at this picture, at that time I felt like, Geena, you've done it, you've made it, you have arrived.
But this past October, I realized that I'm only just beginning.
All of us are put in boxes by our family, by our religion, by our society, our moment in history, even our own bodies.
Some people have the courage to break free, not to accept the limitations imposed by the color of their skin or by the beliefs of those that surround them.
Those people are always the threat to the status quo, to what is considered acceptable.
In my case, for the last nine years, some of my neighbors, some of my friends, colleagues, even my agent, did not know about my history.
I think, in mystery, this is called the reveal.
Here is mine.
I was assigned boy at birth based on the appearance of my genitalia.
I remember when I was five years old in the Philippines walking around our house, I would always wear this t-shirt on my head.
And my mom asked me, "How come you always wear that t-shirt on your head?"
I said, "Mom, this is my hair. I'm a girl."
I knew then how to self-identify.
Gender has always been considered a fact, immutable, but we now know it's actually more fluid, complex and mysterious.
Because of my success, I never had the courage to share my story, not because I thought what I am is wrong, but because of how the world treats those of us who wish to break free.
Every day, I am so grateful because I am a woman.
I have a mom and dad and family who accepted me for who I am.
Many are not so fortunate.
There's a long tradition in Asian culture that celebrates the fluid mystery of gender.
There is a Buddhist goddess of compassion.
There is a Hindu goddess, hijra goddess.
So when I was eight years old, I was at a fiesta in the Philippines celebrating these mysteries.
I was in front of the stage, and I remember, out comes this beautiful woman right in front of me, and I remember that moment something hit me: That is the kind of woman I would like to be.
So when I was 15 years old, still dressing as a boy, I met this woman named T.L.
She is a transgender beauty pageant manager.
That night she asked me, "How come you are not joining the beauty pageant?"
She convinced me that if I joined that she would take care of the registration fee and the garments, and that night, I won best in swimsuit and best in long gown and placed second runner up among 40-plus candidates.
That moment changed my life.
All of a sudden, I was introduced to the world of beauty pageants.
Not a lot of people could say that your first job is a pageant queen for transgender women, but I'll take it.
So from 15 to 17 years old, I joined the most prestigious pageant to the pageant where it's at the back of the truck, literally, or sometimes it would be a pavement next to a rice field, and when it rains -- it rains a lot in the Philippines -- the organizers would have to move it inside someone's house.
I also experienced the goodness of strangers, especially when we would travel in remote provinces in the Philippines.
But most importantly, I met some of my best friends in that community.
In 2001, my mom, who had moved to San Francisco, called me and told me that my green card petition came through, that I could now move to the United States.
I resisted it.
I told my mom, "Mom, I'm having fun.
I'm here with my friends, I love traveling, being a beauty pageant queen."
But then two weeks later she called me, she said, "Did you know that if you move to the United States you could change your name and gender marker?"
That was all I needed to hear.
My mom also told me to put two E's in the spelling of my name.
She also came with me when I had my surgery in Thailand at 19 years old.
It's interesting, in some of the most rural cities in Thailand, they perform some of the most prestigious, safe and sophisticated surgery.
At that time in the United States, you needed to have surgery before you could change your name and gender marker.
So in 2001, I moved to San Francisco, and I remember looking at my California driver's license with the name Geena and gender marker F.
That was a powerful moment.
For some people, their I.D. is their license to drive or even to get a drink, but for me, that was my license to live, to feel dignified.
All of a sudden, my fears were minimized.
I felt that I could conquer my dream and move to New York and be a model.
Many are not so fortunate.
I think of this woman named Islan Nettles.
She's from New York, she's a young woman who was courageously living her truth, but hatred ended her life.
For most of my community, this is the reality in which we live.
Our suicide rate is nine times higher than that of the general population.
Every November 20, we have a global vigil for Transgender Day of Remembrance.
I'm here at this stage because it's a long history of people who fought and stood up for injustice.
This is Marsha P. Johnson and Sylvia Rivera.
Today, this very moment, is my real coming out.
I could no longer live my truth for and by myself.
I want to do my best to help others live their truth without shame and terror.
I am here, exposed, so that one day there will never be a need for a November 20 vigil.
My deepest truth allowed me to accept who I am.
Will you?
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause) Kathryn Schulz: Geena, one quick question for you.
I'm wondering what you would say, especially to parents, but in a more broad way, to friends, to family, to anyone who finds themselves encountering a child or a person who is struggling with and uncomfortable with a gender that's being assigned them, what might you say to the family members of that person to help them become good and caring and kind family members to them?
Geena Rocero: Sure. Well, first, really, I'm so blessed.
The support system, with my mom especially, and my family, that in itself is just so powerful.
I remember every time I would coach young trans women, I would mentor them, and sometimes when they would call me and tell me that their parents can't accept it, I would pick up that phone call and tell my mom, "Mom, can you call this woman?"
And sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't, so — But it's just, gender identity is in the core of our being, right?
I mean, we're all assigned gender at birth, so what I'm trying to do is to have this conversation that sometimes that gender assignment doesn't match, and there should be a space that would allow people to self-identify, and that's a conversation that we should have with parents, with colleagues.
The transgender movement, it's at the very beginning, to compare to how the gay movement started.
There's still a lot of work that needs to be done.
There should be an understanding.
There should be a space of curiosity and asking questions, and I hope all of you guys will be my allies.
KS: Thank you. That was so lovely. GR: Thank you.
(Applause)
Daffodil Hudson: Hello?
Yeah, this is she.
What?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, of course I accept.
What are the dates again?
Pen. Pen. Pen.
March 17 through 21.
Okay, all right, great. Thanks.
Lab Partner: Who was that?
DH: It was TED.
LP: Who's TED?
DH: I've got to prepare.
["Give Your Talk: A Musical"] (Music) ["My Talk"] ♪ Procrastination. ♪ What do you think?
(Doorbell) Can I help you?
(Music) Speaker Coach 1: ♪ Let's prepare for main stage. ♪ ♪ It's your time to shine. ♪ ♪ If you want to succeed then ♪ ♪ you must be primed. ♪ Speaker Coach 2: ♪ Your slides are bad ♪ ♪ but your idea is good ♪ ♪ so you can bet before we're through, ♪ ♪ speaker, we'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ Speaker Coach 3: ♪ We know about climate change, ♪ ♪ but what can you say that's new? ♪ ♪ SC 1: Once you find your focus ♪ ♪ then the talk comes into view. ♪ SC 2: ♪ Don't ever try to sell something ♪ ♪ from up on that stage ♪ ♪ or we won't post your talk online. ♪ All: ♪ Somehow we'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ (Music) SC 1: Ready to practice one more time?
DH: Right now?
Stagehand: Break a leg.
DH: ♪ I'll never remember all this. ♪ ♪ Will the clicker work when I press it? ♪ ♪ Why must Al Gore go right before me? ♪ ♪ Oh man, I'm scared to death. ♪ ♪ I hope I don't pass out onstage ♪ ♪ and now I really wish I wasn't wearing green. ♪ All: ♪ Give your talk. ♪ SC 1: ♪ You must be be sweet like Brené Brown. ♪ All: ♪ Give your talk. ♪ SC 2: ♪ You must be funny like Ken Robinson. ♪ All: ♪ Give your talk. ♪ SC 3: ♪ You must be cool like Reggie Watts ♪ All: ♪ and bring out a prop like Jill Bolte Taylor. ♪ DH: ♪ My time is running over. The clock now says nil. ♪ ♪ I'm saying my words faster. Understand me still. ♪ ♪ I'm too nervous to give this TED Talk. ♪ All: ♪ Don't give up. Rehearse. You're good. ♪ ♪ We'll edit out the mistakes that you make. ♪ ♪ Give your talk. ♪ DH: ♪ I will be big like Amy Cuddy. ♪ All: ♪ Give your talk. ♪ DH: ♪ I will inspire like Liz Gilbert. ♪ All: ♪ Give your talk. ♪ DH: ♪ I will engage like Hans Rosling ♪ ♪ and release mosquitos ♪ ♪ like Bill Gates. ♪ SC 2: ♪ I'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ ♪ I'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ ♪ I'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ ♪ I'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ ♪ I'll make a TED Talk out of you. ♪ (Applause) ["Brought to you by TED staff and friends"] (Music)
If you look deep into the night sky, you see stars, and if you look further, you see more stars, and further, galaxies, and further, more galaxies.
But if you keep looking further and further, eventually you see nothing for a long while, and then finally you see a faint, fading afterglow, and it's the afterglow of the Big Bang.
Now, the Big Bang was an era in the early universe when everything we see in the night sky was condensed into an incredibly small, incredibly hot, incredibly roiling mass, and from it sprung everything we see.
Now, we've mapped that afterglow with great precision, and when I say we, I mean people who aren't me.
We've mapped the afterglow with spectacular precision, and one of the shocks about it is that it's almost completely uniform.
Fourteen billion light years that way and 14 billion light years that way, it's the same temperature.
Now it's been 14 billion years since that Big Bang, and so it's got faint and cold.
It's now 2.7 degrees.
But it's not exactly 2.7 degrees.
It's only 2.7 degrees to about 10 parts in a million.
Over here, it's a little hotter, and over there, it's a little cooler, and that's incredibly important to everyone in this room, because where it was a little hotter, there was a little more stuff, and where there was a little more stuff, we have galaxies and clusters of galaxies and superclusters and all the structure you see in the cosmos.
And those small, little, inhomogeneities, 20 parts in a million, those were formed by quantum mechanical wiggles in that early universe that were stretched across the size of the entire cosmos.
That is spectacular, and that's not what they found on Monday; what they found on Monday is cooler.
So here's what they found on Monday: Imagine you take a bell, and you whack the bell with a hammer.
What happens? It rings.
But if you wait, that ringing fades and fades and fades until you don't notice it anymore.
Now, that early universe was incredibly dense, like a metal, way denser, and if you hit it, it would ring, but the thing ringing would be the structure of space-time itself, and the hammer would be quantum mechanics.
What they found on Monday was evidence of the ringing of the space-time of the early universe, what we call gravitational waves from the fundamental era, and here's how they found it.
Those waves have long since faded.
If you go for a walk, you don't wiggle.
Those gravitational waves in the structure of space are totally invisible for all practical purposes.
But early on, when the universe was making that last afterglow, the gravitational waves put little twists in the structure of the light that we see.
So by looking at the night sky deeper and deeper -- in fact, these guys spent three years on the South Pole looking straight up through the coldest, clearest, cleanest air they possibly could find looking deep into the night sky and studying that glow and looking for the faint twists which are the symbol, the signal, of gravitational waves, the ringing of the early universe.
And on Monday, they announced that they had found it.
And the thing that's so spectacular about that to me is not just the ringing, though that is awesome.
The thing that's totally amazing, the reason I'm on this stage, is because what that tells us is something deep about the early universe.
It tells us that we and everything we see around us are basically one large bubble -- and this is the idea of inflation— one large bubble surrounded by something else.
This isn't conclusive evidence for inflation, but anything that isn't inflation that explains this will look the same.
This is a theory, an idea, that has been around for a while, and we never thought we we'd really see it.
For good reasons, we thought we'd never see killer evidence, and this is killer evidence.
But the really crazy idea is that our bubble is just one bubble in a much larger, roiling pot of universal stuff.
We're never going to see the stuff outside, but by going to the South Pole and spending three years looking at the detailed structure of the night sky, we can figure out that we're probably in a universe that looks kind of like that.
And that amazes me.
Thanks a lot.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: So, this is an interview with a difference.
On the basis that a picture is worth a thousand words, what I did was, I asked Bill and Melinda to dig out from their archive some images that would help explain some of what they've done, and do a few things that way.
So, we're going to start here.
Melinda, when and where was this, and who is that handsome man next to you?
Melinda Gates: With those big glasses, huh?
This is in Africa, our very first trip, the first time either of us had ever been to Africa, in the fall of 1993.
We were already engaged to be married.
We married a few months later, and this was the trip where we really went to see the animals and to see the savanna.
It was incredible. Bill had never taken that much time off from work.
But what really touched us, actually, were the people, and the extreme poverty.
We started asking ourselves questions.
Does it have to be like this?
And at the end of the trip, we went out to Zanzibar, and took some time to walk on the beach, which is something we had done a lot while we were dating.
And we'd already been talking about during that time that the wealth that had come from Microsoft would be given back to society, but it was really on that beach walk that we started to talk about, well, what might we do and how might we go about it?
CA: So, given that this vacation led to the creation of the world's biggest private foundation, it's pretty expensive as vacations go. (Laughter) MG: I guess so. We enjoyed it.
CA: Which of you was the key instigator here, or was it symmetrical?
Bill Gates: Well, I think we were excited that there'd be a phase of our life where we'd get to work together and figure out how to give this money back.
At this stage, we were talking about the poorest, and could you have a big impact on them?
Were there things that weren't being done?
There was a lot we didn't know.
Our naïveté is pretty incredible, when we look back on it.
But we had a certain enthusiasm that that would be the phase, the post-Microsoft phase would be our philanthropy.
MG: Which Bill always thought was going to come after he was 60, so he hasn't quite hit 60 yet, so some things change along the way.
CA: So it started there, but it got accelerated.
So that was '93, and it was '97, really, before the foundation itself started.
MA: Yeah, in '97, we read an article about diarrheal diseases killing so many kids around the world, and we kept saying to ourselves, "Well that can't be.
In the U.S., you just go down to the drug store."
And so we started gathering scientists and started learning about population, learning about vaccines, learning about what had worked and what had failed, and that's really when we got going, was in late 1998, 1999.
CA: So, you've got a big pot of money and a world full of so many different issues.
How on Earth do you decide what to focus on?
BG: Well, we decided that we'd pick two causes, whatever the biggest inequity was globally, and there we looked at children dying, children not having enough nutrition to ever develop, and countries that were really stuck, because with that level of death, and parents would have so many kids that they'd get huge population growth, and that the kids were so sick that they really couldn't be educated and lift themselves up.
So that was our global thing, and then in the U.S., both of us have had amazing educations, and we saw that as the way that the U.S.
could live up to its promise of equal opportunity is by having a phenomenal education system, and the more we learned, the more we realized we're not really fulfilling that promise.
And so we picked those two things, and everything the foundation does is focused there.
CA: So, I asked each of you to pick an image that you like that illustrates your work, and Melinda, this is what you picked.
What's this about?
MG: So I, one of the things I love to do when I travel is to go out to the rural areas and talk to the women, whether it's Bangladesh, India, lots of countries in Africa, and I go in as a Western woman without a name.
I don't tell them who I am. Pair of khakis.
And I kept hearing from women, over and over and over, the more I traveled, "I want to be able to use this shot."
I would be there to talk to them about childhood vaccines, and they would bring the conversation around to "But what about the shot I get?"
which is an injection they were getting called Depo-Provera, which is a contraceptive.
And I would come back and talk to global health experts, and they'd say, "Oh no, contraceptives are stocked in in the developing world."
Well, you had to dig deeper into the reports, and this is what the team came to me with, which is, to have the number one thing that women tell you in Africa they want to use stocked out more than 200 days a year explains why women were saying to me, "I walked 10 kilometers without my husband knowing it, and I got to the clinic, and there was nothing there."
And so condoms were stocked in in Africa because of all the AIDS work that the U.S.
and others supported.
But women will tell you over and over again, "I can't negotiate a condom with my husband.
I'm either suggesting he has AIDS or I have AIDS, and I need that tool because then I can space the births of my children, and I can feed them and have a chance of educating them."
CA: Melinda, you're Roman Catholic, and you've often been embroiled in controversy over this issue, and on the abortion question, on both sides, really.
How do you navigate that?
MG: Yeah, so I think that's a really important point, which is, we had backed away from contraceptives as a global community.
We knew that 210 million women were saying they wanted access to contraceptives, even the contraceptives we have here in the United States, and we weren't providing them because of the political controversy in our country, and to me that was just a crime, and I kept looking around trying to find the person that would get this back on the global stage, and I finally realized I just had to do it.
And even though I'm Catholic, I believe in contraceptives just like most of the Catholic women in the United States who report using contraceptives, and I shouldn't let that controversy be the thing that holds us back.
We used to have consensus in the United States around contraceptives, and so we got back to that global consensus, and actually raised 2.6 billion dollars around exactly this issue for women.
(Applause) CA: Bill, this is your graph. What's this about?
BG: Well, my graph has numbers on it.
(Laughter) I really like this graph.
This is the number of children who die before the age of five every year.
And what you find is really a phenomenal success story which is not widely known, that we are making incredible progress.
We go from 20 million not long after I was born to now we're down to about six million.
So this is a story largely of vaccines.
Smallpox was killing a couple million kids a year.
That was eradicated, so that got down to zero.
Measles was killing a couple million a year.
That's down to a few hundred thousand.
Anyway, this is a chart where you want to get that number to continue, and it's going to be possible, using the science of new vaccines, getting the vaccines out to kids.
We can actually accelerate the progress.
The last decade, that number has dropped faster than ever in history, and so I just love the fact that you can say, okay, if we can invent new vaccines, we can get them out there, use the very latest understanding of these things, and get the delivery right, that we can perform a miracle.
CA: I mean, you do the math on this, and it works out, I think, literally to thousands of kids' lives saved every day compared to the prior year.
It's not reported.
An airliner with 200-plus deaths is a far, far bigger story than that.
Does that drive you crazy?
BG: Yeah, because it's a silent thing going on.
It's a kid, one kid at a time.
Ninety-eight percent of this has nothing to do with natural disasters, and yet, people's charity, when they see a natural disaster, are wonderful.
It's incredible how people think, okay, that could be me, and the money flows.
These causes have been a bit invisible.
Now that the Millennium Development Goals and various things are getting out there, we are seeing some increased generosity, so the goal is to get this well below a million, which should be possible in our lifetime.
CA: Maybe it needed someone who is turned on by numbers and graphs rather than just the big, sad face to get engaged.
I mean, you've used it in your letter this year, you used basically this argument to say that aid, contrary to the current meme that aid is kind of worthless and broken, that actually it has been effective.
BG: Yeah, well people can take, there is some aid that was well-meaning and didn't go well.
There's some venture capital investments that were well-meaning and didn't go well.
You shouldn't just say, okay, because of that, because we don't have a perfect record, this is a bad endeavor.
You should look at, what was your goal?
How are you trying to uplift nutrition and survival and literacy so these countries can take care of themselves, and say wow, this is going well, and be smarter.
We can spend aid smarter.
It is not all a panacea.
We can do better than venture capital, I think, including big hits like this.
CA: Traditional wisdom is that it's pretty hard for married couples to work together.
How have you guys managed it?
MG: Yeah, I've had a lot of women say to me, "I really don't think I could work with my husband.
That just wouldn't work out."
You know, we enjoy it, and we don't -- this foundation has been a coming to for both of us in its continuous learning journey, and we don't travel together as much for the foundation, actually, as we used to when Bill was working at Microsoft.
We have more trips where we're traveling separately, but I always know when I come home, Bill's going to be interested in what I learned, whether it's about women or girls or something new about the vaccine delivery chain, or this person that is a great leader.
He's going to listen and be really interested.
And he knows when he comes home, even if it's to talk about the speech he did or the data or what he's learned, I'm really interested, and I think we have a really collaborative relationship.
But we don't every minute together, that's for sure.
(Laughter) CA: But now you are, and we're very happy that you are.
Melinda, early on, you were basically largely running the show.
Six years ago, I guess, Bill came on full time, so moved from Microsoft and became full time.
That must have been hard, adjusting to that. No?
MG: Yeah. I think actually, for the foundation employees, there was way more angst for them than there was for me about Bill coming.
I was actually really excited.
I mean, Bill made this decision even obviously before it got announced in 2006, and it was really his decision, but again, it was a beach vacation where we were walking on the beach and he was starting to think of this idea.
And for me, the excitement of Bill putting his brain and his heart against these huge global problems, these inequities, to me that was exciting.
Yes, the foundation employees had angst about that.
(Applause) CA: That's cool.
MG: But that went away within three months, once he was there.
BG: Including some of the employees.
MG: That's what I said, the employees, it went away for them three months after you were there.
BG: No, I'm kidding. MG: Oh, you mean, the employees didn't go away.
BG: A few of them did, but — (Laughter) CA: So what do you guys argue about?
Sunday, 11 o'clock, you're away from work, what comes up? What's the argument?
BG: Because we built this thing together from the beginning, it's this great partnership.
I had that with Paul Allen in the early days of Microsoft.
I had it with Steve Ballmer as Microsoft got bigger, and now Melinda, and in even stronger, equal ways, is the partner, so we talk a lot about which things should we give more to, which groups are working well?
She's got a lot of insight.
She'll sit down with the employees a lot.
We'll take the different trips she described.
So there's a lot of collaboration.
I can't think of anything where one of us had a super strong opinion about one thing or another?
CA: How about you, Melinda, though? Can you? (Laughter) You never know.
MG: Well, here's the thing.
We come at things from different angles, and I actually think that's really good.
So Bill can look at the big data and say, "I want to act based on these global statistics."
For me, I come at it from intuition.
I meet with lots of people on the ground and Bill's taught me to take that and read up to the global data and see if they match, and I think what I've taught him is to take that data and meet with people on the ground to understand, can you actually deliver that vaccine?
Can you get a woman to accept those polio drops in her child's mouth?
Because the delivery piece is every bit as important as the science.
So I think it's been more a coming to over time towards each other's point of view, and quite frankly, the work is better because of it.
CA: So, in vaccines and polio and so forth, you've had some amazing successes.
What about failure, though?
Can you talk about a failure and maybe what you've learned from it?
BG: Yeah. Fortunately, we can afford a few failures, because we've certainly had them.
We do a lot of drug work or vaccine work that you know you're going to have different failures.
Like, we put out, one that got a lot of publicity was asking for a better condom.
Well, we got hundreds of ideas.
Maybe a few of those will work out.
We were very naïve, certainly I was, about a drug for a disease in India, visceral leishmaniasis, that I thought, once I got this drug, we can just go wipe out the disease.
Well, turns out it took an injection every day for 10 days.
It took three more years to get it than we expected, and then there was no way it was going to get out there.
Fortunately, we found out that if you go kill the sand flies, you probably can have success there, but we spent five years, you could say wasted five years, and about 60 million, on a path that turned out to have very modest benefit when we got there.
CA: You're spending, like, a billion dollars a year in education, I think, something like that.
Is anything, the story of what's gone right there is quite a long and complex one.
Are there any failures that you can talk about?
MG: Well, I would say a huge lesson for us out of the early work is we thought that these small schools were the answer, and small schools definitely help.
They bring down the dropout rate.
They have less violence and crime in those schools.
But the thing that we learned from that work, and what turned out to be the fundamental key, is a great teacher in front of the classroom.
If you don't have an effective teacher in the front of the classroom, I don't care how big or small the building is, you're not going to change the trajectory of whether that student will be ready for college.
(Applause) CA: So Melinda, this is you and your eldest daughter, Jenn.
And just taken about three weeks ago, I think, three or four weeks ago. Where was this?
MG: So we went to Tanzania.
Jenn's been to Tanzania.
All our kids have been to Africa quite a bit, actually.
And we did something very different, which is, we decided to go spend two nights and three days with a family.
Anna and Sanare are the parents.
They invited us to come and stay in their boma.
Actually, the goats had been there, I think, living in that particular little hut on their little compound before we got there.
And we stayed with their family, and we really, really learned what life is like in rural Tanzania.
And the difference between just going and visiting for half a day or three quarters of a day versus staying overnight was profound, and so let me just give you one explanation of that.
They had six children, and as I talked to Anna in the kitchen, we cooked for about five hours in the cooking hut that day, and as I talked to her, she had absolutely planned and spaced with her husband the births of their children.
It was a very loving relationship.
This was a Maasai warrior and his wife, but they had decided to get married, they clearly had respect and love in the relationship.
Their children, their six children, the two in the middle were twins, 13, a boy, and a girl named Grace.
And when we'd go out to chop wood and do all the things that Grace and her mother would do, Grace was not a child, she was an adolescent, but she wasn't an adult.
She was very, very shy.
So she kept wanting to talk to me and Jenn.
We kept trying to engage her, but she was shy.
And at night, though, when all the lights went out in rural Tanzania, and there was no moon that night, the first night, and no stars, and Jenn came out of our hut with her REI little headlamp on, Grace went immediately, and got the translator, came straight up to my Jenn and said, "When you go home, can I have your headlamp so I can study at night?"
CA: Oh, wow.
MG: And her dad had told me how afraid he was that unlike the son, who had passed his secondary exams, because of her chores, she'd not done so well and wasn't in the government school yet.
He said, "I don't know how I'm going to pay for her education.
I can't pay for private school, and she may end up on this farm like my wife."
So they know the difference that an education can make in a huge, profound way.
CA: I mean, this is another pic of your other two kids, Rory and Phoebe, along with Paul Farmer.
Bringing up three children when you're the world's richest family seems like a social experiment without much prior art.
How have you managed it?
What's been your approach?
BG: Well, I'd say overall the kids get a great education, but you've got to make sure they have a sense of their own ability and what they're going to go and do, and our philosophy has been to be very clear with them -- most of the money's going to the foundation -- and help them find something they're excited about.
We want to strike a balance where they have the freedom to do anything but not a lot of money showered on them so they could go out and do nothing.
And so far, they're fairly diligent, excited to pick their own direction.
CA: You've obviously guarded their privacy carefully for obvious reasons.
I'm curious why you've given me permission to show this picture now here at TED.
MG: Well, it's interesting.
As they get older, they so know that our family belief is about responsibility, that we are in an unbelievable situation just to live in the United States and have a great education, and we have a responsibility to give back to the world.
And so as they get older and we are teaching them -- they have been to so many countries around the world — they're saying, we do want people to know that we believe in what you're doing, Mom and Dad, and it is okay to show us more.
So we have their permission to show this picture, and I think Paul Farmer is probably going to put it eventually in some of his work.
But they really care deeply about the mission of the foundation, too.
CA: You've easily got enough money despite your vast contributions to the foundation to make them all billionaires.
Is that your plan for them?
BG: Nope. No. They won't have anything like that.
They need to have a sense that their own work is meaningful and important.
We read an article long, actually, before we got married, where Warren Buffett talked about that, and we're quite convinced that it wasn't a favor either to society or to the kids.
CA: Well, speaking of Warren Buffett, something really amazing happened in 2006, when somehow your only real rival for richest person in America suddenly turned around and agreed to give 80 percent of his fortune to your foundation.
How on Earth did that happen?
I guess there's a long version and a short version of that.
We've got time for the short version.
BG: All right. Well, Warren was a close friend, and he was going to have his wife Suzie give it all away.
Tragically, she passed away before he did, and he's big on delegation, and — (Laughter) — he said — CA: Tweet that.
BG: If he's got somebody who is doing something well, and is willing to do it at no charge, maybe that's okay. But we were stunned.
MG: Totally stunned. BG: We had never expected it, and it has been unbelievable.
It's allowed us to increase our ambition in what the foundation can do quite dramatically.
Half the resources we have come from Warren's mind-blowing generosity.
CA: And I think you've pledged that by the time you're done, more than, or 95 percent of your wealth, will be given to the foundation.
BG: Yes.
CA: And since this relationship, it's amazing— (Applause) And recently, you and Warren have been going around trying to persuade other billionaires and successful people to pledge to give, what, more than half of their assets for philanthropy.
How is that going?
BG: Well, we've got about 120 people who have now taken this giving pledge.
The thing that's great is that we get together yearly and talk about, okay, do you hire staff, what do you give to them?
We're not trying to homogenize it.
I mean, the beauty of philanthropy is this mind-blowing diversity.
People give to some things.
We look and go, "Wow."
But that's great.
That's the role of philanthropy is to pick different approaches, including even in one space, like education.
We need more experimentation.
But it's been wonderful, meeting those people, sharing their journey to philanthropy, how they involve their kids, where they're doing it differently, and it's been way more successful than we expected.
Now it looks like it'll just keep growing in size in the years ahead.
MG: And having people see that other people are making change with philanthropy, I mean, these are people who have created their own businesses, put their own ingenuity behind incredible ideas.
If they put their ideas and their brain behind philanthropy, they can change the world.
And they start to see others doing it, and saying, "Wow, I want to do that with my own money."
To me, that's the piece that's incredible.
CA: It seems to me, it's actually really hard for some people to figure out even how to remotely spend that much money on something else.
There are probably some billionaires in the room and certainly some successful people.
I'm curious, can you make the pitch?
What's the pitch?
BG: Well, it's the most fulfilling thing we've ever done, and you can't take it with you, and if it's not good for your kids, let's get together and brainstorm about what we can be done.
The world is a far better place because of the philanthropists of the past, and the U.S. tradition here, which is the strongest, is the envy of the world.
And part of the reason I'm so optimistic is because I do think philanthropy is going to grow and take some of these things government's not just good at working on and discovering and shine some light in the right direction.
CA: The world's got this terrible inequality, growing inequality problem that seems structural.
It does seem to me that if more of your peers took the approach that you two have made, it would make a dent both in that problem and certainly in the perception of that problem.
Is that a fair comment?
BG: Oh yeah. If you take from the most wealthy and give to the least wealthy, it's good.
It tries to balance out, and that's just.
MG: But you change systems.
In the U.S., we're trying to change the education system so it's just for everybody and it works for all students.
That, to me, really changes the inequality balance.
BG: That's the most important.
(Applause) CA: Well, I really think that most people here and many millions around the world are just in awe of the trajectory your lives have taken and the spectacular degree to which you have shaped the future.
Thank you so much for coming to TED and for sharing with us and for all you do.
BG: Thank you. MG: Thank you.
(Applause) BG: Thank you. MG: Thank you very much.
BG: All right, good job. (Applause)
Right now there is an aspiring teacher who is working on a 60-page paper based on some age-old education theory developed by some dead education professor wondering to herself what this task that she's engaging in has to do with what she wants to do with her life, which is be an educator, change lives, and spark magic.
Right now there is an aspiring teacher in a graduate school of education who is watching a professor babble on and on about engagement in the most disengaging way possible.
Right now there's a first-year teacher at home who is pouring through lesson plans trying to make sense of standards, who is trying to make sense of how to grade students appropriately, while at the same time saying to herself over and over again, "Don't smile till November," because that's what she was taught in her teacher education program.
Right now there's a student who is coming up with a way to convince his mom or dad that he's very, very sick and can't make it to school tomorrow.
On the other hand, right now there are amazing educators that are sharing information, information that is shared in such a beautiful way that the students are sitting at the edge of their seats just waiting for a bead of sweat to drop off the face of this person so they can soak up all that knowledge.
Right now there is also a person who has an entire audience rapt with attention, a person that is weaving a powerful narrative about a world that the people who are listening have never imagined or seen before, but if they close their eyes tightly enough, they can envision that world because the storytelling is so compelling.
Right now there's a person who can tell an audience to put their hands up in the air and they will stay there till he says, "Put them down."
Right now.
So people will then say, "Well, Chris, you describe the guy who is going through some awful training but you're also describing these powerful educators.
If you're thinking about the world of education or urban education in particular, these guys will probably cancel each other out, and then we'll be okay."
The reality is, the folks I described as the master teachers, the master narrative builders, the master storytellers are far removed from classrooms.
The folks who know the skills about how to teach and engage an audience don't even know what teacher certification means.
They may not even have the degrees to be able to have anything to call an education.
And that to me is sad.
It's sad because the people who I described, they were very disinterested in the learning process, want to be effective teachers, but they have no models.
I'm going to paraphrase Mark Twain.
Mark Twain says that proper preparation, or teaching, is so powerful that it can turn bad morals to good, it can turn awful practices into powerful ones, it can change men and transform them into angels.
The folks who I described earlier got proper preparation in teaching, not in any college or university, but by virtue of just being in the same spaces of those who engage.
Guess where those places are?
Barber shops, rap concerts, and most importantly, in the black church.
And I've been framing this idea called Pentecostal pedagogy.
Who here has been to a black church?
We got a couple of hands.
You go to a black church, their preacher starts off and he realizes that he has to engage the audience, so he starts off with this sort of wordplay in the beginning oftentimes, and then he takes a pause, and he says, "Oh my gosh, they're not quite paying attention."
So he says, "Can I get an amen?"
Audience: Amen.
Chris Emdin: So I can I get an amen? Audience: Amen.
CE: And all of a sudden, everybody's reawoken.
That preacher bangs on the pulpit for attention.
He drops his voice at a very, very low volume when he wants people to key into him, and those things are the skills that we need for the most engaging teachers.
So why does teacher education only give you theory and theory and tell you about standards and tell you about all of these things that have nothing to do with the basic skills, that magic that you need to engage an audience, to engage a student?
So I make the argument that we reframe teacher education, that we could focus on content, and that's fine, and we could focus on theories, and that's fine, but content and theories with the absence of the magic of teaching and learning means nothing.
Now people oftentimes say, "Well, magic is just magic."
There are teachers who, despite all their challenges, who have those skills, get into those schools and are able to engage an audience, and the administrator walks by and says, "Wow, he's so good, I wish all my teachers could be that good."
And when they try to describe what that is, they just say, "He has that magic."
But I'm here to tell you that magic can be taught.
Magic can be taught.
Magic can be taught.
Now, how do you teach it?
You teach it by allowing people to go into those spaces where the magic is happening.
If you want to be an aspiring teacher in urban education, you've got to leave the confines of that university and go into the hood.
You've got to go in there and hang out at the barbershop, you've got to attend that black church, and you've got to view those folks that have the power to engage and just take notes on what they do.
At our teacher education classes at my university, I've started a project where every single student that comes in there sits and watches rap concerts.
They watch the way that the rappers move and talk with their hands.
They study the way that he walks proudly across that stage.
They listen to his metaphors and analogies, and they start learning these little things that if they practice enough becomes the key to magic.
They learn that if you just stare at a student and raise your eyebrow about a quarter of an inch, you don't have to say a word because they know that that means that you want more.
And if we could transform teacher education to focus on teaching teachers how to create that magic then poof! we could make dead classes come alive, we could reignite imaginations, and we can change education.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When people think about cities, they tend to think of certain things.
They think of buildings and streets and skyscrapers, noisy cabs.
But when I think about cities, I think about people.
Cities are fundamentally about people, and where people go and where people meet are at the core of what makes a city work.
So even more important than buildings in a city are the public spaces in between them.
And today, some of the most transformative changes in cities are happening in these public spaces.
So I believe that lively, enjoyable public spaces are the key to planning a great city.
They are what makes it come alive.
But what makes a public space work?
What attracts people to successful public spaces, and what is it about unsuccessful places that keeps people away?
I thought, if I could answer those questions, I could make a huge contribution to my city.
But one of the more wonky things about me is that I am an animal behaviorist, and I use those skills not to study animal behavior but to study how people in cities use city public spaces.
One of the first spaces that I studied was this little vest pocket park called Paley Park in midtown Manhattan.
This little space became a small phenomenon, and because it had such a profound impact on New Yorkers, it made an enormous impression on me.
I studied this park very early on in my career because it happened to have been built by my stepfather, so I knew that places like Paley Park didn't happen by accident.
I saw firsthand that they required incredible dedication and enormous attention to detail.
But what was it about this space that made it special and drew people to it?
Well, I would sit in the park and watch very carefully, and first among other things were the comfortable, movable chairs.
People would come in, find their own seat, move it a bit, actually, and then stay a while, and then interestingly, people themselves attracted other people, and ironically, I felt more peaceful if there were other people around.
And it was green.
This little park provided what New Yorkers crave: comfort and greenery.
But my question was, why weren't there more places with greenery and places to sit in the middle of the city where you didn't feel alone, or like a trespasser?
Unfortunately, that's not how cities were being designed.
So here you see a familiar sight.
This is how plazas have been designed for generations.
They have that stylish, Spartan look that we often associate with modern architecture, but it's not surprising that people avoid spaces like this.
They not only look desolate, they feel downright dangerous.
I mean, where would you sit here?
What would you do here?
But architects love them.
They are plinths for their creations.
They might tolerate a sculpture or two, but that's about it.
And for developers, they are ideal.
There's nothing to water, nothing to maintain, and no undesirable people to worry about.
But don't you think this is a waste?
For me, becoming a city planner meant being able to truly change the city that I lived in and loved.
I wanted to be able to create places that would give you the feeling that you got in Paley Park, and not allow developers to build bleak plazas like this.
But over the many years, I have learned how hard it is to create successful, meaningful, enjoyable public spaces.
As I learned from my stepfather, they certainly do not happen by accident, especially in a city like New York, where public space has to be fought for to begin with, and then for them to be successful, somebody has to think very hard about every detail.
Now, open spaces in cities are opportunities.
Yes, they are opportunities for commercial investment, but they are also opportunities for the common good of the city, and those two goals are often not aligned with one another, and therein lies the conflict.
The first opportunity I had to fight for a great public open space was in the early 1980s, when I was leading a team of planners at a gigantic landfill called Battery Park City in lower Manhattan on the Hudson River.
And this sandy wasteland had lain barren for 10 years, and we were told, unless we found a developer in six months, it would go bankrupt.
So we came up with a radical, almost insane idea.
Instead of building a park as a complement to future development, why don't we reverse that equation and build a small but very high-quality public open space first, and see if that made a difference.
So we only could afford to build a two-block section of what would become a mile-long esplanade, so whatever we built had to be perfect.
So just to make sure, I insisted that we build a mock-up in wood, at scale, of the railing and the sea wall.
And when I sat down on that test bench with sand still swirling all around me, the railing hit exactly at eye level, blocking my view and ruining my experience at the water's edge.
So you see, details really do make a difference.
But design is not just how something looks, it's how your body feels on that seat in that space, and I believe that successful design always depends on that very individual experience.
In this photo, everything looks very finished, but that granite edge, those lights, the back on that bench, the trees in planting, and the many different kinds of places to sit were all little battles that turned this project into a place that people wanted to be.
Now, this proved very valuable 20 years later when Michael Bloomberg asked me to be his planning commissioner and put me in charge of shaping the entire city of New York.
And he said to me on that very day, he said that New York was projected to grow from eight to nine million people.
And he asked me, "So where are you going to put one million additional New Yorkers?"
Well, I didn't have any idea.
Now, you know that New York does place a high value on attracting immigrants, so we were excited about the prospect of growth, but honestly, where were we going to grow in a city that was already built out to its edges and surrounded by water?
How were we going to find housing for that many new New Yorkers?
And if we couldn't spread out, which was probably a good thing, where could new housing go?
And what about cars?
Our city couldn't possibly handle any more cars.
So what were we going to do?
If we couldn't spread out, we had to go up.
And if we had to go up, we had to go up in places where you wouldn't need to own a car.
So that meant using one of our greatest assets: our transit system.
But we had never before thought of how we could make the most of it.
So here was the answer to our puzzle.
If we were to channel and redirect all new development around transit, we could actually handle that population increase, we thought.
And so here was the plan, what we really needed to do: We needed to redo our zoning -- and zoning is the city planner's regulatory tool -- and basically reshape the entire city, targeting where new development could go and prohibiting any development at all in our car-oriented, suburban-style neighborhoods.
Well, this was an unbelievably ambitious idea, ambitious because communities had to approve those plans.
So how was I going to get this done?
By listening. So I began listening, in fact, thousands of hours of listening just to establish trust.
You know, communities can tell whether or not you understand their neighborhoods.
It's not something you can just fake.
And so I began walking.
I can't tell you how many blocks I walked, in sweltering summers, in freezing winters, year after year, just so I could get to understand the DNA of each neighborhood and know what each street felt like.
I became an incredibly geeky zoning expert, finding ways that zoning could address communities' concerns.
So little by little, neighborhood by neighborhood, block by block, we began to set height limits so that all new development would be predictable and near transit.
Over the course of 12 years, we were able to rezone 124 neighborhoods, 40 percent of the city, 12,500 blocks, so that now, 90 percent of all new development of New York is within a 10-minute walk of a subway.
In other words, nobody in those new buildings needs to own a car.
Well, those rezonings were exhausting and enervating and important, but rezoning was never my mission.
You can't see zoning and you can't feel zoning.
My mission was always to create great public spaces.
So in the areas where we zoned for significant development, I was determined to create places that would make a difference in people's lives.
Here you see what was two miles of abandoned, degraded waterfront in the neighborhoods of Greenpoint and Williamsburg in Brooklyn, impossible to get to and impossible to use.
Now the zoning here was massive, so I felt an obligation to create magnificent parks on these waterfronts, and I spent an incredible amount of time on every square inch of these plans.
I wanted to make sure that there were tree-lined paths from the upland to the water, that there were trees and plantings everywhere, and, of course, lots and lots of places to sit.
Honestly, I had no idea how it would turn out.
I had to have faith.
But I put everything that I had studied and learned into those plans.
And then it opened, and I have to tell you, it was incredible.
People came from all over the city to be in these parks.
I know they changed the lives of the people who live there, but they also changed New Yorkers' whole image of their city.
I often come down and watch people get on this little ferry that now runs between the boroughs, and I can't tell you why, but I'm completely moved by the fact that people are using it as if it had always been there.
And here is a new park in lower Manhattan.
Now, the water's edge in lower Manhattan was a complete mess before 9/11.
Wall Street was essentially landlocked because you couldn't get anywhere near this edge.
And after 9/11, the city had very little control.
But I thought if we went to the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation and got money to reclaim this two miles of degraded waterfront that it would have an enormous effect on the rebuilding of lower Manhattan.
And it did.
Lower Manhattan finally has a public waterfront on all three sides.
I really love this park.
You know, railings have to be higher now, so we put bar seating at the edge, and you can get so close to the water you're practically on it.
And see how the railing widens and flattens out so you can lay down your lunch or your laptop.
And I love when people come there and look up and they say, "Wow, there's Brooklyn, and it's so close."
So what's the trick?
How do you turn a park into a place that people want to be?
Well, it's up to you, not as a city planner but as a human being.
You don't tap into your design expertise.
You tap into your humanity.
I mean, would you want to go there?
Would you want to stay there?
Can you see into it and out of it?
Are there other people there?
Does it seem green and friendly?
Can you find your very own seat?
Well now, all over New York City, there are places where you can find your very own seat.
Where there used to be parking spaces, there are now pop-up cafes.
Where Broadway traffic used to run, there are now tables and chairs.
Where 12 years ago, sidewalk cafes were not allowed, they are now everywhere.
But claiming these spaces for public use was not simple, and it's even harder to keep them that way.
So now I'm going to tell you a story about a very unusual park called the High Line.
The High Line was an elevated railway.
(Applause) The High Line was an elevated railway that ran through three neighborhoods on Manhattan's West Side, and when the train stopped running, it became a self-seeded landscape, a kind of a garden in the sky.
And when I saw it the first time, honestly, when I went up on that old viaduct, I fell in love the way you fall in love with a person, honestly.
And when I was appointed, saving the first two sections of the High Line from demolition became my first priority and my most important project.
I knew if there was a day that I didn't worry about the High Line, it would come down.
And the High Line, even though it is widely known now and phenomenally popular, it is the most contested public space in the city.
You might see a beautiful park, but not everyone does.
You know, it's true, commercial interests will always battle against public space.
You might say, "How wonderful it is that more than four million people come from all over the world to visit the High Line."
Well, a developer sees just one thing: customers.
Hey, why not take out those plantings and have shops all along the High Line?
Wouldn't that be terrific and won't it mean a lot more money for the city?
Well no, it would not be terrific.
It would be a mall, and not a park.
(Applause) And you know what, it might mean more money for the city, but a city has to take the long view, the view for the common good.
Most recently, the last section of the High Line, the third section of the High Line, the final section of the High Line, has been pitted against development interests, where some of the city's leading developers are building more than 17 million square feet at the Hudson Yards.
And they came to me and proposed that they "temporarily disassemble" that third and final section.
Perhaps the High Line didn't fit in with their image of a gleaming city of skyscrapers on a hill.
Perhaps it was just in their way.
But in any case, it took nine months of nonstop daily negotiation to finally get the signed agreement to prohibit its demolition, and that was only two years ago.
So you see, no matter how popular and successful a public space may be, it can never be taken for granted.
Public spaces always -- this is it saved -- public spaces always need vigilant champions, not only to claim them at the outset for public use, but to design them for the people that use them, then to maintain them to ensure that they are for everyone, that they are not violated, invaded, abandoned or ignored.
If there is any one lesson that I have learned in my life as a city planner, it is that public spaces have power.
It's not just the number of people using them, it's the even greater number of people who feel better about their city just knowing that they are there.
Public space can change how you live in a city, how you feel about a city, whether you choose one city over another, and public space is one of the most important reasons why you stay in a city.
I believe that a successful city is like a fabulous party.
People stay because they are having a great time.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
What is the intersection between technology, art and science?
Curiosity and wonder, because it drives us to explore, because we're surrounded by things we can't see.
And I love to use film to take us on a journey through portals of time and space, to make the invisible visible, because what that does, it expands our horizons, it transforms our perception, it opens our minds and it touches our heart.
So here are some scenes from my 3D IMAX film, "Mysteries of the Unseen World."
(Music) There is movement which is too slow for our eyes to detect, and time lapse makes us discover and broaden our perspective of life.
We can see how organisms emerge and grow, how a vine survives by creeping from the forest floor to look at the sunlight.
And at the grand scale, time lapse allows us to see our planet in motion.
We can view not only the vast sweep of nature, but the restless movement of humanity.
Each streaking dot represents a passenger plane, and by turning air traffic data into time-lapse imagery, we can see something that's above us constantly but invisible: the vast network of air travel over the United States.
We can do the same thing with ships at sea.
We can turn data into a time-lapse view of a global economy in motion.
And decades of data give us the view of our entire planet as a single organism sustained by currents circulating throughout the oceans and by clouds swirling through the atmosphere, pulsing with lightning, crowned by the aurora Borealis.
It may be the ultimate time-lapse image: the anatomy of Earth brought to life.
At the other extreme, there are things that move too fast for our eyes, but we have technology that can look into that world as well.
With high-speed cameras, we can do the opposite of time lapse.
We can shoot images that are thousands of times faster than our vision.
And we can see how nature's ingenious devices work, and perhaps we can even imitate them.
When a dragonfly flutters by, you may not realize, but it's the greatest flier in nature.
It can hover, fly backwards, even upside down.
And by tracking markers on an insect's wings, we can visualize the air flow that they produce.
Nobody knew the secret, but high speed shows that a dragonfly can move all four wings in different directions at the same time.
And what we learn can lead us to new kinds of robotic flyers that can expand our vision of important and remote places.
We're giants, and we're unaware of things that are too small for us to see.
The electron microscope fires electrons which creates images which can magnify things by as much as a million times.
This is the egg of a butterfly.
And there are unseen creatures living all over your body, including mites that spend their entire lives dwelling on your eyelashes, crawling over your skin at night.
Can you guess what this is?
Shark skin.
A caterpillar's mouth.
The eye of a fruit fly.
An eggshell.
A flea.
A snail's tongue.
We think we know most of the animal kingdom, but there may be millions of tiny species waiting to be discovered.
A spider also has great secrets, because spiders' silk thread is pound for pound stronger than steel but completely elastic.
This journey will take us all the way down to the nano world.
The silk is 100 times thinner than human hair.
On there is bacteria, and near that bacteria, 10 times smaller, a virus.
Inside of that, 10 times smaller, three strands of DNA.
And nearing the limit of our most powerful microscopes, single carbon atoms.
With the tip of a powerful microscope, we can actually move atoms and begin to create amazing nano devices.
Some could one day patrol our body for all kinds of diseases and clean out clogged arteries along the way.
Tiny chemical machines of the future can one day, perhaps, repair DNA.
We are on the threshold of extraordinary advances, born of our drive to unveil the mysteries of life.
So under an endless rain of cosmic dust, the air is full of pollen, micro-diamonds and jewels from other planets and supernova explosions.
People go about their lives surrounded by the unseeable.
Knowing that there's so much around us we can't see forever changes our understanding of the world, and by looking at unseen worlds, we recognize that we exist in the living universe, and this new perspective creates wonder and inspires us to become explorers in our own backyards.
Who knows what awaits to be seen and what new wonders will transform our lives.
We'll just have to see.
(Applause) Thank you.
You will understand nothing with my type of English.
It's good for you because you can have a break after all these fantastic people.
I must tell you I am like that, not very comfortable, because usually, in life, I think my job is absolutely useless.
I mean, I feel useless.
Now after Carolyn, and all the other guys, I feel like shit.
And definitively, I don't know why I am here, but -- you know the nightmare you can have, like you are an impostor, you arrive at the opera, and they push you, "You must sing!"
I don't know. (Laughter) So, so, because I have nothing to show, nothing to say, we shall try to speak about something else.
We can start, if you want, by understanding -- it's just to start, it's not interesting, but -- how I work.
When somebody comes to me and ask for what I am known, I mean, yes, lemon squeezer, toilet brush, toothpick, beautiful toilet seats, and why not -- a toothbrush?
I don't try to design the toothbrush.
I don't try to say, "Oh, that will be a beautiful object," or something like that.
That doesn't interest me.
Because there is different types of design.
The one, we can call it the cynical design, that means the design invented by Raymond Loewy in the '50s, who said, what is ugly is a bad sale, la laideur se vend mal, which is terrible.
It means the design must be just the weapon for marketing, for producer to make product more sexy, like that, they sell more: it's shit, it's obsolete, it's ridiculous.
I call that the cynical design.
After, there is the narcissistic design: it's a fantastic designer who designs only for other fantastic designers. (Laughter) After, there is people like me, who try to deserve to exist, and who are so ashamed to make this useless job, who try to do it in another way, and they try, I try, to not make the object for the object but for the result, for the profit for the human being, the person who will use it.
If we take the toothbrush -- I don't think about the toothbrush.
I think, "What will be the effect of the brush in the mouth?"
And to understand what will be the effect of the toothbrush in the mouth, I must imagine: Who owns this mouth?
What is the life of the owner of this mouth? In what society [does] this guy live?
What civilization creates this society?
What animal species creates this civilization?
When I arrive -- and I take one minute, I am not so intelligent -- when I arrive at the level of animal species, that becomes real interesting.
Me, I have strictly no power to change anything.
But when I come back, I can understand why I shall not do it, because today to not do it, it's more positive than do it, or how I shall do it.
But to come back, where I am at the animal species, there is things to see.
There is things to see, there is the big challenge.
The big challenge in front of us.
Because there is not a human production which exists outside of what I call "the big image."
The big image is our story, our poetry, our romanticism.
Our poetry is our mutation, our life.
We must remember, and we can see that in any book of my son of 10 years old, that life appears four billion years ago, around -- four billion point two?
Voice offstage: Four point five.
Yes, point five, OK, OK, OK! (Laughter) I'm a designer, that's all, of Christmas gifts.
And before, there was this soup, called "soupe primordiale," this first soup -- bloop bloop bloop -- sort of dirty mud, no life, nothing.
So then -- pshoo-shoo -- lightning -- pshoo -- arrive -- pshoo-shoo -- makes life -- bloop bloop -- and that dies.
Some million years after -- pshoo-shoo, bloop-bloop -- ah, wake up!
At the end, finally, that succeeds, and life appears.
We was so, so stupid. The most stupid bacteria.
Even, I think, we copy our way to reproduce, you know what I mean, and something of -- oh no, forget it.
After, we become a fish; after, we become a frog; after, we become a monkey; after, we become what we are today: a super-monkey, and the fun is, the super-monkey we are today, is at half of the story.
Can you imagine? From that stupid bacteria to us, with a microphone, with a computer, with an iPod: four billion years.
And we know, and especially Carolyn knows, that when the sun will implode, the earth will burn, explode, I don't know what, and this is scheduled for four, four billion years?
Yes, she said, something like that. OK, that means we are at half of the story.
Fantastic! It's a beauty!
Can you imagine? It's very symbolic.
Because the bacteria we was had no idea of what we are today.
And today, we have no idea of what we shall be in four billion years.
And this territory is fantastic.
That is our poetry. That is our beautiful story.
It's our romanticism. Mu-ta-tion. We are mutants.
And if we don't deeply understand, if we don't integrate that we are mutants, we completely miss the story.
Because every generation thinks we are the final one.
We have a way to look at Earth like that, you know, "I am the man. The final man.
You know, we mutate during four billion years before, but now, because it's me, we stop. Fin. (Laughter) For the end, for the eternity, it is one with a red jacket."
Something like that. I am not sure of that. (Laughter) Because that is our intelligence of mutation and things like that.
There is so many things to do; it's so fresh.
And here is something: nobody is obliged to be a genius, but everybody is obliged to participate.
And to participate, for a mutant, there is a minimum of exercise, a minimum of sport.
We can say that.
The first, if you want -- there is so many -- but one which is very easy to do, is the duty of vision.
I can explain you. I shall try.
If you walk like that, it's OK, it's OK, you can walk, but perhaps, because you walk with the eyes like that, you will not see, oh, there is a hole.
And you will fall, and you will die. Dangerous.
That's why, perhaps, you will try to have this angle of vision.
OK, I can see, if I found something, up, up, and they continue, up up up.
I raise the angle of vision, but it's still very -- selfish, selfish, egoiste -- yes, selfish.
You, you survive. It's OK.
If you raise the level of your eyes a little more you go, "I see you, oh my God you are here, how are you, I can help you, I can design for you a new toothbrush, new toilet brush," something like that.
I live in society; I live in community.
It's OK. You start to be in the territory of intelligence, we can say.
From this level, the more you can raise this angle of view, the more you will be important for the society.
The more you will rise, the more you will be important for the civilization.
The more you will rise, to see far and high, like that, the more you will be important for the story of our mutation.
That means intelligent people are in this angle. That is intelligence.
From this to here, that, it's genius.
Ptolemy, Eratosthenes, Einstein, things like that.
Nobody's obliged to be a genius.
It's better, but nobody.
Take care, in this training, to be a good mutant.
There is some danger, there is some trap. One trap: the vertical.
Because at the vertical of us, if you look like that, "Ah! my God, there is God. Ah! God!"
God is a trap. God is the answer when we don't know the answer.
That means, when your brain is not enough big, when you don't understand, you go, "Ah, it's God, it's God." That's ridiculous.
That's why -- jump, like that? No, don't jump.
Come back. Because, after, there is another trap.
If you look like that, you look to the past, or you look inside if you are very flexible, inside yourself.
It's called schizophrenia, and you are dead also.
That's why every morning, now, because you are a good mutant, you will raise your angle of view.
Out, more of the horizontal. You are an intelligence.
Never forget -- like that, like that.
It's very, very, very important.
What, what else we can say about that? Why do that?
It's because we -- if we look from far, we see our line of evolution.
This line of evolution is clearly positive.
From far, this line looks very smooth, like that.
But if you take a lens, like that, this line is ack, ack, ack, ack, ack. Like that.
It's made of light and shadow.
We can say light is civilization, shadow is barbaria.
And it's very important to know where we are.
Because some cycle, there is a spot in the cycle, and you have not the same duty in the different parts of the cycle.
That means, we can imagine -- I don't say it was fantastic, but in the '80s, there was not too much war, like that, it was -- we can imagine that the civilization can become civilized.
In this case, people like me are acceptable.
We can say, "It's luxurious time."
We have time to think, we have time to I don't know what, speak about art and things like that.
It's OK. We are in the light.
But sometimes, like today, we fall, we fall so fast, so fast to shadow, we fall so fast to barbaria.
With many, many, many, many face of barbaria.
Because it's not, the barbaria we have today, it's perhaps not the barbaria we think.
There is different type of barbaria.
That's why we must adapt.
That means, when barbaria is back, forget the beautiful chairs, forget the beautiful hotel, forget design, even -- I'm sorry to say -- forget art.
Forget all that. There is priority; there is urgency.
You must go back to politics, you must go back to radicalization, I'm sorry if that's not very English.
You must go back to fight, to battle.
That's why today I'm so ashamed to make this job.
That's why I am here, to try to do it the best possible.
But I know that even I do it the best possible -- that's why I'm the best -- it's nothing.
Because it's not the right time.
That's why I say that. I say that, because, I repeat, nothing exist if it's not in the good rhythym, the rhythym of our beautiful dream, of this civilization.
And because we must all work to finish this story.
Because the scenario of this civilization -- about love, progress, and things like that -- it's OK, but there is so many different, other scenarios of other civilizations.
This scenario, of this civilization, was about becoming powerful, intelligent, like this idea we have invented, this concept of God.
We are God now. We are. It's almost done.
We have just to finish the story.
That is very, very important.
And when you don't understand really what's happened, you cannot go and fight and work and build and things like that.
You go to the future back, back, back, back, like that.
And you can fall, and it's very dangerous.
No, you must really understand that.
Because we have almost finished, I'll repeat this story.
And the beauty of this, in perhaps 50 years, 60 years, we can finish completely this civilization, and offer to our children the possibility to invent a new story, a new poetry, a new romanticism.
With billions of people who have been born, worked, lived and died before us, these people who have worked so much, we have now bring beautiful things, beautiful gifts, we know so many things.
We can say to our children, OK, done, that was our story. That passed.
Now you have a duty: invent a new story. Invent a new poetry.
The only rule is, we have not to have any idea about the next story.
We give you white pages. Invent.
We give you the best tools, the best tools, and now, do it.
That's why I continue to work, even if it's for toilet brush.
I was born and raised in Sierra Leone, a small and very beautiful country in West Africa, a country rich both in physical resources and creative talent.
However, Sierra Leone is infamous for a decade-long rebel war in the '90s when entire villages were burnt down.
An estimated 8,000 men, women and children had their arms and legs amputated during this time.
As my family and I ran for safety when I was about 12 from one of those attacks, I resolved that I would do everything I could to ensure that my own children would not go through the same experiences we had.
They would, in fact, be part of a Sierra Leone where war and amputation were no longer a strategy for gaining power.
As I watched people who I knew, loved ones, recover from this devastation, one thing that deeply troubled me was that many of the amputees in the country would not use their prostheses.
The reason, I would come to find out, was that their prosthetic sockets were painful because they did not fit well.
The prosthetic socket is the part in which the amputee inserts their residual limb, and which connects to the prosthetic ankle.
Even in the developed world, it takes a period of three weeks to often years for a patient to get a comfortable socket, if ever.
Prosthetists still use conventional processes like molding and casting to create single-material prosthetic sockets.
Such sockets often leave intolerable amounts of pressure on the limbs of the patient, leaving them with pressure sores and blisters.
It does not matter how powerful your prosthetic ankle is.
If your prosthetic socket is uncomfortable, you will not use your leg, and that is just simply unacceptable in our age.
So one day, when I met professor Hugh Herr about two and a half years ago, and he asked me if I knew how to solve this problem, I said, "No, not yet, but I would love to figure it out."
And so, for my Ph.D. at the MIT Media Lab, I designed custom prosthetic sockets quickly and cheaply that are more comfortable than conventional prostheses.
I used magnetic resonance imaging to capture the actual shape of the patient's anatomy, then use finite element modeling to better predict the internal stresses and strains on the normal forces, and then create a prosthetic socket for manufacture.
We use a 3D printer to create a multi-material prosthetic socket which relieves pressure where needed on the anatomy of the patient.
In short, we're using data to make novel sockets quickly and cheaply.
In a recent trial we just wrapped up at the Media Lab, one of our patients, a U.S. veteran who has been an amputee for about 20 years and worn dozens of legs, said of one of our printed parts, "It's so soft, it's like walking on pillows, and it's effing sexy."
(Laughter) Disability in our age should not prevent anyone from living meaningful lives.
My hope and desire is that the tools and processes we develop in our research group can be used to bring highly functional prostheses to those who need them.
For me, a place to begin healing the souls of those affected by war and disease is by creating comfortable and affordable interfaces for their bodies.
Whether it's in Sierra Leone or in Boston, I hope this not only restores but indeed transforms their sense of human potential.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Pat Mitchell: That day, January 8, 2011, began like all others.
You were both doing the work that you love.
You were meeting with constituents, which is something that you loved doing as a congresswoman, and Mark, you were happily preparing for your next space shuttle.
And suddenly, everything that you had planned or expected in your lives was irrevocably changed forever.
Mark Kelly: Yeah, it's amazing, it's amazing how everything can change for any of us in an instant.
People don't realize that.
I certainly didn't.
Gabby Giffords: Yes.
MK: And on that Saturday morning, I got this horrible phone call from Gabby's chief of staff.
She didn't have much other information.
She just said, "Gabby was shot."
A few minutes later, I called her back and I actually thought for a second, well, maybe I just imagined getting this phone call.
I called her back, and that's when she told me that Gabby had been shot in the head.
And from that point on, I knew that our lives were going to be a lot different.
PM: And when you arrived at the hospital, what was the prognosis that they gave you about Gabby's condition and what recovery, if any, you could expect?
MK: Well, for a gunshot wound to the head and a traumatic brain injury, they typically can't tell you much.
Every injury is different. It's not predictable like often a stroke might be predictable, which is another TBI kind of injury.
So they didn't know how long Gabby would be in a coma, didn't know when that would change and what the prognosis would be.
PM: Gabby, has your recovery been an effort to create a new Gabby Giffords or reclaim the old Gabby Giffords?
GG: The new one -- better, stronger, tougher.
(Applause) MK: That to say, when you look at the picture behind us, to come back from that kind of injury and come back strong and stronger than ever is a really tough thing to do.
I don't know anybody that's as tough as my wonderful wife right here.
(Applause) PM: And what were the first signs that recovery was not only going to be possible but you were going to have some semblance of the life that you and Gabby had planned?
MK: Well, the first thing, for me, was Gabby was still kind of almost unconscious, but she did something when she was in the ICU hospital bed that she used to do when we might be out to dinner at a restaurant, in that she pulled my ring off and she flipped it from one finger to the next, and at that point I knew that she was still in there.
PM: And there were certain words, too.
Didn't she surprise you with words in the beginning?
MK: Well, it was tough in the beginning. GG: What? What? Chicken. Chicken. Chicken.
MK: Yeah, that was it.
For the first month, that was the extent of Gabby's vocabulary.
For some reason, she has aphasia, which is difficulty with communication.
She latched on to the word "chicken," which isn't the best but certainly is not the worst.
(Laughter) And we were actually worried it could have been a lot worse than that.
PM: Gabby, what's been the toughest challenge for you during this recovery?
GG: Talking. Really hard. Really.
MK: Yeah, with aphasia, Gabby knows what she wants to say, she just can't get it out.
She understands everything, but the communication is just very difficult because when you look at the picture, the part of your brain where those communication centers are are on the left side of your head, which is where the bullet passed through.
PM: So you have to do a very dangerous thing: speak for your wife.
MK: I do.
It might be some of the most dangerous things I've ever done.
PM: Gabby, are you optimistic about your continuing recovery -- walking, talking, being able to move your arm and leg?
GG: I'm optimistic. It will be a long, hard haul, but I'm optimistic.
PM: That seems to be the number one characteristic of Gabby Giffords, wouldn't you say? (Applause) MK: Gabby's always been really optimistic.
She works incredibly hard every day.
GG: On the treadmill, walked on my treadmill, Spanish lessons, French horn.
MK: It's only my wife who could be -- and if you knew her before she was injured, you would kind of understand this -- somebody who could be injured and have such a hard time communicating and meets with a speech therapist, and then about a month ago, she says, "I want to learn Spanish again."
PM: Well, let's take a little closer look at the wife, and this was even before you met Gabby Giffords.
And she's on a motor scooter there, but it's my understanding that's a very tame image of what Gabby Giffords was like growing up.
MK: Yeah, Gabby, she used to race motorcycles.
So that's a scooter, but she had -- well, she still has a BMW motorcycle.
PM: Does she ride it? MK: Well, that's a challenge with not being able to move her right arm, but I think with something I know about, Velcro, we might be able to get her back on the bike, Velcro her right hand up onto the handlebar.
PM: I have a feeling we might see that picture next, Gabby.
But you meet, you're already decided that you're going to dedicate your life to service.
You're going into the military and eventually to become an astronaut.
So you meet.
What attracts you to Gabby?
MK: Well, when we met, oddly enough, it was the last time we were in Vancouver, about 10 years ago. We met in Vancouver, at the airport, on a trip that we were both taking to China, that I would actually, from my background, I would call it a boondoggle.
Gabby would — GG: Fact-finding mission.
MK: She would call it an important fact-finding mission.
She was a state senator at the time, and we met here, at the airport, before a trip to China.
PM: Would you describe it as a whirlwind romance?
GG: No, no, no.
(Laughter) A good friend.
MK: Yeah, we were friends for a long time.
GG: Yes. (Laughter) MK: And then she invited me on, about a year or so later, she invited me on a date.
Where'd we go, Gabby?
GG: Death row.
MK: Yes. Our first date was to death row at the Florence state prison in Arizona, which was just outside Gabby's state senate district.
They were working on some legislation that had to do with crime and punishment and capital punishment in the state of Arizona.
So she couldn't get anybody else to go with her, and I'm like, "Of course I want to go to death row."
So that was our first date.
We've been together ever since. GG: Yes.
PM: Well, that might have contributed to the reason that Gabby decided to marry you.
You were willing to go to death row, after all.
MK: I guess.
PM: Gabby, what did make you want to marry Mark?
GG: Um, good friends. Best friends. Best friends.
MK: I thought we always had a very special relationship.
We've gone through some tough times and it's only made it stronger. GG: Stronger.
PM: After you got married, however, you continued very independent lives.
Actually, you didn't even live together.
MK: We had one of those commuter marriages.
In our case, it was Washington, D.C., Houston, Tucson.
Sometimes we'd go clockwise, sometimes counterclockwise, to all those different places, and we didn't really live together until that Saturday morning.
Within an hour of Gabby being shot, I was on an airplane to Tucson, and that was the moment where that had changed things.
PM: And also, Gabby, you had run for Congress after being a state senator and served in Congress for six years.
What did you like best about being in Congress?
GG: Fast pace. Fast pace.
PM: Well it was the way you did it. GG: Yes, yes. Fast pace.
PM: I'm not sure people would describe it entirely that way.
(Laughter) MK: Yeah, you know, legislation is often at a colossally slow pace, but my wife, and I have to admit, a lot of other members of Congress that I know, work incredibly hard.
I mean, Gabby would run around like a crazy person, never take a day off, maybe a half a day off a month, and whenever she was awake she was working, and she really, really thrived on that, and still does today. GG: Yes. Yes.
PM: Installing solar panels on the top of her house, I have to say.
So after the tragic incident, Mark, you decided to resign your position as an astronaut, even though you were supposed to take the next space mission.
Everybody, including Gabby, talked you into going back, and you did end up taking.
MK: Kind of. The day after Gabby was injured, I called my boss, the chief astronaut, Dr. Peggy Whitson, and I said, "Peggy, I know I'm launching in space in three months from now.
Gabby's in a coma. I'm in Tucson.
You've got to find a replacement for me."
So I didn't actually resign from being an astronaut, but I gave up my job and they found a replacement.
Months later, maybe about two months later, I started about getting my job back, which is something, when you become this primary caregiver person, which some people in the audience here have certainly been in that position, it's a challenging role but at some point you've got to figure out when you're going to get your life back, and at the time, I couldn't ask Gabby if she wanted me to go fly in the space shuttle again.
But I knew she was— GG: Yes. Yes. Yes.
MK: She was the biggest supporter of my career, and I knew it was the right thing to do.
PM: And yet I'm trying to imagine, Mark, what that was like, going off onto a mission, one presumes safely, but it's never a guarantee, and knowing that Gabby is — MK: Well not only was she still in the hospital, on the third day of that flight, literally while I was rendezvousing with the space station, and you've got two vehicles moving at 17,500 miles an hour, I'm actually flying it, looking out the window, a bunch of computers, Gabby was in brain surgery, literally at that time having the final surgery to replace the piece of skull that they took out on the day she was injured with a prosthetic, yeah, which is the whole side of her head.
Now if any of you guys would ever come to our house in Tucson for the first time, Gabby would usually go up to the freezer and pull out the piece of Tupperware that has the real skull. (Laughter) GG: The real skull. MK: Which freaks people out, sometimes.
PM: Is that for appetizer or dessert, Mark?
MK: Well, it just gets the conversation going.
PM: But there was a lot of conversation about something you did, Gabby, after Mark's flight.
You had to make another step of courage too, because here was Congress deadlocked again, and you got out of the rehabilitation center, got yourself to Washington so that you could walk on the floor of the House -- I can barely talk about this without getting emotional — and cast a vote which could have been the deciding vote.
GG: The debt ceiling. The debt ceiling.
MK: Yeah, we had that vote, I guess about five months after Gabby was injured, and she made this bold decision to go back.
A very controversial vote, but she wanted to be there to have her voice heard one more time.
PM: And after that, resigned and began what has been a very slow and challenging recovery.
What's life like, day to day?
MK: Well, that's Gabby's service dog Nelson.
GG: Nelson.
MK: New member of our family. GG: Yes, yes.
MK: And we got him from a— GG: Prison. Murder. MK: We have a lot of connections with prisons, apparently. (Laughter) Nelson came from a prison, raised by a murderer in Massachusetts.
But she did a great job with this dog.
He's a fabulous service dog.
PM: So Gabby, what have you learned from your experiences the past few years?
MK: Yeah, what have you learned? GG: Deeper. Deeper.
PM: Your relationship is deeper.
It has to be. You're together all the time now.
MK: I imagine being grateful, too, right?
GG: Grateful.
PM: This is a picture of family and friends gathering, but I love these pictures because they show the Gabby and Mark relationship now.
And you describe it, Gabby, over and over, as deeper on so many levels. Yes?
MK: I think when something tragic happens in a family, it can pull people together.
Here's us watching the space shuttle fly over Tucson, the Space Shuttle Endeavour, the one that I was the commander on its last flight, on its final flight on top of an airplane on a 747 on its way to L.A., NASA was kind enough to have it fly over Tucson.
PM: And of course, the two of you go through these challenges of a slow and difficult recovery, and yet, Gabby, how do you maintain your optimism and positive outlook?
GG: I want to make the world a better place.
(Applause) PM: And you're doing that even though your recovery has to remain front and center for both of you.
You are people who have done service to your country and you are continuing to do that with a new initiative, a new purpose.
And Gabby, what's on the agenda now?
GG: Americans for Responsible Solutions.
MK: That's our political action committee, where we are trying to get members of Congress to take a more serious look at gun violence in this country, and to try to pass some reasonable legislation.
GG: Yes. Yes. (Applause) MK: You know, this affected us very personally, but it wasn't what happened to Gabby that got us involved.
It was really the 20 murdered first graders and kindergartners in Newtown, Connecticut, and the response that we saw afterwards where -- well, look what's happened so far.
So far the national response has been pretty much to do nothing.
We're trying to change that.
PM: There have been 11 mass shootings since Newtown, a school a week in the first two months of last year.
What are you doing that's different than other efforts to balance rights for gun ownership and responsibilities?
MK: We're gun owners, we support gun rights.
At the same time, we've got to do everything we can to keep guns out of the hands of criminals and the dangerously mentally ill.
It's not too difficult to do that.
This issue, like many others, has become very polarizing and political, and we're trying to bring some balance to the debate in Washington.
PM: Thank you both for that effort.
And not surprisingly for this woman of courage and of a sense of adventure, you just keep challenging yourself, and the sky seems to be the limit.
I have to share this video of your most recent adventure.
Take a look at Gabby.
MK: This is a couple months ago.
(Video) MK: You okay? You did great. GG: Yes, it's gorgeous. Thank you.
Good stuff. Gorgeous. Oh, thank you.
Mountains. Gorgeous mountains.
(Applause) MK: Let me just say one of the guys that Gabby jumped with that day was a Navy SEAL who she met in Afghanistan who was injured in combat, had a really rough time.
Gabby visited him when he was at Bethesda and went through a really tough period.
He started doing better.
Months later, Gabby was shot in the head, and then he supported her while she was in the hospital in Houston.
So they have a very, very nice connection.
GG: Yes.
PM: What a wonderful moment.
Because this is the TED stage, Gabby, I know you worked very hard to think of the ideas that you wanted to leave with this audience.
GG: Thank you.
Hello, everyone.
Thank you for inviting us here today.
It's been a long, hard haul, but I'm getting better.
I'm working hard, lots of therapy -- speech therapy, physical therapy, and yoga too.
But my spirit is strong as ever.
I'm still fighting to make the world a better place, and you can too.
Get involved with your community.
Be a leader. Set an example.
Be passionate. Be courageous.
Be your best. Thank you very much.
(Applause) MK: Thank you. GG: Thank you.
(Applause) MK: Thank you everybody. GG: Bye bye. (Applause)
Tyler Edmonds, Bobby Johnson, Davontae Sanford, Marty Tankleff, Jeffrey Deskovic, Anthony Caravella and Travis Hayes.
You probably don't recognize their faces.
Together, they served 89 years for murders that they didn't commit; murders that they falsely confessed to committing when they were teenagers.
I'm a forensic developmental psychologist, and I study these types of cases.
As a researcher, a professor and a new parent, my goal is to conduct scientific research that helps us understand how kids function in a legal system that was designed for adults.
In March of 2006, police interrogated Brendan Dassey, a 16-year-old high school student with an IQ around 70, putting him in the range of intellectual disability.
So here's just a brief snippet of his four-hour interrogation.
(Video) Police 1: Brendan, be honest.
I told you before that's the only thing that's going to help you here.
We already know what happened, OK?
Police 2: If we don't get honesty here -- I'm your friend right now, but I've got to believe in you, and if I don't believe in you, I can't go to bat for you.
OK? You're nodding.
Tell us what happened.
P1: Your mom said you'd be honest with us.
P2: And she's behind you 100 percent no matter what happens here.
P1: That's what she said, because she thinks you know more, too.
P2: We're in your corner.
P1: We already know what happened, now tell us exactly. Don't lie.
Lindsay Malloy: They told Brendan that honesty would "set him free," but they were completely convinced of his guilt at that point.
So by honesty, they meant a confession, and his confession would definitely not end up setting him free.
They eventually got a confession from Brendan that didn't really make sense, didn't match much of the physical evidence of the crime and is widely believed to be false.
Still, it was enough to convict Brendan and sentence him to life in prison for murder and sexual assault in 2007.
There was no physical evidence against Brendan at all.
It was nothing more than his own words that sent him to prison for nearly a decade, until a judge overturned his conviction just a few months ago.
The Dassey case is unique because it made its way into a Netflix series, called "Making a Murderer," which I'm sure many of you saw, and if you haven't, you should definitely watch it.
The Dassey case is also unique because it led to such intense public outrage.
People were very angry about how Brendan was questioned, and many assumed that his interrogation had to have been illegal.
It wasn't illegal.
As someone who's a researcher in this area and is familiar with police interrogation training manuals, I wasn't really surprised by what I saw.
The fact is, Dassey's interrogation itself is actually not all that unique, and to be honest with you, I've seen worse.
So I understand the public outcry about injustice in Brendan Dassey's individual case.
But let's not forget that approximately one million or so of his peers are arrested every year in the United States and may be subjected to similar interrogation techniques, techniques that we know increase the risk for false confession.
And I know many people are going to struggle with that term, "false confession," and with believing that false confessions actually occur.
And I get that.
It's very shocking and counterintuitive: Why would someone confess and even give gruesome details about a horrifying crime like rape or murder if they hadn't actually done it?
It makes no sense.
And the fact is, we can never know precisely how often false confessions occur.
But what we do know is that false confessions or admissions were present in approximately 25 percent of wrongful convictions of people later exonerated by DNA evidence.
Turns out, they were innocent.
These cases are crystal clear because we have the DNA.
So they didn't do the crime, and yet one-quarter of them confessed to it anyway.
And at this point, from countless research studies, we have a pretty good sense of why people falsely confess, and why some people, like Brendan Dassey, are at greater risk for doing so.
We know that youth are especially vulnerable to providing false confessions.
In one study of exonerations, for example, only eight percent of adults had falsely confessed, but 42 percent of juveniles had done so.
Of course, if we're just looking at wrongful convictions and exonerations, we're only getting part of the story.
Left out, for instance, are the many cases that are resolved by guilty pleas, not trials.
From TV and news headlines, you may think that trials are the norm in our legal system, but the reality is that 97 percent of legal cases in the US are resolved by pleas, not trials.
Ninety-seven percent.
Also left out will be confessions to more minor types of crimes that don't typically involve DNA evidence and aren't usually reviewed or appealed following a conviction.
So for this reason, many refer to the false confessions we actually do know about as the tip of a much larger iceberg.
In our research, we found alarming rates of false confession among teenagers.
We interviewed almost 200 incarcerated 14-to-17-year-olds, and 17 percent of them reported that they'd made at least one false confession to police.
What's also shocking to most is that, in interrogations in the US, police are allowed to interrogate juveniles just like adults.
So they can lie to them -- blatant lies like, "We have your fingerprints, we have your DNA; your friend is down the hall saying that this was all your idea."
Lying to suspects is banned in the UK, for example, but legal here in the US, even with intellectually impaired teens like Brendan Dassey.
In our research, most of the incarcerated teens that we interviewed reported experiencing high-pressure police interrogations without lawyers or parents present.
More than 80 percent described having been threatened by the police, including with the possibility of being raped or killed in jail or being tried as an adult.
These maximization strategies are designed to make suspects feel like denials are pointless and confession is the only option.
So you may have heard of playing the role of "good cop/bad cop," right?
Well, this is bad cop.
Juveniles are more suggestible and susceptible to social influence, like the intense pressure accusations and suggestions coming from authority figures in interrogations.
More than 70 percent of the teens in our study said that the police had tried to "befriend" them or indicate a desire to help them out during the interrogation.
These are referred to as "minimization strategies," and they're designed to convey sympathy and understanding to the suspect, and they imply that a confession will result in more lenient treatment.
So in the classic good-cop-bad-cop oversimplification of police interrogations, this is "good cop."
(Video) P1: Honesty here, Brendan, is the thing that's going to help you, OK?
No matter what you did, we can work through that, OK?
We can't make any promises, but we'll stand behind you no matter what you did, OK?
LM: "No matter what you did, we can work through that."
Hints of leniency like you just saw with Brendan are especially powerful among adolescents, in part because they evaluate reward and risk differently than adults do.
Confessing brings an immediate reward to the suspect, right?
Now the stressful, unpleasant interrogation is over.
So confessing may seem like the best option to most teens, who are less focused on that long-term risk of conviction and punishment down the road as a result of that confession.
I think we can all agree that thoughtful, long-term planning is not a strength of most teenagers that we know.
And by and large, the legal system seems to get that young victims and witnesses should be treated differently than adults.
But when it comes to young suspects, it's like the kid gloves come off.
And treating juveniles as though they're adults in interrogations is a problem, because literally hundreds of psychological and neuroscientific studies tell us that juveniles do not think like adults, they do not behave like adults, and they're not built like adults.
Adolescent brains are different from adult brains -- even anatomically.
So there are important changes happening in the structure and function of the brain during adolescence, especially in the prefrontal cortex and the limbic system, and these are areas that are crucial for things like self-control, decision-making, emotion processing and regulation and sensitivity to reward and risk, all of which can affect how you function in a stressful circumstance, like a police interrogation.
We need to educate law enforcement, attorneys, judges and jurors on juveniles' developmental limitations and how they can play out in a high-stakes interrogation.
In one national survey of police officers, 75 percent of them actually requested specialized training in how to talk to children and adolescents -- most of them had had none.
We also need to consider having special protections in place for juveniles.
In his 91-page decision to overturn Dassey's conviction earlier this year, the judge made a big deal about the fact that Dassey had no parent or other allied adult in the interrogation room with him.
So here's a clip of Brendan talking to his mom after he confessed, when it was obviously far too late for him.
(Video) Mom: What do you mean?
Brendan: Like, if his story is, like, different, like I never did nothing or something.
M: Did you?
Huh?
B: Not really.
M: What do you mean, "Not really"?
B: They got into my head.
LM: So he sums it up pretty beautifully there: "They got into my head."
We don't know if the outcome would have been different for Brendan if his mom had been in the interrogation room with him.
But it's certainly possible.
In our research, only seven percent of incarcerated teens, most of whom had had numerous encounters with police, had ever had a parent or attorney in the room with them when they were questioned as a suspect.
Few had ever asked for a parent or attorney to be present.
And you see this in lower-stake situations, too.
We did a mock interrogation experiment in our lab here at FIU -- with parent permission for all minors, of course, and all the appropriate ethical approvals.
We falsely accused teens and adults of cheating on a study task -- an academic dishonesty offense -- that we told them was as serious as cheating in a class.
In reality, participants had witnessed a peer cheat, someone who was actually part of our research team and was allegedly on academic probation.
And we gave everyone a tough choice: you can lose your extra credit for participating in the study or accuse your peer, who will probably be expelled because of his academic probation status.
Of course, in reality, none of these consequences would have panned out, and we fully debriefed all of the participants afterward.
But most teenagers -- 59 percent of them -- signed the confession statement, falsely taking responsibility for the cheating.
Only three teens out of 74, or about four percent of them, asked to talk to a parent when we accused them of cheating, despite the fact that for most of them, their parent was literally sitting in the next room during the study.
Of course, cheating is far from murder, and I know that.
But it's interesting that so many teens, significantly more teens than adults, signed the confession saying that they cheated.
They hadn't cheated, but they signed this form anyway saying that they had, rarely attempting to involve a parent in the situation.
Other studies tell the same story.
Over 90 percent of juveniles waive their Miranda rights and submit to police questioning without lawyers or parents present.
In England and Wales, interrogations of juveniles must be conducted in the presence of an "appropriate adult," like a parent, guardian or social worker.
And this isn't something youth have to ask for -- which is great, because research shows that they won't -- it's automatic.
Now, having an appropriate adult safeguard for juveniles here in the US would not be a cure-all for improving police questioning of youth.
Unfortunately, parents often lack the knowledge and legal sophistication to appropriately advise their children.
You can just look at the case of the Central Park Five: five teenagers who falsely confessed to a brutal gang rape in 1989, with their parents by their sides.
And it took over a decade to clear their names.
So the appropriate adult really should be an attorney or perhaps a trained child advocate.
Overturning Dassey's conviction, the judge pointed out that there's no federal law requiring that the police even inform a juvenile's parent that the juvenile is being questioned or honor that juvenile's request to have a parent in the room.
So if you think about all of this together for a second: as a country, we've decided that juveniles cannot be trusted with things like voting, buying cigarettes, attending an R-rated movie or driving, but they can make the judgment call to waive their Miranda rights, rights that we know from research, most teens don't understand or appreciate.
And parents in the room: depending on the state that you live in, your child can potentially waive these rights without your knowledge and without consulting any adult first.
Now, no one -- and certainly not me -- wants to prevent police from doing the very important investigative work that they do every day.
But we need to make sure that they have appropriate training for talking to youth.
As a parent and as a researcher, I think we can do better.
I think we can take steps to prevent another Brendan Dassey, while still getting the crucial information that we need from children and teens to solve crimes.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I've been thinking about the difference between the résumé virtues and the eulogy virtues.
The résumé virtues are the ones you put on your résumé, which are the skills you bring to the marketplace.
The eulogy virtues are the ones that get mentioned in the eulogy, which are deeper: who are you, in your depth, what is the nature of your relationships, are you bold, loving, dependable, consistency?
And most of us, including me, would say that the eulogy virtues are the more important of the virtues.
But at least in my case, are they the ones that I think about the most? And the answer is no.
So I've been thinking about that problem, and a thinker who has helped me think about it is a guy named Joseph Soloveitchik, who was a rabbi who wrote a book called "The Lonely Man Of Faith" in 1965.
Soloveitchik said there are two sides of our natures, which he called Adam I and Adam II.
Adam I is the worldly, ambitious, external side of our nature.
He wants to build, create, create companies, create innovation.
Adam II is the humble side of our nature.
Adam II wants not only to do good but to be good, to live in a way internally that honors God, creation and our possibilities.
Adam I wants to conquer the world.
Adam II wants to hear a calling and obey the world.
Adam I savors accomplishment.
Adam II savors inner consistency and strength.
Adam I asks how things work.
Adam II asks why we're here.
Adam I's motto is "success."
Adam II's motto is "love, redemption and return."
And Soloveitchik argued that these two sides of our nature are at war with each other.
We live in perpetual self-confrontation between the external success and the internal value.
And the tricky thing, I'd say, about these two sides of our nature is they work by different logics.
The external logic is an economic logic: input leads to output, risk leads to reward.
The internal side of our nature is a moral logic and often an inverse logic.
You have to give to receive.
You have to surrender to something outside yourself to gain strength within yourself.
You have to conquer the desire to get what you want.
In order to fulfill yourself, you have to forget yourself.
In order to find yourself, you have to lose yourself.
We happen to live in a society that favors Adam I, and often neglects Adam II.
And the problem is, that turns you into a shrewd animal who treats life as a game, and you become a cold, calculating creature who slips into a sort of mediocrity where you realize there's a difference between your desired self and your actual self.
You're not earning the sort of eulogy you want, you hope someone will give to you.
You don't have the depth of conviction.
You don't have an emotional sonorousness.
You don't have commitment to tasks that would take more than a lifetime to commit.
I was reminded of a common response through history of how you build a solid Adam II, how you build a depth of character.
Through history, people have gone back into their own pasts, sometimes to a precious time in their life, to their childhood, and often, the mind gravitates in the past to a moment of shame, some sin committed, some act of selfishness, an act of omission, of shallowness, the sin of anger, the sin of self-pity, trying to be a people-pleaser, a lack of courage.
Adam I is built by building on your strengths.
Adam II is built by fighting your weaknesses.
You go into yourself, you find the sin which you've committed over and again through your life, your signature sin out of which the others emerge, and you fight that sin and you wrestle with that sin, and out of that wrestling, that suffering, then a depth of character is constructed.
And we're often not taught to recognize the sin in ourselves, in that we're not taught in this culture how to wrestle with it, how to confront it, and how to combat it.
We live in a culture with an Adam I mentality where we're inarticulate about Adam II.
Finally, Reinhold Niebuhr summed up the confrontation, the fully lived Adam I and Adam II life, this way: "Nothing that is worth doing can be achieved in our lifetime; therefore we must be saved by hope.
Nothing which is true or beautiful or good makes complete sense in any immediate context of history; therefore we must be saved by faith.
Nothing we do, however virtuous, can be accomplished alone; therefore we must be saved by love.
No virtuous act is quite as virtuous from the standpoint of our friend or foe as from our own standpoint.
Therefore we must be saved by that final form of love, which is forgiveness.” Thanks.
(Applause)
When I was born, there was really only one book about how to raise your children, and it was written by Dr. Spock.
(Laughter) Thank you for indulging me.
I have always wanted to do that.
No, it was Benjamin Spock, and his book was called "The Common Sense Book of Baby And Child Care."
It sold almost 50 million copies by the time he died.
Today, I, as the mother of a six-year-old, walk into Barnes and Noble, and see this.
And it is amazing the variety that one finds on those shelves.
There are guides to raising an eco-friendly kid, a gluten-free kid, a disease-proof kid, which, if you ask me, is a little bit creepy.
There are guides to raising a bilingual kid even if you only speak one language at home.
There are guides to raising a financially savvy kid and a science-minded kid and a kid who is a whiz at yoga.
Short of teaching your toddler how to defuse a nuclear bomb, there is pretty much a guide to everything.
All of these books are well-intentioned.
I am sure that many of them are great.
But taken together, I am sorry, I do not see help when I look at that shelf.
I see anxiety.
I see a giant candy-colored monument to our collective panic, and it makes me want to know, why is it that raising our children is associated with so much anguish and so much confusion?
Why is it that we are at sixes and sevens about the one thing human beings have been doing successfully for millennia, long before parenting message boards and peer-reviewed studies came along?
Why is it that so many mothers and fathers experience parenthood as a kind of crisis?
Crisis might seem like a strong word, but there is data suggesting it probably isn't.
There was, in fact, a paper of just this very name, "Parenthood as Crisis," published in 1957, and in the 50-plus years since, there has been plenty of scholarship documenting a pretty clear pattern of parental anguish.
Parents experience more stress than non-parents.
Their marital satisfaction is lower.
There have been a number of studies looking at how parents feel when they are spending time with their kids, and the answer often is, not so great.
Last year, I spoke with a researcher named Matthew Killingsworth who is doing a very, very imaginative project that tracks people's happiness, and here is what he told me he found: "Interacting with your friends is better than interacting with your spouse, which is better than interacting with other relatives, which is better than interacting with acquaintances, which is better than interacting with parents, which is better than interacting with children.
Who are on par with strangers."
(Laughter) But here's the thing.
I have been looking at what underlies these data for three years, and children are not the problem.
Something about parenting right now at this moment is the problem.
Specifically, I don't think we know what parenting is supposed to be.
Parent, as a verb, only entered common usage in 1970.
Our roles as mothers and fathers have changed.
The roles of our children have changed.
We are all now furiously improvising our way through a situation for which there is no script, and if you're an amazing jazz musician, then improv is great, but for the rest of us, it can kind of feel like a crisis.
So how did we get here?
How is it that we are all now navigating a child-rearing universe without any norms to guide us?
Well, for starters, there has been a major historical change.
Until fairly recently, kids worked, on our farms primarily, but also in factories, mills, mines.
Kids were considered economic assets.
Sometime during the Progressive Era, we put an end to this arrangement.
We recognized kids had rights, we banned child labor, we focused on education instead, and school became a child's new work.
And thank God it did.
But that only made a parent's role more confusing in a way.
The old arrangement might not have been particularly ethical, but it was reciprocal.
We provided food, clothing, shelter, and moral instruction to our kids, and they in return provided income.
Once kids stopped working, the economics of parenting changed.
Kids became, in the words of one brilliant if totally ruthless sociologist, "economically worthless but emotionally priceless."
Rather than them working for us, we began to work for them, because within only a matter of decades it became clear: if we wanted our kids to succeed, school was not enough.
Today, extracurricular activities are a kid's new work, but that's work for us too, because we are the ones driving them to soccer practice.
Massive piles of homework are a kid's new work, but that's also work for us, because we have to check it.
About three years ago, a Texas woman told something to me that totally broke my heart.
She said, almost casually, "Homework is the new dinner."
The middle class now pours all of its time and energy and resources into its kids, even though the middle class has less and less of those things to give.
Mothers now spend more time with their children than they did in 1965, when most women were not even in the workforce.
It would probably be easier for parents to do their new roles if they knew what they were preparing their kids for.
This is yet another thing that makes modern parenting so very confounding.
We have no clue what portion our wisdom, if any, is of use to our kids.
The world is changing so rapidly, it's impossible to say.
This was true even when I was young.
When I was a kid, high school specifically, I was told that I would be at sea in the new global economy if I did not know Japanese.
And with all due respect to the Japanese, it didn't turn out that way.
Now there is a certain kind of middle-class parent that is obsessed with teaching their kids Mandarin, and maybe they're onto something, but we cannot know for sure.
So, absent being able to anticipate the future, what we all do, as good parents, is try and prepare our kids for every possible kind of future, hoping that just one of our efforts will pay off.
We teach our kids chess, thinking maybe they will need analytical skills.
We sign them up for team sports, thinking maybe they will need collaborative skills, you know, for when they go to Harvard Business School.
We try and teach them to be financially savvy and science-minded and eco-friendly and gluten-free, though now is probably a good time to tell you that I was not eco-friendly and gluten-free as a child.
I ate jars of pureed macaroni and beef.
And you know what? I'm doing okay.
I pay my taxes.
I hold down a steady job.
I was even invited to speak at TED.
But the presumption now is that what was good enough for me, or for my folks for that matter, isn't good enough anymore.
So we all make a mad dash to that bookshelf, because we feel like if we aren't trying everything, it's as if we're doing nothing and we're defaulting on our obligations to our kids.
So it's hard enough to navigate our new roles as mothers and fathers.
Now add to this problem something else: we are also navigating new roles as husbands and wives because most women today are in the workforce.
This is another reason, I think, that parenthood feels like a crisis.
We have no rules, no scripts, no norms for what to do when a child comes along now that both mom and dad are breadwinners.
The writer Michael Lewis once put this very, very well.
He said that the surest way for a couple to start fighting is for them to go out to dinner with another couple whose division of labor is ever so slightly different from theirs, because the conversation in the car on the way home goes something like this: "So, did you catch that Dave is the one who walks them to school every morning?"
(Laughter) Without scripts telling us who does what in this brave new world, couples fight, and both mothers and fathers each have their legitimate gripes.
Mothers are much more likely to be multi-tasking when they are at home, and fathers, when they are at home, are much more likely to be mono-tasking.
Find a guy at home, and odds are he is doing just one thing at a time.
In fact, UCLA recently did a study looking at the most common configuration of family members in middle-class homes.
Guess what it was?
Dad in a room by himself.
According to the American Time Use Survey, mothers still do twice as much childcare as fathers, which is better than it was in Erma Bombeck's day, but I still think that something she wrote is highly relevant: "I have not been alone in the bathroom since October."
(Laughter) But here is the thing: Men are doing plenty.
They spend more time with their kids than their fathers ever spent with them.
They work more paid hours, on average, than their wives, and they genuinely want to be good, involved dads.
Today, it is fathers, not mothers, who report the most work-life conflict.
Either way, by the way, if you think it's hard for traditional families to sort out these new roles, just imagine what it's like now for non-traditional families: families with two dads, families with two moms, single-parent households.
They are truly improvising as they go.
Now, in a more progressive country, and forgive me here for capitulating to cliché and invoking, yes, Sweden, parents could rely on the state for support.
There are countries that acknowledge the anxieties and the changing roles of mothers and fathers.
Unfortunately, the United States is not one of them, so in case you were wondering what the U.S.
has in common with Papua New Guinea and Liberia, it's this: We too have no paid maternity leave policy.
We are one of eight known countries that does not.
In this age of intense confusion, there is just one goal upon which all parents can agree, and that is whether they are tiger moms or hippie moms, helicopters or drones, our kids' happiness is paramount.
That is what it means to raise kids in an age when they are economically worthless but emotionally priceless.
We are all the custodians of their self-esteem.
The one mantra no parent ever questions is, "All I want is for my children to be happy."
And don't get me wrong: I think happiness is a wonderful goal for a child.
But it is a very elusive one.
Happiness and self-confidence, teaching children that is not like teaching them how to plow a field.
It's not like teaching them how to ride a bike.
There's no curriculum for it.
Happiness and self-confidence can be the byproducts of other things, but they cannot really be goals unto themselves.
A child's happiness is a very unfair burden to place on a parent.
And happiness is an even more unfair burden to place on a kid.
And I have to tell you, I think it leads to some very strange excesses.
We are now so anxious to protect our kids from the world's ugliness that we now shield them from "Sesame Street."
I wish I could say I was kidding about this, but if you go out and you buy the first few episodes of "Sesame Street" on DVD, as I did out of nostalgia, you will find a warning at the beginning saying that the content is not suitable for children.
(Laughter) Can I just repeat that?
The content of the original "Sesame Street" is not suitable for children.
When asked about this by The New York Times, a producer for the show gave a variety of explanations.
One was that Cookie Monster smoked a pipe in one skit and then swallowed it.
Bad modeling. I don't know.
But the thing that stuck with me is she said that she didn't know whether Oscar the Grouch could be invented today because he was too depressive.
I cannot tell you how much this distresses me.
(Laughter) You are looking at a woman who has a periodic table of the Muppets hanging from her cubicle wall.
The offending muppet, right there.
That's my son the day he was born.
I was high as a kite on morphine.
I had had an unexpected C-section.
But even in my opiate haze, I managed to have one very clear thought the first time I held him.
I whispered it into his ear.
I said, "I will try so hard not to hurt you."
It was the Hippocratic Oath, and I didn't even know I was saying it.
But it occurs to me now that the Hippocratic Oath is a much more realistic aim than happiness.
In fact, as any parent will tell you, it's awfully hard.
All of us have said or done hurtful things that we wish to God we could take back.
I think in another era we did not expect quite so much from ourselves, and it is important that we all remember that the next time we are staring with our hearts racing at those bookshelves.
I'm not really sure how to create new norms for this world, but I do think that in our desperate quest to create happy kids, we may be assuming the wrong moral burden.
It strikes me as a better goal, and, dare I say, a more virtuous one, to focus on making productive kids and moral kids, and to simply hope that happiness will come to them by virtue of the good that they do and their accomplishments and the love that they feel from us.
That, anyway, is one response to having no script.
Absent having new scripts, we just follow the oldest ones in the book -- decency, a work ethic, love — and let happiness and self-esteem take care of themselves.
I think if we all did that, the kids would still be all right, and so would their parents, possibly in both cases even better.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Alright, let me tell you about building synthetic cells and printing life.
But first, let me tell you a quick story.
On March 31, 2013, my team and I received an email from an international health organization, alerting us that two men died in China shortly after contracting the H7N9 bird flu.
There were fears of a global pandemic as the virus started rapidly moving across China.
Although methods existed to produce a flu vaccine and stop the disease from spreading, at best, it would not be available for at least six months.
This is because a slow, antiquated flu vaccine manufacturing process developed over 70 years ago was the only option.
The virus would need to be isolated from infected patients, packaged up and then sent to a facility where scientists would inject the virus into chicken eggs, and incubate those chicken eggs for several weeks in order to prepare the virus for the start of a multistep, multimonth flu vaccine manufacturing process.
My team and I received this email because we had just invented a biological printer, which would allow for the flu vaccine instructions to be instantly downloaded from the internet and printed.
Drastically speeding up the way in which flu vaccines are made, and potentially saving thousands of lives.
The biological printer leverages our ability to read and write DNA and starts to bring into focus what we like to call biological teleportation.
I am a biologist and an engineer who builds stuff out of DNA.
Believe it or not, one of my favorite things to do is to take DNA apart and put it back together so that I can understand better how it works.
I can edit and program DNA to do things, just like coders programing a computer.
But my apps are different.
They create life.
Self-replicating living cells and things like vaccines and therapeutics that work in ways that were previously impossible.
Here's National Medal of Science recipient Craig Venter and Nobel laureate Ham Smith.
These two guys shared a similar vision.
That vision was, because all of the functions and characteristics of all biological entities, including viruses and living cells, are written into the code of DNA, if one can read and write that code of DNA, then they can be reconstructed in a distant location.
This is what we mean by biological teleportation.
To prove out this vision, Craig and Ham set a goal of creating, for the first time, a synthetic cell, starting from DNA code in the computer.
I mean, come on, as a scientist looking for a job, doing cutting-edge research, it doesn't get any better than this.
(Laughter) OK, a genome is a complete set of DNA within an organism.
Following the Human Genome Project in 2003, which was an international effort to identify the complete genetic blueprint of a human being, a genomics revolution happened.
Scientists started mastering the techniques for reading DNA.
In order to determine the order of the As, Cs, Ts and Gs within an organism.
But my job was far different.
I needed to master the techniques for writing DNA.
Like an author of a book, this started out as writing short sentences, or sequences of DNA code, but this soon turned into writing paragraphs and then full-on novels of DNA code, to make important biological instructions for proteins and living cells.
Living cells are nature's most efficient machines at making new products, accounting for the production of 25 percent of the total pharmaceutical market, which is billions of dollars.
We knew that writing DNA would drive this bioeconomy even more, once cells could be programmed just like computers.
We also knew that writing DNA would enable biological teleportation ...
the printing of defined, biological material, starting from DNA code.
As a step toward bringing these promises to fruition, our team set out to create, for the first time, a synthetic bacterial cell, starting from DNA code in the computer.
Synthetic DNA is a commodity.
You can order very short pieces of DNA from a number of companies, and they will start from these four bottles of chemicals that make up DNA, G, A, T and C, and they will build those very short pieces of DNA for you.
Over the past 15 years or so, my teams have been developing the technology for stitching together those short pieces of DNA into complete bacterial genomes.
The largest genome that we constructed contained over one million letters.
Which is more than twice the size of your average novel, and we had to put every single one of those letters in the correct order, without a single typo.
We were able to accomplish this by developing a procedure that I tried to call the "one-step isothermal in vitro recombination method."
(Laughter) But, surprisingly, the science community didn't like this technically accurate name and decided to call it Gibson Assembly.
Gibson Assembly is now the gold standard tool, used in laboratories around the world for building short and long pieces of DNA.
(Applause) Once we chemically synthesized the complete bacterial genome, our next challenge was to find a way to convert it into a free-living, self-replicating cell.
Our approach was to think of the genome as the operating system of the cell, with the cell containing the hardware necessary to boot up the genome.
Through a lot of trial and error, we developed a procedure where we could reprogram cells and even convert one bacterial species into another, by replacing the genome of one cell with that of another.
This genome transplantation technology then paved the way for the booting-up of genomes written by scientists and not by Mother Nature.
In 2010, all of the technologies that we had been developing for reading and writing DNA all came together when we announced the creation of the first synthetic cell, which of course, we called Synthia.
(Laughter) Ever since the first bacterial genome was sequenced, back in 1995, thousands more whole bacterial genomes have been sequenced and stored in computer databases.
Our synthetic cell work was the proof of concept that we could reverse this process: pull a complete bacterial genome sequence out of the computer and convert that information into a free-living, self-replicating cell, with all of the expected characteristics of the species that we constructed.
Now I can understand why there may be concerns about the safety of this level of genetic manipulation.
While the technology has the potential for great societal benefit, it also has the potential for doing harm.
With this in mind, even before carrying out the very first experiment, our team started to work with the public and the government to find solutions together to responsibly develop and regulate this new technology.
One of the outcomes from those discussions was to screen every customer and every customer's DNA synthesis orders, to make sure that pathogens or toxins are not being made by bad guys, or accidentally by scientists.
All suspicious orders are reported to the FBI and other relevant law-enforcement agencies.
Synthetic cell technologies will power the next industrial revolution and transform industries and economies in ways that address global sustainability challenges.
The possibilities are endless.
I mean, you can think of clothes constructed form renewable biobased sources, cars running on biofuel from engineered microbes, plastics made from biodegradable polymers and customized therapies, printed at a patient's bedside.
The massive efforts to create synthetic cells have made us world leaders at writing DNA.
Throughout the process, we found ways to write DNA faster, more accurately and more reliably.
Because of the robustness of these technologies, we found that we could readily automate the processes and move the laboratory workflows out of the scientist's hands and onto a machine.
In 2013, we built the first DNA printer.
We call it the BioXp.
And it has been absolutely essential in writing DNA across a number of applications my team and researchers around the world are working on.
It was shortly after we built the BioXp that we received that email about the H7N9 bird flu scare in China.
A team of Chinese scientists had already isolated the virus, sequenced its DNA and uploaded the DNA sequence to the internet.
At the request of the US government, we downloaded the DNA sequence and in less than 12 hours, we printed it on the BioXp.
Our collaborators at Novartis then quickly started turning that synthetic DNA into a flu vaccine.
Meanwhile, the CDC, using technology dating back to the 1940s, was still waiting for the virus to arrive from China so that they could begin their egg-based approach.
For the first time, we had a flu vaccine developed ahead of time for a new and potentially dangerous strain, and the US government ordered a stockpile.
(Applause) This was when I began to appreciate, more than ever, the power of biological teleportation.
(Laughter) Naturally, with this in mind, we started to build a biological teleporter.
We call it the DBC.
That's short for digital-to-biological converter.
Unlike the BioXp, which starts from pre-manufactured short pieces of DNA, the DBC starts from digitized DNA code and converts that DNA code into biological entities, such as DNA, RNA, proteins or even viruses.
You can think of the BioXp as a DVD player, requiring a physical DVD to be inserted, whereas the DBC is Netflix.
To build the DBC, my team of scientists worked with software and instrumentation engineers to collapse multiple laboratory workflows, all in a single box.
This included software algorithms to predict what DNA to build, chemistry to link the G, A, T and C building blocks of DNA into short pieces, Gibson Assembly to stitch together those short pieces into much longer ones, and biology to convert the DNA into other biological entities, such as proteins.
This is the prototype.
Although it wasn't pretty, it was effective.
It made therapeutic drugs and vaccines.
And laboratory workflows that once took weeks or months could now be carried out in just one to two days.
And that's all without any human intervention and simply activated by the receipt of an email which could be sent from anywhere in the world.
We like to compare the DBC to fax machines.
But whereas fax machines received images and documents, the DBC receives biological materials.
Now, consider how fax machines have evolved.
The prototype of the 1840s is unrecognizable, compared with the fax machines of today.
In the 1980s, most people still didn't know what a fax machine was, and if they did, it was difficult for them to grasp the concept of instantly reproducing an image on the other side of the world.
But nowadays, everything that a fax machine does is integrated on our smart phones, and of course, we take this rapid exchange of digital information for granted.
Here's what our DBC looks like today.
We imagine the DBC evolving in similar ways as fax machines have.
We're working to reduce the size of the instrument, and we're working to make the underlying technology more reliable, cheaper, faster and more accurate.
Accuracy is extremely important when synthesizing DNA, because a single change to a DNA letter could mean the difference between a medicine working or not or synthetic cell being alive or dead.
The DBC will be useful for the distributed manufacturing of medicine starting from DNA.
Every hospital in the world could use a DBC for printing personalized medicines for a patient at their bedside.
I can even imagine a day when it's routine for people to have a DBC to connect to their home computer or smart phone as a means to download their prescriptions, such as insulin or antibody therapies.
The DBC will also be valuable when placed in strategic areas around the world, for rapid response to disease outbreaks.
For example, the CDC in Atlanta, Georgia could send flu vaccine instructions to a DBC on the other side of the world, where the flu vaccine is manufactured right on the front lines.
That flu vaccine could even be specifically tailored to the flu strain that's circulating in that local area.
Sending vaccines around in a digital file, rather than stockpiling those same vaccines and shipping them out, promises to save thousands of lives.
Of course, the applications go as far as the imagination goes.
It's not hard to imagine placing a DBC on another planet.
Scientists on Earth could then send the digital instructions to that DBC to make new medicines or to make synthetic organisms that produce oxygen, food, fuel or building materials, as a means for making the planet more habitable for humans.
(Applause) With digital information traveling at the speed of light, it would only take minutes to send those digital instructions from Earth to Mars, but it would take months to physically deliver those same samples on a spacecraft.
But for now, I would be satisfied beaming new medicines across the globe, fully automated and on demand, saving lives from emerging infectious diseases and printing personalized cancer medicines for those who don't have time to wait.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The universe is teeming with planets.
I want us, in the next decade, to build a space telescope that'll be able to image an Earth about another star and figure out whether it can harbor life.
My colleagues at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Princeton and I are working on technology that will be able to do just that in the coming years.
Astronomers now believe that every star in the galaxy has a planet, and they speculate that up to one fifth of them have an Earth-like planet that might be able to harbor life, but we haven't seen any of them.
We've only detected them indirectly.
This is NASA's famous picture of the pale blue dot.
It was taken by the Voyager spacecraft in 1990, when they turned it around as it was exiting the solar system to take a picture of the Earth from six billion kilometers away.
I want to take that of an Earth-like planet about another star.
Why haven't we done that? Why is that hard?
Well to see, let's imagine we take the Hubble Space Telescope and we turn it around and we move it out to the orbit of Mars.
We'll see something like that, a slightly blurry picture of the Earth, because we're a fairly small telescope out at the orbit of Mars.
Now let's move ten times further away.
Here we are at the orbit of Uranus.
It's gotten smaller, it's got less detail, less resolve.
We can still see the little moon, but let's go ten times further away again.
Here we are at the edge of the solar system, out at the Kuiper Belt.
Now it's not resolved at all.
It's that pale blue dot of Carl Sagan's.
But let's move yet again ten times further away.
Here we are out at the Oort Cloud, outside the solar system, and we're starting to see the sun move into the field of view and get into where the planet is.
One more time, ten times further away.
Now we're at Alpha Centauri, our nearest neighbor star, and the planet is gone.
All we're seeing is the big beaming image of the star that's ten billion times brighter than the planet, which should be in that little red circle.
That's what we want to see. That's why it's hard.
The light from the star is diffracting.
It's scattering inside the telescope, creating that very bright image that washes out the planet.
So to see the planet, we have to do something about all of that light.
We have to get rid of it.
I have a lot of colleagues working on really amazing technologies to do that, but I want to tell you about one today that I think is the coolest, and probably the most likely to get us an Earth in the next decade.
It was first suggested by Lyman Spitzer, the father of the space telescope, in 1962, and he took his inspiration from an eclipse.
You've all seen that. That's a solar eclipse.
The moon has moved in front of the sun.
It blocks out most of the light so we can see that dim corona around it.
It would be the same thing if I put my thumb up and blocked that spotlight that's getting right in my eye, I can see you in the back row.
Well, what's going on?
Well the moon is casting a shadow down on the Earth.
We put a telescope or a camera in that shadow, we look back at the sun, and most of the light's been removed and we can see that dim, fine structure in the corona.
Spitzer's suggestion was we do this in space.
We build a big screen, we fly it in space, we put it up in front of the star, we block out most of the light, we fly a space telescope in that shadow that's created, and boom, we get to see planets.
Well that would look something like this.
So there's that big screen, and there's no planets, because unfortunately it doesn't actually work very well, because the light waves of the light and waves diffracts around that screen the same way it did in the telescope.
It's like water bending around a rock in a stream, and all that light just destroys the shadow.
It's a terrible shadow. And we can't see planets.
But Spitzer actually knew the answer.
If we can feather the edges, soften those edges so we can control diffraction, well then we can see a planet, and in the last 10 years or so we've come up with optimal solutions for doing that.
It looks something like that.
We call that our flower petal starshade.
If we make the edges of those petals exactly right, if we control their shape, we can control diffraction, and now we have a great shadow.
It's about 10 billion times dimmer than it was before, and we can see the planets beam out just like that.
That, of course, has to be bigger than my thumb.
That starshade is about the size of half a football field and it has to fly 50,000 kilometers away from the telescope that has to be held right in its shadow, and then we can see those planets.
This sounds formidable, but brilliant engineers, colleagues of mine at JPL, came up with a fabulous design for how to do that and it looks like this.
It starts wrapped around a hub.
It separates from the telescope.
The petals unfurl, they open up, the telescope turns around.
Then you'll see it flip and fly out that 50,000 kilometers away from the telescope.
It's going to move in front of the star just like that, creates a wonderful shadow.
Boom, we get planets orbiting about it.
(Applause) Thank you.
That's not science fiction.
We've been working on this for the last five or six years.
Last summer, we did a really cool test out in California at Northrop Grumman.
So those are four petals.
This is a sub-scale star shade.
It's about half the size of the one you just saw.
You'll see the petals unfurl.
Those four petals were built by four undergraduates doing a summer internship at JPL.
Now you're seeing it deploy.
Those petals have to rotate into place.
The base of those petals has to go to the same place every time to within a tenth of a millimeter.
We ran this test 16 times, and 16 times it went into the exact same place to a tenth of a millimeter.
This has to be done very precisely, but if we can do this, if we can build this technology, if we can get it into space, you might see something like this.
That's a picture of one our nearest neighbor stars taken with the Hubble Space Telescope.
If we can take a similar space telescope, slightly larger, put it out there, fly an occulter in front of it, what we might see is something like that -- that's a family portrait of our solar system -- but not ours.
We're hoping it'll be someone else's solar system as seen through an occulter, through a starshade like that.
You can see Jupiter, you can see Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and right there in the center, next to the residual light is that pale blue dot. That's Earth.
We want to see that, see if there's water, oxygen, ozone, the things that might tell us that it could harbor life.
I think this is the coolest possible science.
That's why I got into doing this, because I think that will change the world.
That will change everything when we see that.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Type is something we consume in enormous quantities.
In much of the world, it's completely inescapable.
But few consumers are concerned to know where a particular typeface came from or when or who designed it, if, indeed, there was any human agency involved in its creation, if it didn't just sort of materialize out of the software ether.
But I do have to be concerned with those things.
It's my job.
I'm one of the tiny handful of people who gets badly bent out of shape by the bad spacing of the T and the E that you see there.
I've got to take that slide off.
I can't stand it. Nor can Chris.
There. Good.
So my talk is about the connection between technology and design of type.
The technology has changed a number of times since I started work: photo, digital, desktop, screen, web.
I've had to survive those changes and try to understand their implications for what I do for design.
This slide is about the effect of tools on form.
The two letters, the two K's, the one on your left, my right, is modern, made on a computer.
All straight lines are dead straight.
The curves have that kind of mathematical smoothness that the Bézier formula imposes.
On the right, ancient Gothic, cut in the resistant material of steel by hand.
None of the straight lines are actually straight.
The curves are kind of subtle.
It has that spark of life from the human hand that the machine or the program can never capture.
What a contrast.
Well, I tell a lie.
A lie at TED. I'm really sorry.
Both of these were made on a computer, same software, same Bézier curves, same font format.
The one on your left was made by Zuzana Licko at Emigre, and I did the other one.
The tool is the same, yet the letters are different.
The letters are different because the designers are different.
That's all. Zuzana wanted hers to look like that.
I wanted mine to look like that. End of story.
Type is very adaptable.
Unlike a fine art, such as sculpture or architecture, type hides its methods.
I think of myself as an industrial designer.
The thing I design is manufactured, and it has a function: to be read, to convey meaning.
But there is a bit more to it than that.
There's the sort of aesthetic element.
What makes these two letters different from different interpretations by different designers?
What gives the work of some designers sort of characteristic personal style, as you might find in the work of a fashion designer, an automobile designer, whatever?
There have been some cases, I admit, where I as a designer did feel the influence of technology.
This is from the mid-'60s, the change from metal type to photo, hot to cold.
This brought some benefits but also one particular drawback: a spacing system that only provided 18 discrete units for letters to be accommodated on.
I was asked at this time to design a series of condensed sans serif types with as many different variants as possible within this 18-unit box.
Quickly looking at the arithmetic, I realized I could only actually make three of related design. Here you see them.
In Helvetica Compressed, Extra Compressed, and Ultra Compressed, this rigid 18-unit system really boxed me in.
It kind of determined the proportions of the design.
Here are the typefaces, at least the lower cases.
So do you look at these and say, "Poor Matthew, he had to submit to a problem, and by God it shows in the results."
I hope not.
If I were doing this same job today, instead of having 18 spacing units, I would have 1,000.
Clearly I could make more variants, but would these three members of the family be better?
It's hard to say without actually doing it, but they would not be better in the proportion of 1,000 to 18, I can tell you that.
My instinct tells you that any improvement would be rather slight, because they were designed as functions of the system they were designed to fit, and as I said, type is very adaptable.
It does hide its methods.
All industrial designers work within constraints.
This is not fine art.
The question is, does a constraint force a compromise?
By accepting a constraint, are you working to a lower standard?
I don't believe so, and I've always been encouraged by something that Charles Eames said.
He said he was conscious of working within constraints, but not of making compromises.
The distinction between a constraint and a compromise is obviously very subtle, but it's very central to my attitude to work.
Remember this reading experience?
The phone book. I'll hold the slide so you can enjoy the nostalgia.
This is from the mid-'70s early trials of Bell Centennial typeface I designed for the U.S. phone books, and it was my first experience of digital type, and quite a baptism.
Designed for the phone books, as I said, to be printed at tiny size on newsprint on very high-speed rotary presses with ink that was kerosene and lampblack.
This is not a hospitable environment for a typographic designer.
So the challenge for me was to design type that performed as well as possible in these very adverse production conditions.
As I say, we were in the infancy of digital type.
I had to draw every character by hand on quadrille graph paper -- there were four weights of Bell Centennial — pixel by pixel, then encode them raster line by raster line for the keyboard.
It took two years, but I learned a lot.
These letters look as though they've been chewed by the dog or something or other, but the missing pixels at the intersections of strokes or in the crotches are the result of my studying the effects of ink spread on cheap paper and reacting, revising the font accordingly.
These strange artifacts are designed to compensate for the undesirable effects of scale and production process.
At the outset, AT&amp;T had wanted to set the phone books in Helvetica, but as my friend Erik Spiekermann said in the Helvetica movie, if you've seen that, the letters in Helvetica were designed to be as similar to one another as possible.
This is not the recipe for legibility at small size.
It looks very elegant up on a slide.
I had to disambiguate these forms of the figures as much as possible in Bell Centennial by sort of opening the shapes up, as you can see in the bottom part of that slide.
So now we're on to the mid-'80s, the early days of digital outline fonts, vector technology.
There was an issue at that time with the size of the fonts, the amount of data that was required to find and store a font in computer memory.
It limited the number of fonts you could get on your typesetting system at any one time.
I did an analysis of the data, and found that a typical serif face you see on the left needed nearly twice as much data as a sans serif in the middle because of all the points required to define the elegantly curved serif brackets.
The numbers at the bottom of the slide, by the way, they represent the amount of data needed to store each of the fonts.
So the sans serif, in the middle, sans the serifs, was much more economical, 81 to 151.
"Aha," I thought. "The engineers have a problem.
Designer to the rescue."
I made a serif type, you can see it on the right, without curved serifs.
I made them polygonal, out of straight line segments, chamfered brackets.
And look, as economical in data as a sans serif.
We call it Charter, on the right.
So I went to the head of engineering with my numbers, and I said proudly, "I have solved your problem."
"Oh," he said. "What problem?"
And I said, "Well, you know, the problem of the huge data you require for serif fonts and so on."
"Oh," he said. "We solved that problem last week.
We wrote a compaction routine that reduces the size of all fonts by an order of magnitude.
You can have as many fonts on your system as you like."
"Well, thank you for letting me know," I said.
Foiled again.
I was left with a design solution for a nonexistent technical problem.
But here is where the story sort of gets interesting for me.
I didn't just throw my design away in a fit of pique.
I persevered.
What had started as a technical exercise became an aesthetic exercise, really.
In other words, I had come to like this typeface.
Forget its origins. Screw that.
I liked the design for its own sake.
The simplified forms of Charter gave it a sort of plain-spoken quality and unfussy spareness that sort of pleased me.
You know, at times of technical innovation, designers want to be influenced by what's in the air.
We want to respond. We want to be pushed into exploring something new.
So Charter is a sort of parable for me, really.
In the end, there was no hard and fast causal link between the technology and the design of Charter.
I had really misunderstood the technology.
The technology did suggest something to me, but it did not force my hand, and I think this happens very often.
You know, engineers are very smart, and despite occasional frustrations because I'm less smart, I've always enjoyed working with them and learning from them.
Apropos, in the mid-'90s, I started talking to Microsoft about screen fonts.
Up to that point, all the fonts on screen had been adapted from previously existing printing fonts, of course.
But Microsoft foresaw correctly the movement, the stampede towards electronic communication, to reading and writing onscreen with the printed output as being sort of secondary in importance.
So the priorities were just tipping at that point.
They wanted a small core set of fonts that were not adapted but designed for the screen to face up to the problems of screen, which were their coarse resolution displays.
I said to Microsoft, a typeface designed for a particular technology is a self-obsoleting typeface.
I've designed too many faces in the past that were intended to mitigate technical problems.
Thanks to the engineers, the technical problems went away.
So did my typeface.
It was only a stopgap.
Microsoft came back to say that affordable computer monitors with better resolutions were at least a decade away.
So I thought, well, a decade, that's not bad, that's more than a stopgap.
So I was persuaded, I was convinced, and we went to work on what became Verdana and Georgia, for the first time working not on paper but directly onto the screen from the pixel up.
At that time, screens were binary.
The pixel was either on or it was off.
Here you see the outline of a letter, the cap H, which is the thin black line, the contour, which is how it is stored in memory, superimposed on the bitmap, which is the grey area, which is how it's displayed on the screen.
The bitmap is rasterized from the outline.
Here in a cap H, which is all straight lines, the two are in almost perfect sync on the Cartesian grid.
Not so with an O.
This looks more like bricklaying than type design, but believe me, this is a good bitmap O, for the simple reason that it's symmetrical in both x and y axes.
In a binary bitmap, you actually can't ask for more than that.
I would sometimes make, I don't know, three or four different versions of a difficult letter like a lowercase A, and then stand back to choose which was the best.
Well, there was no best, so the designer's judgment comes in in trying to decide which is the least bad.
Is that a compromise?
Not to me, if you are working at the highest standard the technology will allow, although that standard may be well short of the ideal.
You may be able to see on this slide two different bitmap fonts there.
The "a" in the upper one, I think, is better than the "a" in the lower one, but it still ain't great.
You can maybe see the effect better if it's reduced. Well, maybe not.
So I'm a pragmatist, not an idealist, out of necessity.
For a certain kind of temperament, there is a certain kind of satisfaction in doing something that cannot be perfect but can still be done to the best of your ability.
Here's the lowercase H from Georgia Italic.
The bitmap looks jagged and rough.
It is jagged and rough.
But I discovered, by experiment, that there is an optimum slant for an italic on a screen so the strokes break well at the pixel boundaries.
Look in this example how, rough as it is, how the left and right legs actually break at the same level.
That's a victory. That's good, right there.
And of course, at the lower depths, you don't get much choice.
This is an S, in case you were wondering.
Well, it's been 18 years now since Verdana and Georgia were released.
Microsoft were absolutely right, it took a good 10 years, but screen displays now do have improved spatial resolution, and very much improved photometric resolution thanks to anti-aliasing and so on.
So now that their mission is accomplished, has that meant the demise of the screen fonts that I designed for coarser displays back then?
Will they outlive the now-obsolete screens and the flood of new web fonts coming on to the market?
Or have they established their own sort of evolutionary niche that is independent of technology?
In other words, have they been absorbed into the typographic mainstream?
I'm not sure, but they've had a good run so far.
Hey, 18 is a good age for anything with present-day rates of attrition, so I'm not complaining.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I feel so fortunate that my first job was working at the Museum of Modern Art on a retrospective of painter Elizabeth Murray.
I learned so much from her.
After the curator Robert Storr selected all the paintings from her lifetime body of work, I loved looking at the paintings from the 1970s.
There were some motifs and elements that would come up again later in her life.
I remember asking her what she thought of those early works.
If you didn't know they were hers, you might not have been able to guess.
She told me that a few didn't quite meet her own mark for what she wanted them to be.
One of the works, in fact, so didn't meet her mark, she had set it out in the trash in her studio, and her neighbor had taken it because she saw its value.
In that moment, my view of success and creativity changed.
I realized that success is a moment, but what we're always celebrating is creativity and mastery.
But this is the thing: What gets us to convert success into mastery?
This is a question I've long asked myself.
I think it comes when we start to value the gift of a near win.
I started to understand this when I went on one cold May day to watch a set of varsity archers, all women as fate would have it, at the northern tip of Manhattan at Columbia's Baker Athletics Complex.
I wanted to see what's called archer's paradox, the idea that in order to actually hit your target, you have to aim at something slightly skew from it.
I stood and watched as the coach drove up these women in this gray van, and they exited with this kind of relaxed focus.
One held a half-eaten ice cream cone in one hand and arrows in the left with yellow fletching.
And they passed me and smiled, but they sized me up as they made their way to the turf, and spoke to each other not with words but with numbers, degrees, I thought, positions for how they might plan to hit their target.
I stood behind one archer as her coach stood in between us to maybe assess who might need support, and watched her, and I didn't understand how even one was going to hit the ten ring.
The ten ring from the standard 75-yard distance, it looks as small as a matchstick tip held out at arm's length.
And this is while holding 50 pounds of draw weight on each shot.
She first hit a seven, I remember, and then a nine, and then two tens, and then the next arrow didn't even hit the target.
And I saw that gave her more tenacity, and she went after it again and again.
For three hours this went on.
At the end of the practice, one of the archers was so taxed that she lied out on the ground just star-fished, her head looking up at the sky, trying to find what T.S. Eliot might call that still point of the turning world.
It's so rare in American culture, there's so little that's vocational about it anymore, to look at what doggedness looks like with this level of exactitude, what it means to align your body posture for three hours in order to hit a target, pursuing a kind of excellence in obscurity.
But I stayed because I realized I was witnessing what's so rare to glimpse, that difference between success and mastery.
So success is hitting that ten ring, but mastery is knowing that it means nothing if you can't do it again and again.
Mastery is not just the same as excellence, though.
It's not the same as success, which I see as an event, a moment in time, and a label that the world confers upon you.
Mastery is not a commitment to a goal but to a constant pursuit.
What gets us to do this, what get us to forward thrust more is to value the near win.
How many times have we designated something a classic, a masterpiece even, while its creator considers it hopelessly unfinished, riddled with difficulties and flaws, in other words, a near win?
Elizabeth Murray surprised me with her admission about her earlier paintings.
Painter Paul Cézanne so often thought his works were incomplete that he would deliberately leave them aside with the intention of picking them back up again, but at the end of his life, the result was that he had only signed 10 percent of his paintings.
His favorite novel was "The [Unknown] Masterpiece" by Honoré de Balzac, and he felt the protagonist was the painter himself.
Franz Kafka saw incompletion when others would find only works to praise, so much so that he wanted all of his diaries, manuscripts, letters and even sketches burned upon his death.
His friend refused to honor the request, and because of that, we now have all the works we now do by Kafka: "America," "The Trial" and "The Castle," a work so incomplete it even stops mid-sentence.
The pursuit of mastery, in other words, is an ever-onward almost.
"Lord, grant that I desire more than I can accomplish," Michelangelo implored, as if to that Old Testament God on the Sistine Chapel, and he himself was that Adam with his finger outstretched and not quite touching that God's hand.
Mastery is in the reaching, not the arriving.
It's in constantly wanting to close that gap between where you are and where you want to be.
Mastery is about sacrificing for your craft and not for the sake of crafting your career.
How many inventors and untold entrepreneurs live out this phenomenon?
We see it even in the life of the indomitable Arctic explorer Ben Saunders, who tells me that his triumphs are not merely the result of a grand achievement, but of the propulsion of a lineage of near wins.
We thrive when we stay at our own leading edge.
It's a wisdom understood by Duke Ellington, who said that his favorite song out of his repertoire was always the next one, always the one he had yet to compose.
Part of the reason that the near win is inbuilt to mastery is because the greater our proficiency, the more clearly we might see that we don't know all that we thought we did.
It's called the Dunning–Kruger effect.
The Paris Review got it out of James Baldwin when they asked him, "What do you think increases with knowledge?"
and he said, "You learn how little you know."
Success motivates us, but a near win can propel us in an ongoing quest.
One of the most vivid examples of this comes when we look at the difference between Olympic silver medalists and bronze medalists after a competition.
Thomas Gilovich and his team from Cornell studied this difference and found that the frustration silver medalists feel compared to bronze, who are typically a bit more happy to have just not received fourth place and not medaled at all, gives silver medalists a focus on follow-up competition.
We see it even in the gambling industry that once picked up on this phenomenon of the near win and created these scratch-off tickets that had a higher than average rate of near wins and so compelled people to buy more tickets that they were called heart-stoppers, and were set on a gambling industry set of abuses in Britain in the 1970s.
The reason the near win has a propulsion is because it changes our view of the landscape and puts our goals, which we tend to put at a distance, into more proximate vicinity to where we stand.
If I ask you to envision what a great day looks like next week, you might describe it in more general terms.
But if I ask you to describe a great day at TED tomorrow, you might describe it with granular, practical clarity.
And this is what a near win does.
It gets us to focus on what, right now, we plan to do to address that mountain in our sights.
It's Jackie Joyner-Kersee, who in 1984 missed taking the gold in the heptathlon by one third of a second, and her husband predicted that would give her the tenacity she needed in follow-up competition.
In 1988, she won the gold in the heptathlon and set a record of 7,291 points, a score that no athlete has come very close to since.
We thrive not when we've done it all, but when we still have more to do.
I stand here thinking and wondering about all the different ways that we might even manufacture a near win in this room, how your lives might play this out, because I think on some gut level we do know this.
We know that we thrive when we stay at our own leading edge, and it's why the deliberate incomplete is inbuilt into creation myths.
In Navajo culture, some craftsmen and women would deliberately put an imperfection in textiles and ceramics.
It's what's called a spirit line, a deliberate flaw in the pattern to give the weaver or maker a way out, but also a reason to continue making work.
Masters are not experts because they take a subject to its conceptual end.
They're masters because they realize that there isn't one.
Now it occurred to me, as I thought about this, why the archery coach told me at the end of that practice, out of earshot of his archers, that he and his colleagues never feel they can do enough for their team, never feel there are enough visualization techniques and posture drills to help them overcome those constant near wins.
It didn't sound like a complaint, exactly, but just a way to let me know, a kind of tender admission, to remind me that he knew he was giving himself over to a voracious, unfinished path that always required more.
We build out of the unfinished idea, even if that idea is our former self.
This is the dynamic of mastery.
Coming close to what you thought you wanted can help you attain more than you ever dreamed you could.
It's what I have to imagine Elizabeth Murray was thinking when I saw her smiling at those early paintings one day in the galleries.
Even if we created utopias, I believe we would still have the incomplete.
Completion is a goal, but we hope it is never the end.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Wow, this is bright.
It must use a lot of power.
Well, flying you all in here must have cost a bit of energy too.
So the whole planet needs a lot of energy, and so far we've been running mostly on fossil fuel.
We've been burning gas.
It's been a good run.
It got us to where we are, but we have to stop.
We can't do that anymore.
So we are trying different types of energy now, alternative energy, but it proved quite difficult to find something that's as convenient and as cost-effective as oil, gas and coal.
My personal favorite is nuclear energy.
Now, it's very energy-dense, it produces solid, reliable power, and it doesn't make any CO2.
Now we know of two ways of making nuclear energy: fission and fusion.
Now in fission, you take a big nucleus, you break it in part, in two, and it makes lots of energy, and this is how the nuclear reactor today works.
It works pretty good.
And then there's fusion.
Now, I like fusion. Fusion's much better.
So you take two small nuclei, you put it together, and you make helium, and that's very nice.
It makes lots of energy.
This is nature's way of producing energy.
The sun and all the stars in the universe run on fusion.
Now, a fusion plant would actually be quite cost-effective and it also would be quite safe.
It only produces short term radioactive waste, and it cannot melt down.
Now, the fuel from fusion comes from the ocean.
In the ocean, you can extract the fuel for about one thousandth of a cent per kilowatt-hour, so that's very, very cheap.
And if the whole planet would run on fusion, we could extract the fuel from the ocean.
It would run for billions and billions of years.
Now, if fusion is so great, why don't we have it?
Where is it?
Well, there's always a bit of a catch.
Fusion is really, really hard to do.
So the problem is, those two nuclei, they are both positively charged, so they don't want to fuse.
They go like this. They go like that.
So in order to make them fuse, you have to throw them at each other with great speed, and if they have enough speed, they will go against the repulsion, they will touch, and they will make energy.
Now, the particle speed is a measure of the temperature.
So the temperature required for fusion is 150 billion degrees C.
This is rather warm, and this is why fusion is so hard to do.
Now, I caught my little fusion bug when I did my Ph.D. here at the University of British Columbia, and then I got a big job in a laser printer place making printing for the printing industry.
I worked there for 10 years, and I got a little bit bored, and then I was 40, and I got a mid-life crisis, you know, the usual thing: Who am I? What should I do?
What should I do? What can I do?
And then I was looking at my good work, and what I was doing is I was cutting the forests around here in B.C.
and burying you, all of you, in millions of tons of junk mail.
Now, that was not very satisfactory.
So some people buy a Porsche.
Others get a mistress.
But I've decided to get my bit to solve global warming and make fusion happen.
Now, so the first thing I did is I looked into the literature and I see, how does fusion work?
So the physicists have been working on fusion for a while, and one of the ways they do it is with something called a tokamak.
It's a big ring of magnetic coil, superconducting coil, and it makes a magnetic field in a ring like this, and the hot gas in the middle, which is called a plasma, is trapped.
The particles go round and round and round the circle at the wall.
Then they throw a huge amount of heat in there to try to cook that to fusion temperature.
So this is the inside of one of those donuts, and on the right side you can see the fusion plasma in there.
Now, a second way of doing this is by using laser fusion.
Now in laser fusion, you have a little ping pong ball, you put the fusion fuel in the center, and you zap that with a whole bunch of laser around it.
The lasers are very strong, and it squashes the ping pong ball really, really quick.
And if you squeeze something hard enough, it gets hotter, and if it gets really, really fast, and they do that in one billionth of a second, it makes enough energy and enough heat to make fusion.
So this is the inside of one such machine.
You see the laser beam and the pellet in the center.
Now, most people think that fusion is going nowhere.
They always think that the physicists are in their lab and they're working hard, but nothing is happening.
That's actually not quite true.
This is a curve of the gain in fusion over the last 30 years or so, and you can see that we're making now about 10,000 times more fusion than we used to when we started.
That's a pretty good gain.
As a matter of fact, it's as fast as the fabled Moore's Law that defined the amount of transistors they can put on a chip.
Now, this dot here is called JET, the Joint European Torus.
It's a big tokamak donut in Europe, and this machine in 1997 produced 16 megawatts of fusion power with 17 megawatts of heat.
Now, you say, that's not much use, but it's actually pretty close, considering we can get about 10,000 times more than we started.
The second dot here is the NIF.
It's the National Ignition Facility.
It's a big laser machine in the U.S., and last month they announced with quite a bit of noise that they had managed to make more fusion energy from the fusion than the energy that they put in the center of the ping pong ball.
Now, that's not quite good enough, because the laser to put that energy in was more energy than that, but it was pretty good.
Now this is ITER, pronounced in French: EE-tairh.
So this is a big collaboration of different countries that are building a huge magnetic donut in the south of France, and this machine, when it's finished, will produce 500 megawatts of fusion power with only 50 megawatts to make it.
So this one is the real one.
It's going to work.
That's the kind of machine that makes energy.
Now if you look at the graph, you will notice that those two dots are a little bit on the right of the curve.
We kind of have fallen off the progress.
Actually, the science to make those machines was really in time to produce fusion during that curve.
However, there has been a bit of politics going on, and the will to do it was not there, so it drifted to the right.
ITER, for example, could have been built in 2000 or 2005, but because it's a big international collaboration, the politics got in and it delayed it a bit.
For example, it took them about three years to decide where to put it.
Now, fusion is often criticized for being a little too expensive.
Yes, it did cost a billion dollars or two billion dollars a year to make this progress.
But you have to compare that to the cost of making Moore's Law.
That cost way more than that.
The result of Moore's Law is this cell phone here in my pocket.
This cell phone, and the Internet behind it, cost about one trillion dollars, just so I can take a selfie and put it on Facebook.
Then when my dad sees that, he'll be very proud.
We also spend about 650 billion dollars a year in subsidies for oil and gas and renewable energy.
Now, we spend one half of a percent of that on fusion.
So me, personally, I don't think it's too expensive.
I think it's actually been shortchanged, considering it can solve all our energy problems cleanly for the next couple of billions of years.
Now I can say that, but I'm a little bit biased, because I started a fusion company and I don't even have a Facebook account.
So when I started this fusion company in 2002, I knew I couldn't fight with the big lads.
They had much more resources than me.
So I decided I would need to find a solution that is cheaper and faster.
Now magnetic and laser fusion are pretty good machines.
They are awesome pieces of technology, wonderful machines, and they have shown that fusion can be done.
However, as a power plant, I don't think they're very good.
They're way too big, way too complicated, way too expensive, and also, they don't deal very much with the fusion energy.
When you make fusion, the energy comes out as neutrons, fast neutrons comes out of the plasma.
Those neutrons hit the wall of the machine.
It damages it.
And also, you have to catch the heat from those neutrons and run some steam to spin a turbine somewhere, and on those machines, it was all a bit of an afterthought.
So I decided that surely there is a better way of doing that.
So back to the literature, and I read about the fusion everywhere.
One way in particular attracted my attention, and it's called magnetized target fusion, or MTF for short.
Now, in MTF, what you want to do is you take a big vat and you fill that with liquid metal, and you spin the liquid metal to open a vortex in the center, a bit like your sink.
When you pull the plug on a sink, it makes a vortex.
And then you have some pistons driven by pressure that goes on the outside, and this compresses the liquid metal around the plasma, and it compresses it, it gets hotter, like a laser, and then it makes fusion.
So it's a bit of a mix between a magnetized fusion and the laser fusion.
So those have a couple of very good advantages.
The liquid metal absorbs all the neutrons and no neutrons hit the wall, and therefore there's no damage to the machine.
The liquid metal gets hot, so you can pump that in a heat exchanger, make some steam, spin a turbine.
So that's a very convenient way of doing this part of the process.
And finally, all the energy to make the fusion happen comes from steam-powered pistons, which is way cheaper than lasers or superconducting coils.
Now, this was all very good except for the problem that it didn't quite work.
(Laughter) There's always a catch.
So when you compress that, the plasma cools down faster than the compression speed, so you're trying to compress it, but the plasma cooled down and cooled down and cooled down and then it did absolutely nothing.
So when I saw that, I said, well, this is such a shame, because it's a very, very good idea.
So hopefully I can improve on that.
So I thought about it for a minute, and I said, okay, how can we make that work better?
So then I thought about impact.
What about if we use a big hammer and we swing it and we hit the nail like this, in the place of putting the hammer on the nail and pushing and try to put it in? That won't work.
So what the idea is is to use the idea of an impact.
So we accelerate the pistons with steam, that takes a little bit of time, but then, bang! you hit the piston, and, baff!, all the energy is done instantly, down instantly to the liquid, and that compresses the plasma much faster.
So I decided, okay, this is good, let's make that.
So we built this machine in this garage here.
We made a small machine that we managed to squeeze a little bit of neutrons out of that, and those are my marketing neutrons, and with those marketing neutrons, then I raised about 50 million dollars, and I hired 65 people. That's my team here.
And this is what we want to build.
So it's going to be a big machine, about three meters in diameter, liquid lead spinning around, big vortex in the center, put the plasma on the top and on the bottom, piston hits on the side, bang!, it compresses it, and it will make some energy, and the neutron will come out in the liquid metal, going to go in a steam engine and make the turbine, and some of the steam will go back to fire the piston.
We're going to run that about one time per second, and it will produce 100 megawatts of electricity.
Okay, we also built this injector, so this injector makes the plasma to start with.
It makes the plasma at about a lukewarm temperature of three million degrees C.
Unfortunately, it doesn't last quite long enough, so we need to extend the life of the plasma a little bit, but last month it got a lot better, so I think we have the plasma compressing now.
Then we built a small sphere, about this big, 14 pistons around it, and this will compress the liquid.
However, plasma is difficult to compress.
When you compress it, it tends to go a little bit crooked like that, so you need the timing of the piston to be very good, and for that we use several control systems, which was not possible in 1970, but we now can do that with nice, new electronics.
So finally, most people think that fusion is in the future and will never happen, but as a matter of fact, fusion is getting very close.
We are almost there.
The big labs have shown that fusion is doable, and now there are small companies that are thinking about that, and they say, it's not that it cannot be done, but it's how to make it cost-effectively.
General Fusion is one of those small companies, and hopefully, very soon, somebody, someone, will crack that nut, and perhaps it will be General Fusion.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want to start my story in Germany, in 1877, with a mathematician named Georg Cantor.
And Cantor decided he was going to take a line and erase the middle third of the line, and then take those two resulting lines and bring them back into the same process, a recursive process.
So he starts out with one line, and then two, and then four, and then 16, and so on.
And if he does this an infinite number of times, which you can do in mathematics, he ends up with an infinite number of lines, each of which has an infinite number of points in it.
So he realized he had a set whose number of elements was larger than infinity.
And this blew his mind. Literally. He checked into a sanitarium. (Laughter) And when he came out of the sanitarium, he was convinced that he had been put on earth to found transfinite set theory because the largest set of infinity would be God Himself.
He was a very religious man.
He was a mathematician on a mission.
And other mathematicians did the same sort of thing.
A Swedish mathematician, von Koch, decided that instead of subtracting lines, he would add them.
And so he came up with this beautiful curve.
And there's no particular reason why we have to start with this seed shape; we can use any seed shape we like.
And I'll rearrange this and I'll stick this somewhere -- down there, OK -- and now upon iteration, that seed shape sort of unfolds into a very different looking structure.
So these all have the property of self-similarity: the part looks like the whole.
It's the same pattern at many different scales.
Now, mathematicians thought this was very strange because as you shrink a ruler down, you measure a longer and longer length.
And since they went through the iterations an infinite number of times, as the ruler shrinks down to infinity, the length goes to infinity.
This made no sense at all, so they consigned these curves to the back of the math books.
They said these are pathological curves, and we don't have to discuss them.
(Laughter) And that worked for a hundred years.
And then in 1977, Benoit Mandelbrot, a French mathematician, realized that if you do computer graphics and used these shapes he called fractals, you get the shapes of nature.
You get the human lungs, you get acacia trees, you get ferns, you get these beautiful natural forms.
If you take your thumb and your index finger and look right where they meet -- go ahead and do that now -- -- and relax your hand, you'll see a crinkle, and then a wrinkle within the crinkle, and a crinkle within the wrinkle. Right?
Your body is covered with fractals.
The mathematicians who were saying these were pathologically useless shapes?
They were breathing those words with fractal lungs.
It's very ironic. And I'll show you a little natural recursion here.
Again, we just take these lines and recursively replace them with the whole shape.
So here's the second iteration, and the third, fourth and so on.
So nature has this self-similar structure.
Nature uses self-organizing systems.
Now in the 1980s, I happened to notice that if you look at an aerial photograph of an African village, you see fractals.
And I thought, "This is fabulous! I wonder why?"
And of course I had to go to Africa and ask folks why.
So I got a Fulbright scholarship to just travel around Africa for a year asking people why they were building fractals, which is a great job if you can get it.
(Laughter) And so I finally got to this city, and I'd done a little fractal model for the city just to see how it would sort of unfold -- but when I got there, I got to the palace of the chief, and my French is not very good; I said something like, "I am a mathematician and I would like to stand on your roof."
But he was really cool about it, and he took me up there, and we talked about fractals.
And he said, "Oh yeah, yeah! We knew about a rectangle within a rectangle, we know all about that."
And it turns out the royal insignia has a rectangle within a rectangle within a rectangle, and the path through that palace is actually this spiral here.
And as you go through the path, you have to get more and more polite.
So they're mapping the social scaling onto the geometric scaling; it's a conscious pattern. It is not unconscious like a termite mound fractal.
This is a village in southern Zambia.
The Ba-ila built this village about 400 meters in diameter.
You have a huge ring.
The rings that represent the family enclosures get larger and larger as you go towards the back, and then you have the chief's ring here towards the back and then the chief's immediate family in that ring.
So here's a little fractal model for it.
Here's one house with the sacred altar, here's the house of houses, the family enclosure, with the humans here where the sacred altar would be, and then here's the village as a whole -- a ring of ring of rings with the chief's extended family here, the chief's immediate family here, and here there's a tiny village only this big.
Now you might wonder, how can people fit in a tiny village only this big?
That's because they're spirit people. It's the ancestors.
And of course the spirit people have a little miniature village in their village, right?
So it's just like Georg Cantor said, the recursion continues forever.
This is in the Mandara mountains, near the Nigerian border in Cameroon, Mokoulek.
I saw this diagram drawn by a French architect, and I thought, "Wow! What a beautiful fractal!"
So I tried to come up with a seed shape, which, upon iteration, would unfold into this thing.
I came up with this structure here.
Let's see, first iteration, second, third, fourth.
Now, after I did the simulation, I realized the whole village kind of spirals around, just like this, and here's that replicating line -- a self-replicating line that unfolds into the fractal.
Well, I noticed that line is about where the only square building in the village is at.
So, when I got to the village, I said, "Can you take me to the square building?
I think something's going on there."
And they said, "Well, we can take you there, but you can't go inside because that's the sacred altar, where we do sacrifices every year to keep up those annual cycles of fertility for the fields."
And I started to realize that the cycles of fertility were just like the recursive cycles in the geometric algorithm that builds this.
And the recursion in some of these villages continues down into very tiny scales.
So here's a Nankani village in Mali.
And you can see, you go inside the family enclosure -- you go inside and here's pots in the fireplace, stacked recursively.
Here's calabashes that Issa was just showing us, and they're stacked recursively.
Now, the tiniest calabash in here keeps the woman's soul.
And when she dies, they have a ceremony where they break this stack called the zalanga and her soul goes off to eternity.
Once again, infinity is important.
Now, you might ask yourself three questions at this point.
Aren't these scaling patterns just universal to all indigenous architecture?
And that was actually my original hypothesis.
When I first saw those African fractals, I thought, "Wow, so any indigenous group that doesn't have a state society, that sort of hierarchy, must have a kind of bottom-up architecture."
But that turns out not to be true.
I started collecting aerial photographs of Native American and South Pacific architecture; only the African ones were fractal.
And if you think about it, all these different societies have different geometric design themes that they use.
So Native Americans use a combination of circular symmetry and fourfold symmetry.
You can see on the pottery and the baskets.
Here's an aerial photograph of one of the Anasazi ruins; you can see it's circular at the largest scale, but it's rectangular at the smaller scale, right?
It is not the same pattern at two different scales.
Second, you might ask, "Well, Dr. Eglash, aren't you ignoring the diversity of African cultures?"
And three times, the answer is no.
First of all, I agree with Mudimbe's wonderful book, "The Invention of Africa," that Africa is an artificial invention of first colonialism, and then oppositional movements.
No, because a widely shared design practice doesn't necessarily give you a unity of culture -- and it definitely is not "in the DNA."
And finally, the fractals have self-similarity -- so they're similar to themselves, but they're not necessarily similar to each other -- you see very different uses for fractals.
It's a shared technology in Africa.
And finally, well, isn't this just intuition?
It's not really mathematical knowledge.
Africans can't possibly really be using fractal geometry, right?
It wasn't invented until the 1970s.
Well, it's true that some African fractals are, as far as I'm concerned, just pure intuition.
So some of these things, I'd wander around the streets of Dakar asking people, "What's the algorithm? What's the rule for making this?"
and they'd say, "Well, we just make it that way because it looks pretty, stupid." (Laughter) But sometimes, that's not the case.
In some cases, there would actually be algorithms, and very sophisticated algorithms.
So in Manghetu sculpture, you'd see this recursive geometry.
In Ethiopian crosses, you see this wonderful unfolding of the shape.
In Angola, the Chokwe people draw lines in the sand, and it's what the German mathematician Euler called a graph; we now call it an Eulerian path -- you can never lift your stylus from the surface and you can never go over the same line twice.
But they do it recursively, and they do it with an age-grade system, so the little kids learn this one, and then the older kids learn this one, then the next age-grade initiation, you learn this one.
And with each iteration of that algorithm, you learn the iterations of the myth.
You learn the next level of knowledge.
And finally, all over Africa, you see this board game.
It's called Owari in Ghana, where I studied it; it's called Mancala here on the East Coast, Bao in Kenya, Sogo elsewhere.
Well, you see self-organizing patterns that spontaneously occur in this board game.
And the folks in Ghana knew about these self-organizing patterns and would use them strategically.
So this is very conscious knowledge.
Here's a wonderful fractal.
Anywhere you go in the Sahel, you'll see this windscreen.
And of course fences around the world are all Cartesian, all strictly linear.
But here in Africa, you've got these nonlinear scaling fences.
So I tracked down one of the folks who makes these things, this guy in Mali just outside of Bamako, and I asked him, "How come you're making fractal fences? Because nobody else is."
And his answer was very interesting.
He said, "Well, if I lived in the jungle, I would only use the long rows of straw because they're very quick and they're very cheap.
It doesn't take much time, doesn't take much straw."
He said, "but wind and dust goes through pretty easily.
Now, the tight rows up at the very top, they really hold out the wind and dust.
But it takes a lot of time, and it takes a lot of straw because they're really tight."
"Now," he said, "we know from experience that the farther up from the ground you go, the stronger the wind blows."
Right? It's just like a cost-benefit analysis.
And I measured out the lengths of straw, put it on a log-log plot, got the scaling exponent, and it almost exactly matches the scaling exponent for the relationship between wind speed and height in the wind engineering handbook.
So these guys are right on target for a practical use of scaling technology.
The most complex example of an algorithmic approach to fractals that I found was actually not in geometry, it was in a symbolic code, and this was Bamana sand divination.
And the same divination system is found all over Africa.
You can find it on the East Coast as well as the West Coast, and often the symbols are very well preserved, so each of these symbols has four bits -- it's a four-bit binary word -- you draw these lines in the sand randomly, and then you count off, and if it's an odd number, you put down one stroke, and if it's an even number, you put down two strokes.
And they did this very rapidly, and I couldn't understand where they were getting -- they only did the randomness four times -- I couldn't understand where they were getting the other 12 symbols.
And they wouldn't tell me.
They said, "No, no, I can't tell you about this."
And I said, "Well look, I'll pay you, you can be my teacher, and I'll come each day and pay you."
They said, "It's not a matter of money. This is a religious matter."
And finally, out of desperation, I said, "Well, let me explain Georg Cantor in 1877."
And I started explaining why I was there in Africa, and they got very excited when they saw the Cantor set.
And one of them said, "Come here. I think I can help you out here."
And so he took me through the initiation ritual for a Bamana priest.
And of course, I was only interested in the math, so the whole time, he kept shaking his head going, "You know, I didn't learn it this way."
But I had to sleep with a kola nut next to my bed, buried in sand, and give seven coins to seven lepers and so on.
And finally, he revealed the truth of the matter.
And it turns out it's a pseudo-random number generator using deterministic chaos.
When you have a four-bit symbol, you then put it together with another one sideways.
So even plus odd gives you odd.
Odd plus even gives you odd.
Even plus even gives you even. Odd plus odd gives you even.
It's addition modulo 2, just like in the parity bit check on your computer.
And then you take this symbol, and you put it back in so it's a self-generating diversity of symbols.
They're truly using a kind of deterministic chaos in doing this.
Now, because it's a binary code, you can actually implement this in hardware -- what a fantastic teaching tool that should be in African engineering schools.
And the most interesting thing I found out about it was historical.
In the 12th century, Hugo of Santalla brought it from Islamic mystics into Spain.
And there it entered into the alchemy community as geomancy: divination through the earth.
This is a geomantic chart drawn for King Richard II in 1390.
Leibniz, the German mathematician, talked about geomancy in his dissertation called "De Combinatoria."
And he said, "Well, instead of using one stroke and two strokes, let's use a one and a zero, and we can count by powers of two."
Right? Ones and zeros, the binary code.
George Boole took Leibniz's binary code and created Boolean algebra, and John von Neumann took Boolean algebra and created the digital computer.
So all these little PDAs and laptops -- every digital circuit in the world -- started in Africa.
And I know Brian Eno says there's not enough Africa in computers, but you know, I don't think there's enough African history in Brian Eno.
(Laughter) (Applause) So let me end with just a few words about applications that we've found for this.
And you can go to our website, the applets are all free; they just run in the browser.
Anybody in the world can use them.
The National Science Foundation's Broadening Participation in Computing program recently awarded us a grant to make a programmable version of these design tools, so hopefully in three years, anybody'll be able to go on the Web and create their own simulations and their own artifacts.
We've focused in the U.S. on African-American students as well as Native American and Latino.
We've found statistically significant improvement with children using this software in a mathematics class in comparison with a control group that did not have the software.
So it's really very successful teaching children that they have a heritage that's about mathematics, that it's not just about singing and dancing.
We've started a pilot program in Ghana.
We got a small seed grant, just to see if folks would be willing to work with us on this; we're very excited about the future possibilities for that.
We've also been working in design.
I didn't put his name up here -- my colleague, Kerry, in Kenya, has come up with this great idea for using fractal structure for postal address in villages that have fractal structure, because if you try to impose a grid structure postal system on a fractal village, it doesn't quite fit.
Bernard Tschumi at Columbia University has finished using this in a design for a museum of African art.
David Hughes at Ohio State University has written a primer on Afrocentric architecture in which he's used some of these fractal structures.
And finally, I just wanted to point out that this idea of self-organization, as we heard earlier, it's in the brain.
It's in the -- it's in Google's search engine.
Actually, the reason that Google was such a success is because they were the first ones to take advantage of the self-organizing properties of the web.
It's in ecological sustainability.
It's in the developmental power of entrepreneurship, the ethical power of democracy.
It's also in some bad things.
Self-organization is why the AIDS virus is spreading so fast.
And if you don't think that capitalism, which is self-organizing, can have destructive effects, you haven't opened your eyes enough.
So we need to think about, as was spoken earlier, the traditional African methods for doing self-organization.
These are robust algorithms.
These are ways of doing self-organization -- of doing entrepreneurship -- that are gentle, that are egalitarian.
So if we want to find a better way of doing that kind of work, we need look only no farther than Africa to find these robust self-organizing algorithms.
Thank you.
Scientific breakthrough, the kind that can potentially save lives, can sometimes be lying right out in the open for us to discover, in the evolved, accumulated body of human anecdote, for example, or in the time-tested adaptations that we observe in the natural world around us.
Science starts with observation, but the trick is to identify the patterns and signatures that we might otherwise dismiss as myth or coincidence, isolate them, and test them with scientific rigor.
And when we do, the results will often surprise.
Western Australia has had a particular problem with shark attacks over the last three years, unfortunately and tragically culminating in five fatal shark attacks in a 10-month period during that time.
But Western Australia is not alone in this.
The incident of shark engagements on humans is escalating worldwide.
And so it's not surprising, perhaps, that in July of this year, Shark Attack Mitigation Systems in collaboration with the University of Western Australia Oceans Institute made an announcement which captured the attention of the worldwide media and of ocean users worldwide, and that was around the development of technology to mitigate or reduce the risk of shark attack based on the science of what sharks can see.
And I have for you today the story of that journey, but also the notion that science can be as powerful as a translator as it can be for invention.
When we began this process, we were looking, it was about three years ago, and we'd just had the first two fatal shark attacks in Western Australia, and by chance, in a previous role, I happened to be having dinner with Harry Butler.
Now Harry Butler, who most Australians would know is a famous naturalist, had spent a lot of time in the marine environment.
Harry Butler is a precursor, if you like, to the late Steve Irwin.
When I asked him about what the solution to the problem might be, the answer was quite surprising.
He said, "Take a black wetsuit, band it in yellow stripes like a bumblebee, and you'll be mimicking the warning systems of most marine species."
I didn't think about that much at the time, and it wasn't until the next three fatal shark attacks happened, and it caused me to think, maybe there's some merit to this idea.
And I turned to the web to see if there might be some clues.
And it turns out the web is awash with this sort of evidence that supports this sort of thinking.
So biologically, there are plenty of species that display banding or patterns, warning patterns, to either be cryptical in the water or warn against being attacked, not the least of which is the pilot fish which spends a big slab of its life around the business end of a shark.
On the human side, Walter Starck, an oceanographer, has been painting his wetsuit since the 1970s, and anthropologically, Pacific island tribes painted themselves in bands in a sea snake ceremony to ward off the shark god.
So what's going on here?
Is this an idea lying wide out in the open for us to consider and define?
We know that sharks use a range of sensors when they engage, particularly for attack, but the sight sensor is the one that they use to identify the target, and particularly in the last number of meters before the attack.
It makes sense to pay attention to the biological anecdote because that's time-tested evolution over many millennia.
But isn't human anecdote also an evolution of sorts, the idea that there's a kernel of truth thought to be important, passed down from generation to generation, so that it actually ends up shaping human behavior?
I wanted to test this idea.
I wanted to put some science to this anecdotal evidence, because if science could support this concept, then we might have at least part of the solution to shark attack right under our very nose.
To do that, I needed some experts in shark vision and shark neurology, and a worldwide search, again, led to the University of W.A.
on the doorstep here, with the Oceans Institute.
And professor Nathan Hart and his team had just written a paper which tells us, confirms that predatory sharks see in black and white, or grayscale.
So I called up Nathan, a little bit sheepishly, actually, about this idea that maybe we could use these patterns and shapes to produce a wetsuit to try and mitigate the risk of shark attack, and fortunately, he thought that was a good idea.
So what ensued is a collaborative bit of research supported by the West Australian State Government.
And we did three key things.
The first is that we mapped the characteristics, the physical characteristics of the eyes of the three main predatory sharks, so the great white, tiger and bull shark.
We did that genetically and we did that anatomically.
The next thing we did was to understand, using complex computer modeling, what that eye can see at different depths, distances, light conditions, and water clarity in the ocean.
And from there, we were able to pinpoint two key characteristics: what patterns and shapes would present the wearer as hidden or hard to make out in the water, cryptic, and what patterns and shapes might provide the greatest contrast but provide the greatest breakup of profile so that that person wasn't confused for shark prey or shark food.
The next thing we needed to do was to convert this into wetsuits that people might actually wear, and to that end, I invited Ray Smith, a surfer, industrial designer, wetsuit designer, and in fact the guy that designed the original Quiksilver logo, to come over and sit with the science team and interpret that science into aesthetic wetsuits that people might actually wear.
And here's an example of one of the first drawings.
So this is what I call a "don't eat me" wetsuit.
So this takes that banding idea, takes that banding idea, it's highly visible, provides a highly disruptive profile, and is intended to prevent the shark from considering that you would be ordinary food, and potentially even create confusion for the shark.
And this one's configured to go with a surfboard.
You can see that dark, opaque panel on the front, and it's particularly better for the surface, where being backlit and providing a silhouette is problematic.
Second iteration is the cryptic wetsuit, or the one which attempts to hide the wearer in the water column.
There are three panels on this suit, and in any given conditions, one or more of those panels will match the reflective spectra of the water so as to disappear fully or partially, leaving the last panel or panels to create a disruptive profile in the water column.
And this one's particularly well-suited to the dive configuration, so when you're deeper under the water.
So we knew that we had some really solid science here.
We knew, if you wanted to stand out, you needed to look stripy, and we knew if you wanted to be cryptic, you needed to look like this.
But the acid test is always going to be, how would sharks really behave in the context of these patterns and shapes.
And testing to simulate a person in a wetsuit in the water with a predatory shark in a natural environment is actually a lot harder than you might think.
(Laughter) So we have to bait the rig, because we need to get the statistical number of samples through to get the scientific evidence, and by baiting the rig, we're obviously changing shark behavior.
We can't put humans in the water.
We're ethically precluded from even using humanoid shapes and baiting them up in the water.
But nevertheless, we started the testing process in January of this year, initially with tiger sharks and subsequently with great white sharks.
The way we did that was to get a perforated drum which is full of bait, wrap it in a neoprene skin, and then run two stereo underwater cameras to watch how the shark actually engages with that rig.
And because we use stereo, we can capture all the statistics on how big the shark is, what angle it comes in at, how quickly it leaves, and what its behavior is in an empirical rather than a subjective way.
Because we needed to preserve the scientific method, we ran a control rig which was a black neoprene rig just like a normal black wetsuit against the, what we call, SAMS technology rig.
And the results were not just exciting, but very encouraging, and today I would like to just give you a snapshot of two of those engagements.
So here we've got a four-meter tiger shark engaging the black control rig, which it had encountered about a minute and a half before.
Now that exact same shark had engaged, or encountered this SAMS rig, which is the Elude SAMS rig, about eight minutes before, and spent six minutes circling it, hunting for it, looking for what it could smell and sense but not see, and this was the final engagement.
Great white sharks are more confident than the tigers, and here you see great white shark engaging a control rig, so a black neoprene wetsuit, and going straight to the bottom, coming up and engaging.
In contrast to the SAMS technology rig, this is the banded one, where it's more tactile, it's more investigative, it's more apprehensive, and shows a reluctance to come straight in and go.
(Applause) So, it's important for us that all the testing is done independently, and the University of W.A. is doing the testing.
It'll be an ongoing process.
It's subject to peer review and subject to publication.
It's so important that this concept is led with the science.
From the perspective of Shark Attack Mitigation Systems, we're a biotechnology licensing company, so we don't make wetsuits ourselves.
We'll license others to do that.
But I thought you might be interested in seeing what SAMS technology looks like embedded in a wetsuit, and to that end, for the first time, live, worldwide -- (Laughter) — I can show you what biological adaptation, science and design looks like in real life.
So I can welcome Sam, the surfer, from this side. Where are you, Sam?
(Applause) And Eduardo.
(Applause) Cheers, mate.
Cheers.
Thanks, gentlemen. (Applause) So what have we done here?
Well, to my mind, rather than take a blank sheet and use science as a tool for invention, we've paid attention to the biological evidence, we've put importance to the human anecdotal evidence, and we've used science as a tool for translation, translation of something that was already there into something that we can use for the benefit of mankind.
And it strikes me that this idea of science as a tool for translation rather than invention is one that we can apply much more widely than this in the pursuit of innovation.
After all, did the Wright brothers discover manned flight, or did they observe the biological fact of flight and translate that mechanically, replicate it in a way that humans could use?
As for the humble wetsuit, who knows what oceanwear will look like in two years' time, in five years' time or in 50 years' time, but with this new thinking, I'm guessing there's a fair chance it won't be pure black.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The Earth needs no introduction.
It needs no introduction in part because the Apollo 17 astronauts, when they were hurtling around the moon in 1972, took this iconic image.
It galvanized a whole generation of human beings to realize that we're on Spaceship Earth, fragile and finite as it is, and that we need to take care of it.
But while this picture is beautiful, it's static, and the Earth is constantly changing.
It's changing on days' time scales with human activity.
And the satellite imagery we have of it today is old.
Typically, years old.
And that's important because you can't fix what you can't see.
What we'd ideally want is images of the whole planet every day.
So, what's standing in our way?
What's the problem?
This is the problem: Satellites are big, expensive and they're slow.
This one weighs three tons.
It's six meters tall, four meters wide.
It took up the entire fairing of a rocket just to launch it.
One satellite, one rocket.
It cost 855 million dollars.
Satellites like these have done an amazing job at helping us to understand our planet.
But if we want to understand it much more regularly, we need lots of satellites, and this model isn't scalable.
So me and my friends, we started Planet Labs to make satellites ultra-compact and small and highly capable.
I'm going to show you what our satellite looks like: This is our satellite.
This is not a scale model, this is the real size.
It's 10 by 10 by 30 centimeters, it weighs four kilograms, and we've stuffed the latest and greatest electronics and sensor systems into this little package so that even though this is really small, this can take pictures 10 times the resolution of the big satellite here, even though it weighs one thousandth of the mass.
And we call this satellite "Dove" — Thank you.
(Applause) We call this satellite "Dove," and we call it "Dove" because satellites are typically named after birds, but normally birds of prey: like Eagle, Hawk, Swoop, Kill, I don't know, Kestrel, these sort of things.
But ours have a humanitarian mission, so we wanted to call them Doves.
And we haven't just built them, though.
We've launched them.
And not just one, but many.
It all started in our garage.
Yes, we built our first satellite prototype in our garage.
Now, this is pretty normal for a Silicon Valley company that we are, but we believe it's the first time for a space company.
And that's not the only trick we learned from Silicon Valley.
We rapidly prototype our satellites.
We use "release early, release often" on our software.
And we take a different risk approach.
We take them outside and test them.
We even put satellites in space just to test the satellites, and we've learned to manufacture our satellites at scale.
We've used modern production techniques so we can build large numbers of them, I think for the first time.
We call it agile aerospace, and that's what's enabled us to put so much capability into this little box.
Now, what has bonded our team over the years is the idea of democratizing access to satellite information.
In fact, the founders of our company, Chris, Robbie and I, we met over 15 years ago at the United Nations when they were hosting a conference about exactly that question: How do you use satellites to help humanity?
How do you use satellites to help people in developing countries or with climate change?
And this is what has bonded us.
Our entire team is passionate about using satellites to help humanity.
You could say we're space geeks, but not only do we care about what's up there, we care about what's down here, too.
I'm going to show you a video from just four weeks ago of two of our satellites being launched from the International Space Station.
This is not an animation, this is a video taken by the astronaut looking out of the window.
It gives you a bit of a sense of scale of our two satellites.
It's like some of the smallest satellites ever are being launched from the biggest satellite ever.
And right at the end, the solar array glints in the sun.
It's really cool. Wait for it.
Boom! Yeah. It's the money shot.
(Laughter) So we didn't just launch two of them like this, we launched 28 of them.
It's the largest constellation of Earth-imaging satellites in human history, and it's going to provide a completely radical new data set about our changing planet.
But that's just the beginning.
You see, we're going to launch more than 100 of these satellites like these over the course of the next year.
It's going to be the largest constellation of satellites in human history.
And this is what it's going to do: Acting in a single-orbit plane that stays fixed with respect to the sun, the Earth rotates underneath.
They're all cameras pointed down, and they slowly scan across as the Earth rotates underneath.
The Earth rotates every 24 hours, so we scan every point on the planet every 24 hours.
It's a line scanner for the planet.
We don't take a picture of anywhere on the planet every day, we take a picture of every single place on the planet every day.
Even though we launched these just a couple of weeks ago, we've already got some initial imagery from the satellites and I'm going to show it publicly for the first time right now.
This is the very first picture taken by our satellite.
It happened to be over UC-Davis' campus in California when we turned the camera on.
But what's even cooler is when we compare it to the previous latest image of that area, which was taken many months ago.
And the image on the left is from our satellite, and we see buildings are being built.
The general point is that we will be able to track urban growth as it happens around the whole world in all cities, every day.
Water as well.
Thank you.
(Applause) We'll be able to see the extent of all water bodies around the whole world every day and help water security.
From water security to food security.
We'll see crops as they grow in all the fields in every farmer's field around the planet every day.
and help them to improve crop yield.
This is a beautiful image that was taken just a few hours ago when the satellite was flying over Argentina.
The general point is there are probably hundreds and thousands of applications of this data, I've mentioned a few, but there's others: deforestation, the ice caps melting.
We can track all of these things, every tree on the planet every day.
If you took the difference between today's image and yesterday's image, you'd see much of the world news — you'd see floods and fires and earthquakes.
And we have decided, therefore, that the best thing that we could do with our data is to ensure universal access to it.
We want to ensure everyone can see it.
Thank you. (Applause) We want to empower NGOs and companies and scientists and journalists to be able to answer the questions that they have about the planet.
We want to enable the developer community to run their apps on our data.
In short, we want to democratize access to information about our planet.
Which brings me back to this.
You see, this will be an entirely new global data set.
And we believe that together, we can help to take care of our Spaceship Earth.
And what I would like to leave you with is the following question: If you had access to imagery of the whole planet every single day, what would you do with that data?
What problems would you solve?
What exploration would you do?
Well, I invite you to come and explore with us.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The coldest materials in the world aren’t in Antarctica.
They’re not at the top of Mount Everest or buried in a glacier.
They’re in physics labs: clouds of gases held just fractions of a degree above absolute zero.
That’s 395 million times colder than your refrigerator, 100 million times colder than liquid nitrogen, and 4 million times colder than outer space.
Temperatures this low give scientists a window into the inner workings of matter, and allow engineers to build incredibly sensitive instruments that tell us more about everything from our exact position on the planet to what’s happening in the farthest reaches of the universe.
How do we create such extreme temperatures?
In short, by slowing down moving particles.
When we’re talking about temperature, what we’re really talking about is motion.
The atoms that make up solids, liquids, and gases are moving all the time.
When atoms are moving more rapidly, we perceive that matter as hot.
When they’re moving more slowly, we perceive it as cold.
To make a hot object or gas cold in everyday life, we place it in a colder environment, like a refrigerator.
Some of the atomic motion in the hot object is transferred to the surroundings, and it cools down.
But there’s a limit to this: even outer space is too warm to create ultra-low temperatures.
So instead, scientists figured out a way to slow the atoms down directly – with a laser beam.
Under most circumstances, the energy in a laser beam heats things up.
But used in a very precise way, the beam’s momentum can stall moving atoms, cooling them down.
That’s what happens in a device called a magneto-optical trap.
Atoms are injected into a vacuum chamber, and a magnetic field draws them towards the center.
A laser beam aimed at the middle of the chamber is tuned to just the right frequency that an atom moving towards it will absorb a photon of the laser beam and slow down.
The slow down effect comes from the transfer of momentum between the atom and the photon.
A total of six beams, in a perpendicular arrangement, ensure that atoms traveling in all directions will be intercepted.
At the center, where the beams intersect, the atoms move sluggishly, as if trapped in a thick liquid — an effect the researchers who invented it described as “optical molasses.” A magneto-optical trap like this can cool atoms down to just a few microkelvins — about -273 degrees Celsius.
This technique was developed in the 1980s, and the scientists who'd contributed to it won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1997 for the discovery.
Since then, laser cooling has been improved to reach even lower temperatures.
But why would you want to cool atoms down that much?
First of all, cold atoms can make very good detectors.
With so little energy, they’re incredibly sensitive to fluctuations in the environment.
So they’re used in devices that find underground oil and mineral deposits, and they also make highly accurate atomic clocks, like the ones used in global positioning satellites.
Secondly, cold atoms hold enormous potential for probing the frontiers of physics.
Their extreme sensitivity makes them candidates to be used to detect gravitational waves in future space-based detectors.
They’re also useful for the study of atomic and subatomic phenomena, which requires measuring incredibly tiny fluctuations in the energy of atoms.
Those are drowned out at normal temperatures, when atoms speed around at hundreds of meters per second.
Laser cooling can slow atoms to just a few centimeters per second— enough for the motion caused by atomic quantum effects to become obvious.
Ultracold atoms have already allowed scientists to study phenomena like Bose-Einstein condensation, in which atoms are cooled almost to absolute zero and become a rare new state of matter.
So as researchers continue in their quest to understand the laws of physics and unravel the mysteries of the universe, they’ll do so with the help of the very coldest atoms in it.
So, a few years ago I was at JFK Airport about to get on a flight, when I was approached by two women who I do not think would be insulted to hear themselves described as tiny old tough-talking Italian-American broads.
The taller one, who is like up here, she comes marching up to me, and she goes, "Honey, I gotta ask you something.
You got something to do with that whole 'Eat, Pray, Love' thing that's been going on lately?"
And I said, "Yes, I did."
And she smacks her friend and she goes, "See, I told you, I said, that's that girl.
That's that girl who wrote that book based on that movie."
(Laughter) So that's who I am.
And believe me, I'm extremely grateful to be that person, because that whole "Eat, Pray, Love" thing was a huge break for me.
But it also left me in a really tricky position moving forward as an author trying to figure out how in the world I was ever going to write a book again that would ever please anybody, because I knew well in advance that all of those people who had adored "Eat, Pray, Love" were going to be incredibly disappointed in whatever I wrote next because it wasn't going to be "Eat, Pray, Love," and all of those people who had hated "Eat, Pray, Love" were going to be incredibly disappointed in whatever I wrote next because it would provide evidence that I still lived.
So I knew that I had no way to win, and knowing that I had no way to win made me seriously consider for a while just quitting the game and moving to the country to raise corgis.
But if I had done that, if I had given up writing, I would have lost my beloved vocation, so I knew that the task was that I had to find some way to gin up the inspiration to write the next book regardless of its inevitable negative outcome.
In other words, I had to find a way to make sure that my creativity survived its own success.
And I did, in the end, find that inspiration, but I found it in the most unlikely and unexpected place.
I found it in lessons that I had learned earlier in life about how creativity can survive its own failure.
So just to back up and explain, the only thing I have ever wanted to be for my whole life was a writer.
I wrote all through childhood, all through adolescence, by the time I was a teenager I was sending my very bad stories to The New Yorker, hoping to be discovered.
After college, I got a job as a diner waitress, kept working, kept writing, kept trying really hard to get published, and failing at it.
I failed at getting published for almost six years.
So for almost six years, every single day, I had nothing but rejection letters waiting for me in my mailbox.
And it was devastating every single time, and every single time, I had to ask myself if I should just quit while I was behind and give up and spare myself this pain.
But then I would find my resolve, and always in the same way, by saying, "I'm not going to quit, I'm going home."
And you have to understand that for me, going home did not mean returning to my family's farm.
For me, going home meant returning to the work of writing because writing was my home, because I loved writing more than I hated failing at writing, which is to say that I loved writing more than I loved my own ego, which is ultimately to say that I loved writing more than I loved myself.
And that's how I pushed through it.
But the weird thing is that 20 years later, during the crazy ride of "Eat, Pray, Love," I found myself identifying all over again with that unpublished young diner waitress who I used to be, thinking about her constantly, and feeling like I was her again, which made no rational sense whatsoever because our lives could not have been more different.
She had failed constantly.
I had succeeded beyond my wildest expectation.
We had nothing in common.
Why did I suddenly feel like I was her all over again?
And it was only when I was trying to unthread that that I finally began to comprehend the strange and unlikely psychological connection in our lives between the way we experience great failure and the way we experience great success.
So think of it like this: For most of your life, you live out your existence here in the middle of the chain of human experience where everything is normal and reassuring and regular, but failure catapults you abruptly way out over here into the blinding darkness of disappointment.
Success catapults you just as abruptly but just as far way out over here into the equally blinding glare of fame and recognition and praise.
And one of these fates is objectively seen by the world as bad, and the other one is objectively seen by the world as good, but your subconscious is completely incapable of discerning the difference between bad and good.
The only thing that it is capable of feeling is the absolute value of this emotional equation, the exact distance that you have been flung from yourself.
And there's a real equal danger in both cases of getting lost out there in the hinterlands of the psyche.
But in both cases, it turns out that there is also the same remedy for self-restoration, and that is that you have got to find your way back home again as swiftly and smoothly as you can, and if you're wondering what your home is, here's a hint: Your home is whatever in this world you love more than you love yourself.
So that might be creativity, it might be family, it might be invention, adventure, faith, service, it might be raising corgis, I don't know, your home is that thing to which you can dedicate your energies with such singular devotion that the ultimate results become inconsequential.
For me, that home has always been writing.
So after the weird, disorienting success that I went through with "Eat, Pray, Love," I realized that all I had to do was exactly the same thing that I used to have to do all the time when I was an equally disoriented failure.
I had to get my ass back to work, and that's what I did, and that's how, in 2010, I was able to publish the dreaded follow-up to "Eat, Pray, Love."
And you know what happened with that book?
It bombed, and I was fine.
Actually, I kind of felt bulletproof, because I knew that I had broken the spell and I had found my way back home to writing for the sheer devotion of it.
And I stayed in my home of writing after that, and I wrote another book that just came out last year and that one was really beautifully received, which is very nice, but not my point.
My point is that I'm writing another one now, and I'll write another book after that and another and another and another and many of them will fail, and some of them might succeed, but I will always be safe from the random hurricanes of outcome as long as I never forget where I rightfully live.
Look, I don't know where you rightfully live, but I know that there's something in this world that you love more than you love yourself.
Something worthy, by the way, so addiction and infatuation don't count, because we all know that those are not safe places to live. Right?
The only trick is that you've got to identify the best, worthiest thing that you love most, and then build your house right on top of it and don't budge from it.
And if you should someday, somehow get vaulted out of your home by either great failure or great success, then your job is to fight your way back to that home the only way that it has ever been done, by putting your head down and performing with diligence and devotion and respect and reverence whatever the task is that love is calling forth from you next.
You just do that, and keep doing that again and again and again, and I can absolutely promise you, from long personal experience in every direction, I can assure you that it's all going to be okay.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine trying to use words to describe every scene in a film, every note in your favorite song, or every street in your town.
Now imagine trying to do it using only the numbers 1 and 0.
Every time you use the Internet to watch a movie, listen to music, or check directions, that’s exactly what your device is doing, using the language of binary code.
Computers use binary because it's a reliable way of storing data.
For example, a computer's main memory is made of transistors that switch between either high or low voltage levels, such as 5 volts and 0 volts.
Voltages sometimes oscillate, but since there are only two options, a value of 1 volt would still be read as "low."
That reading is done by the computer’s processor, which uses the transistors’ states to control other computer devices according to software instructions.
The genius of this system is that a given binary sequence doesn't have a pre-determined meaning on its own.
Instead, each type of data is encoded in binary according to a separate set of rules.
Let’s take numbers.
In normal decimal notation, each digit is multiplied by 10 raised to the value of its position, starting from zero on the right.
So 84 in decimal form is 4x10⁰ + 8x10¹.
Binary number notation works similarly, but with each position based on 2 raised to some power.
So 84 would be written as follows: Meanwhile, letters are interpreted based on standard rules like UTF-8, which assigns each character to a specific group of 8-digit binary strings.
In this case, 01010100 corresponds to the letter T.
So, how can you know whether a given instance of this sequence is supposed to mean T or 84?
Well, you can’t from seeing the string alone – just as you can’t tell what the sound "da" means from hearing it in isolation.
You need context to tell whether you're hearing Russian, Spanish, or English.
And you need similar context to tell whether you’re looking at binary numbers or binary text.
Binary code is also used for far more complex types of data.
Each frame of this video, for instance, is made of hundreds of thousands of pixels.
In color images, every pixel is represented by three binary sequences that correspond to the primary colors.
Each sequence encodes a number that determines the intensity of that particular color.
Then, a video driver program transmits this information to the millions of liquid crystals in your screen to make all the different hues you see now.
The sound in this video is also stored in binary, with the help of a technique called pulse code modulation.
Continuous sound waves are digitized by taking "snapshots" of their amplitudes every few milliseconds.
These are recorded as numbers in the form of binary strings, with as many as 44,000 for every second of sound.
When they’re read by your computer’s audio software, the numbers determine how quickly the coils in your speakers should vibrate to create sounds of different frequencies.
All of this requires billions and billions of bits.
But that amount can be reduced through clever compression formats.
For example, if a picture has 30 adjacent pixels of green space, they can be recorded as "30 green" instead of coding each pixel separately - a process known as run-length encoding.
These compressed formats are themselves written in binary code.
So is binary the end-all-be-all of computing?
Not necessarily.
There’s been research into ternary computers, with circuits in three possible states, and even quantum computers, whose circuits can be in multiple states simultaneously.
But so far, none of these has provided as much physical stability for data storage and transmission.
So for now, everything you see, hear, and read through your screen comes to you as the result of a simple "true" or "false" choice, made billions of times over.
So the first antidepressants were made from, of all things, rocket fuel, left over after World War II.
Which is fitting, seeing as today, one in five soldiers develop depression, or post-traumatic stress disorder or both.
But it's not just soldiers that are at high risk for these diseases.
It's firefighters, ER doctors, cancer patients, aid workers, refugees -- anyone exposed to trauma or major life stress.
And yet, despite how commonplace these disorders are, our current treatments, if they work at all, only suppress symptoms.
In 1798, when Edward Jenner discovered the first vaccine -- it happened to be for smallpox -- he didn't just discover a prophylactic for a disease, but a whole new way of thinking: that medicine could prevent disease.
However, for over 200 years, this prevention was not believed to extend to psychiatric diseases.
Until 2014, when my colleague and I accidentally discovered the first drugs that might prevent depression and PTSD.
We discovered the drugs in mice, and we're currently studying whether they work in humans.
And these preventative psychopharmaceuticals are not antidepressants.
They are a whole new class of drug.
And they work by increasing stress resilience, so let's call them resilience enhancers.
So think back to a stressful time that you've since recovered from.
Maybe a breakup or an exam, you missed a flight.
Stress resilience is the active biological process that allows us to bounce back after stress.
Similar to if you have a cold and your immune system fights it off.
And insufficient resilience in the face of a significant enough stressor, can result in a psychiatric disorder, such as depression.
In fact, most cases of major depressive disorder are initially triggered by stress.
And from what we've seen so far in mice, resilience enhancers can protect against purely biological stressors, like stress hormones, and social and psychological stressors, like bullying and isolation.
So here is an example where we gave mice three weeks of high levels of stress hormones.
So, in other words, a biological stressor without a psychological component.
And this causes depressive behavior.
And if we give three weeks of antidepressant treatment beforehand, it has no beneficial effects.
But a single dose of a resilience enhancer given a week before completely prevents the depressive behavior.
Even after three weeks of stress.
This is the first time a drug has ever been shown to prevent the negative effects of stress.
Depression and PTSD are chronic, often lifelong, clinical diseases.
They also increase the risk of substance abuse, homelessness, heart disease, Alzheimer's, suicide.
The global cost of depression alone is over three trillion dollars per year.
But now, imagine a scenario where we know someone is predictively at high risk for exposure to extreme stress.
Say, a red cross volunteer going into an earthquake zone.
In addition to the typhoid vaccine, we could give her a pill or an injection of a resilience enhancer before she leaves.
So when she is held at gunpoint by looters or worse, she would at least be protected against developing depression or PTSD after the fact.
It won't prevent her from experiencing the stress, but it will allow her to recover from it.
And that's what's revolutionary here.
By increasing resiliency, we can dramatically reduce her susceptibility to depression and PTSD, possibly saving her from losing her job, her home, her family or even her life.
After Jenner discovered the smallpox vaccine, a lot of other vaccines rapidly followed.
But it was over 150 years before a tuberculosis vaccine was widely available.
Why?
In part because society believed that tuberculosis made people more sensitive and creative and empathetic.
And that it was caused by constitution and not biology.
And similar things are still said today about depression.
And just as Jenner's discovery opened the door for all of the vaccines that followed after, the drugs we've discovered open the possibility of a whole new field: preventative psychopharmacology.
But whether that's 15 years away, or 150 years away, depends not just on the science, but on what we as a society choose to do with it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A computer is an incredibly powerful means of creative expression, but for the most part, that expression is confined to the screens of our laptops and mobile phones.
And I'd like to tell you a story about bringing this power of the computer to move things around and interact with us off of the screen and into the physical world in which we live.
A few years ago, I got a call from a luxury fashion store called Barneys New York, and the next thing I knew, I was designing storefront kinetic sculptures for their window displays.
This one's called "The Chase."
There are two pairs of shoes, a man's pair and a woman's pair, and they play out this slow, tense chase around the window in which the man scoots up behind the woman and gets in her personal space, and then she moves away.
Each of the shoes has magnets in it, and there are magnets underneath the table that move the shoes around.
My friend Andy Cavatorta was building a robotic harp for Bjork's Biophilia tour and I wound up building the electronics and motion control software to make the harps move and play music.
The harp has four separate pendulums, and each pendulum has 11 strings, so the harp swings on its axis and also rotates in order to play different musical notes, and the harps are all networked together so that they can play the right notes at the right time in the music.
I built an interactive chemistry exhibit at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, and this exhibit lets people use physical objects to grab chemical elements off of the periodic table and bring them together to cause chemical reactions to happen.
And the museum noticed that people were spending a lot of time with this exhibit, and a researcher from a science education center in Australia decided to study this exhibit and try to figure out what was going on.
And she found that the physical objects that people were using were helping people understand how to use the exhibit, and were helping people learn in a social way.
And when you think about it, this makes a lot of sense, that using specialized physical objects would help people use an interface more easily.
I mean, our hands and our minds are optimized to think about and interact with tangible objects.
Think about which you find easier to use, a physical keyboard or an onscreen keyboard like on a phone?
But the thing that struck me about all of these different projects is that they really had to be built from scratch, down to the level of the electronics and the printed circuit boards and all the mechanisms all the way up to the software.
I wanted to create something where we could move objects under computer control and create interactions around that idea without having to go through this process of building something from scratch every single time.
So my first attempt at this was at the MIT Media Lab with Professor Hiroshi Ishii, and we built this array of 512 different electromagnets, and together they were able to move objects around on top of their surface.
But the problem with this was that these magnets cost over 10,000 dollars.
Although each one was pretty small, altogether they weighed so much that the table that they were on started to sag.
So I wanted to build something where you could have this kind of interaction on any tabletop surface.
So to explore this idea, I built an army of small robots, and each of these robots has what are called omni wheels.
They're these special wheels that can move equally easily in all directions, and when you couple these robots with a video projector, you have these physical tools for interacting with digital information.
So here's an example of what I mean.
This is a video editing application where all of the controls for manipulating the video are physical.
So if we want to tweak the color, we just enter the color mode, and then we get three different dials for tweaking the color, or if we want to adjust the audio, then we get two different dials for that, these physical objects.
So here the left and right channel stay in sync, but if we want to, we can override that by grabbing both of them at the same time.
So the idea is that we get the speed and efficiency benefits of using these physical dials together with the flexibility and versatility of a system that's designed in software.
And this is a mapping application for disaster response.
So you have these physical objects that represent police, fire and rescue, and a dispatcher can grab them and place them on the map to tell those units where to go, and then the position of the units on the map gets synced up with the position of those units in the real world.
This is a video chat application.
It's amazing how much emotion you can convey with just a few simple movements of a physical object.
With this interface, we open up a huge array of possibilities in between traditional board games and arcade games, where the physical possibilities of interaction make so many different styles of play possible.
But one of the areas that I'm most excited about using this platform for is applying it to problems that are difficult for computers or people to solve alone.
One example of those is protein folding.
So here we have an interface where we have physical handles onto a protein, and we can grab those handles and try to move the protein and try to fold it in different ways.
And if we move it in a way that doesn't really make sense with the underlying molecular simulation, we get this physical feedback where we can actually feel these physical handles pulling back against us.
So feeling what's going on inside a molecular simulation is a whole different level of interaction.
So we're just beginning to explore what's possible when we use software to control the movement of objects in our environment.
Maybe this is the computer of the future.
There's no touchscreen.
There's no technology visible at all.
But when we want to have a video chat or play a game or lay out the slides to our next TED Talk, the objects on the table come alive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"Why?"
"Why?" is a question that parents ask me all the time.
"Why did my child develop autism?"
As a pediatrician, as a geneticist, as a researcher, we try and address that question.
But autism is not a single condition.
It's actually a spectrum of disorders, a spectrum that ranges, for instance, from Justin, a 13-year-old boy who's not verbal, who can't speak, who communicates by using an iPad to touch pictures to communicate his thoughts and his concerns, a little boy who, when he gets upset, will start rocking, and eventually, when he's disturbed enough, will bang his head to the point that he can actually cut it open and require stitches.
That same diagnosis of autism, though, also applies to Gabriel, another 13-year-old boy who has quite a different set of challenges.
He's actually quite remarkably gifted in mathematics.
He can multiple three numbers by three numbers in his head with ease, yet when it comes to trying to have a conversation, he has great difficulty.
He doesn't make eye contact.
He has difficulty starting a conversation, feels awkward, and when he gets nervous, he actually shuts down.
Yet both of these boys have the same diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
One of the things that concerns us is whether or not there really is an epidemic of autism.
These days, one in 88 children will be diagnosed with autism, and the question is, why does this graph look this way?
Has that number been increasing dramatically over time?
Or is it because we have now started labeling individuals with autism, simply giving them a diagnosis when they were still present there before yet simply didn't have that label?
And in fact, in the late 1980s, the early 1990s, legislation was passed that actually provided individuals with autism with resources, with access to educational materials that would help them.
With that increased awareness, more parents, more pediatricians, more educators learned to recognize the features of autism.
As a result of that, more individuals were diagnosed and got access to the resources they needed.
In addition, we've changed our definition over time, so in fact we've widened the definition of autism, and that accounts for some of the increased prevalence that we see.
The next question everyone wonders is, what caused autism?
And a common misconception is that vaccines cause autism.
But let me be very clear: Vaccines do not cause autism.
(Applause) In fact, the original research study that suggested that was the case was completely fraudulent.
It was actually retracted from the journal Lancet, in which it was published, and that author, a physician, had his medical license taken away from him.
(Applause) The Institute of Medicine, The Centers for Disease Control, have repeatedly investigated this and there is no credible evidence that vaccines cause autism.
Furthermore, one of the ingredients in vaccines, something called thimerosal, was thought to be what the cause of autism was.
That was actually removed from vaccines in the year 1992, and you can see that it really did not have an effect in what happened with the prevalence of autism.
So again, there is no evidence that this is the answer.
So the question remains, what does cause autism?
In fact, there's probably not one single answer.
Just as autism is a spectrum, there's a spectrum of etiologies, a spectrum of causes.
Based on epidemiological data, we know that one of the causes, or one of the associations, I should say, is advanced paternal age, that is, increasing age of the father at the time of conception.
In addition, another vulnerable and critical period in terms of development is when the mother is pregnant.
During that period, while the fetal brain is developing, we know that exposure to certain agents can actually increase the risk of autism.
In particular, there's a medication, valproic acid, which mothers with epilepsy sometimes take, we know can increase that risk of autism.
In addition, there can be some infectious agents that can also cause autism.
And one of the things I'm going to spend a lot of time focusing on are the genes that can cause autism.
I'm focusing on this not because genes are the only cause of autism, but it's a cause of autism that we can readily define and be able to better understand the biology and understand better how the brain works so that we can come up with strategies to be able to intervene.
One of the genetic factors that we don't understand, however, is the difference that we see in terms of males and females.
Males are affected four to one compared to females with autism, and we really don't understand what that cause is.
One of the ways that we can understand that genetics is a factor is by looking at something called the concordance rate.
In other words, if one sibling has autism, what's the probability that another sibling in that family will have autism?
And we can look in particular at three types of siblings: identical twins, twins that actually share 100 percent of their genetic information and shared the same intrauterine environment, versus fraternal twins, twins that actually share 50 percent of their genetic information, versus regular siblings, brother-sister, sister-sister, also sharing 50 percent of their genetic information, yet not sharing the same intrauterine environment.
And when you look at those concordance ratios, one of the striking things that you will see is that in identical twins, that concordance rate is 77 percent.
Remarkably, though, it's not 100 percent.
It is not that genes account for all of the risk for autism, but yet they account for a lot of that risk, because when you look at fraternal twins, that concordance rate is only 31 percent.
On the other hand, there is a difference between those fraternal twins and the siblings, suggesting that there are common exposures for those fraternal twins that may not be shared as commonly with siblings alone.
So this provides some of the data that autism is genetic.
Well, how genetic is it?
When we compare it to other conditions that we're familiar with, things like cancer, heart disease, diabetes, in fact, genetics plays a much larger role in autism than it does in any of these other conditions.
But with this, that doesn't tell us what the genes are.
It doesn't even tell us in any one child, is it one gene or potentially a combination of genes?
And so in fact, in some individuals with autism, it is genetic!
That is, that it is one single, powerful, deterministic gene that causes the autism.
However, in other individuals, it's genetic, that is, that it's actually a combination of genes in part with the developmental process that ultimately determines that risk for autism.
We don't know in any one person, necessarily, which of those two answers it is until we start digging deeper.
So the question becomes, how can we start to identify what exactly those genes are.
And let me pose something that might not be intuitive.
In certain individuals, they can have autism for a reason that is genetic but yet not because of autism running in the family.
And the reason is because in certain individuals, they can actually have genetic changes or mutations that are not passed down from the mother or from the father, but actually start brand new in them, mutations that are present in the egg or the sperm at the time of conception but have not been passed down generation through generation within the family.
And we can actually use that strategy to now understand and to identify those genes causing autism in those individuals.
So in fact, at the Simons Foundation, we took 2,600 individuals that had no family history of autism, and we took that child and their mother and father and used them to try and understand what were those genes causing autism in those cases?
To do that, we actually had to comprehensively be able to look at all that genetic information and determine what those differences were between the mother, the father and the child.
In doing so, I apologize, I'm going to use an outdated analogy of encyclopedias rather than Wikipedia, but I'm going to do so to try and help make the point that as we did this inventory, we needed to be able to look at massive amounts of information.
Our genetic information is organized into a set of 46 volumes, and when we did that, we had to be able to account for each of those 46 volumes, because in some cases with autism, there's actually a single volume that's missing.
We had to get more granular than that, though, and so we had to start opening those books, and in some cases, the genetic change was more subtle.
It might have been a single paragraph that was missing, or yet, even more subtle than that, a single letter, one out of three billion letters that was changed, that was altered, yet had profound effects in terms of how the brain functions and affects behavior.
In doing this within these families, we were able to account for approximately 25 percent of the individuals and determine that there was a single powerful genetic factor that caused autism within those families.
On the other hand, there's 75 percent that we still haven't figured out.
As we did this, though, it was really quite humbling, because we realized that there was not simply one gene for autism.
In fact, the current estimates are that there are 200 to 400 different genes that can cause autism.
And that explains, in part, why we see such a broad spectrum in terms of its effects.
Although there are that many genes, there is some method to the madness.
It's not simply random 200, 400 different genes, but in fact they fit together.
They fit together in a pathway.
They fit together in a network that's starting to make sense now in terms of how the brain functions.
We're starting to have a bottom-up approach where we're identifying those genes, those proteins, those molecules, understanding how they interact together to make that neuron work, understanding how those neurons interact together to make circuits work, and understand how those circuits work to now control behavior, and understand that both in individuals with autism as well as individuals who have normal cognition.
But early diagnosis is a key for us.
Being able to make that diagnosis of someone who's susceptible at a time in a window where we have the ability to transform, to be able to impact that growing, developing brain is critical.
And so folks like Ami Klin have developed methods to be able to take infants, small babies, and be able to use biomarkers, in this case eye contact and eye tracking, to identify an infant at risk.
This particular infant, you can see, making very good eye contact with this woman as she's singing "Itsy, Bitsy Spider," in fact is not going to develop autism.
This baby we know is going to be in the clear.
On the other hand, this other baby is going to go on to develop autism.
In this particular child, you can see, it's not making good eye contact.
Instead of the eyes focusing in and having that social connection, looking at the mouth, looking at the nose, looking off in another direction, but not again socially connecting, and being able to do this on a very large scale, screen infants, screen children for autism, through something very robust, very reliable, is going to be very helpful to us in terms of being able to intervene at an early stage when we can have the greatest impact.
How are we going to intervene?
It's probably going to be a combination of factors.
In part, in some individuals, we're going to try and use medications.
And so in fact, identifying the genes for autism is important for us to identify drug targets, to identify things that we might be able to impact and can be certain that that's really what we need to do in autism.
But that's not going to be the only answer.
Beyond just drugs, we're going to use educational strategies.
Individuals with autism, some of them are wired a little bit differently.
They learn in a different way.
They absorb their surroundings in a different way, and we need to be able to educate them in a way that serves them best.
Beyond that, there are a lot of individuals in this room who have great ideas in terms of new technologies we can use, everything from devices we can use to train the brain to be able to make it more efficient and to compensate for areas in which it has a little bit of trouble, to even things like Google Glass.
You could imagine, for instance, Gabriel, with his social awkwardness, might be able to wear Google Glass with an earpiece in his ear, and have a coach be able to help him, be able to help think about conversations, conversation-starters, being able to even perhaps one day invite a girl out on a date.
All of these new technologies just offer tremendous opportunities for us to be able to impact the individuals with autism, but yet we have a long way to go.
As much as we know, there is so much more that we don't know, and so I invite all of you to be able to help us think about how to do this better, to use as a community our collective wisdom to be able to make a difference, and in particular, for the individuals in families with autism, I invite you to join the interactive autism network, to be part of the solution to this, because it's going to take really a lot of us to think about what's important, what's going to be a meaningful difference.
As we think about something that's potentially a solution, how well does it work?
Is it something that's really going to make a difference in your lives, as an individual, as a family with autism?
We're going to need individuals of all ages, from the young to the old, and with all different shapes and sizes of the autism spectrum disorder to make sure that we can have an impact.
So I invite all of you to join the mission and to help to be able to make the lives of individuals with autism so much better and so much richer.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The Olympic motto is "Citius, Altius, Fortius."
Faster, Higher, Stronger.
And athletes have fulfilled that motto rapidly.
The winner of the 2012 Olympic marathon ran two hours and eight minutes.
Had he been racing against the winner of the 1904 Olympic marathon, he would have won by nearly an hour and a half.
Now we all have this feeling that we're somehow just getting better as a human race, inexorably progressing, but it's not like we've evolved into a new species in a century.
So what's going on here?
I want to take a look at what's really behind this march of athletic progress.
In 1936, Jesse Owens held the world record in the 100 meters.
Had Jesse Owens been racing last year in the world championships of the 100 meters, when Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt finished, Owens would have still had 14 feet to go.
That's a lot in sprinter land.
To give you a sense of how much it is, I want to share with you a demonstration conceived by sports scientist Ross Tucker.
Now picture the stadium last year at the world championships of the 100 meters: thousands of fans waiting with baited breath to see Usain Bolt, the fastest man in history; flashbulbs popping as the nine fastest men in the world coil themselves into their blocks.
And I want you to pretend that Jesse Owens is in that race.
Now close your eyes for a second and picture the race.
Bang! The gun goes off.
An American sprinter jumps out to the front.
Usain Bolt starts to catch him.
Usain Bolt passes him, and as the runners come to the finish, you'll hear a beep as each man crosses the line.
(Beeps) That's the entire finish of the race.
You can open your eyes now.
That first beep was Usain Bolt.
That last beep was Jesse Owens.
Listen to it again.
(Beeps) When you think of it like that, it's not that big a difference, is it?
And then consider that Usain Bolt started by propelling himself out of blocks down a specially fabricated carpet designed to allow him to travel as fast as humanly possible.
Jesse Owens, on the other hand, ran on cinders, the ash from burnt wood, and that soft surface stole far more energy from his legs as he ran.
Rather than blocks, Jesse Owens had a gardening trowel that he had to use to dig holes in the cinders to start from.
Biomechanical analysis of the speed of Owens' joints shows that had been running on the same surface as Bolt, he wouldn't have been 14 feet behind, he would have been within one stride.
Rather than the last beep, Owens would have been the second beep.
Listen to it again.
(Beeps) That's the difference track surface technology has made, and it's done it throughout the running world.
Consider a longer event.
In 1954, Sir Roger Bannister became the first man to run under four minutes in the mile.
Nowadays, college kids do that every year.
On rare occasions, a high school kid does it.
As of the end of last year, 1,314 men had run under four minutes in the mile, but like Jesse Owens, Sir Roger Bannister ran on soft cinders that stole far more energy from his legs than the synthetic tracks of today.
So I consulted biomechanics experts to find out how much slower it is to run on cinders than synthetic tracks, and their consensus that it's one and a half percent slower.
So if you apply a one and a half percent slowdown conversion to every man who ran his sub-four mile on a synthetic track, this is what happens.
Only 530 are left.
If you look at it from that perspective, fewer than ten new men per [year] have joined the sub-four mile club since Sir Roger Bannister.
Now, 530 is a lot more than one, and that's partly because there are many more people training today and they're training more intelligently.
Even college kids are professional in their training compared to Sir Roger Bannister, who trained for 45 minutes at a time while he ditched gynecology lectures in med school.
And that guy who won the 1904 Olympic marathon in three in a half hours, that guy was drinking rat poison and brandy while he ran along the course.
That was his idea of a performance-enhancing drug.
(Laughter) Clearly, athletes have gotten more savvy about performance-enhancing drugs as well, and that's made a difference in some sports at some times, but technology has made a difference in all sports, from faster skis to lighter shoes.
Take a look at the record for the 100-meter freestyle swim.
The record is always trending downward, but it's punctuated by these steep cliffs.
This first cliff, in 1956, is the introduction of the flip turn.
Rather than stopping and turning around, athletes could somersault under the water and get going right away in the opposite direction.
This second cliff, the introduction of gutters on the side of the pool that allows water to splash off, rather than becoming turbulence that impedes the swimmers as they race.
This final cliff, the introduction of full-body and low-friction swimsuits.
Throughout sports, technology has changed the face of performance.
In 1972, Eddy Merckx set the record for the longest distance cycled in one hour at 30 miles, 3,774 feet.
Now that record improved and improved as bicycles improved and became more aerodynamic all the way until 1996, when it was set at 35 miles, 1,531 feet, nearly five miles farther than Eddy Merckx cycled in 1972.
But then in 2000, the International Cycling Union decreed that anyone who wanted to hold that record had to do so with essentially the same equipment that Eddy Merckx used in 1972.
Where does the record stand today?
30 miles, 4,657 feet, a grand total of 883 feet farther than Eddy Merckx cycled more than four decades ago.
Essentially the entire improvement in this record was due to technology.
Still, technology isn't the only thing pushing athletes forward.
While indeed we haven't evolved into a new species in a century, the gene pool within competitive sports most certainly has changed.
In the early half of the 20th century, physical education instructors and coaches had the idea that the average body type was the best for all athletic endeavors: medium height, medium weight, no matter the sport.
And this showed in athletes' bodies.
In the 1920s, the average elite high-jumper and average elite shot-putter were the same exact size.
But as that idea started to fade away, as sports scientists and coaches realized that rather than the average body type, you want highly specialized bodies that fit into certain athletic niches, a form of artificial selection took place, a self-sorting for bodies that fit certain sports, and athletes' bodies became more different from one another.
Today, rather than the same size as the average elite high jumper, the average elite shot-putter is two and a half inches taller and 130 pounds heavier.
And this happened throughout the sports world.
In fact, if you plot on a height versus mass graph one data point for each of two dozen sports in the first half of the 20th century, it looks like this.
There's some dispersal, but it's kind of grouped around that average body type.
Then that idea started to go away, and at the same time, digital technology -- first radio, then television and the Internet -- gave millions, or in some cases billions, of people a ticket to consume elite sports performance.
The financial incentives and fame and glory afforded elite athletes skyrocketed, and it tipped toward the tiny upper echelon of performance.
It accelerated the artificial selection for specialized bodies.
And if you plot a data point for these same two dozen sports today, it looks like this.
The athletes' bodies have gotten much more different from one another.
And because this chart looks like the charts that show the expanding universe, with the galaxies flying away from one another, the scientists who discovered it call it "The Big Bang of Body Types."
In sports where height is prized, like basketball, the tall athletes got taller.
In 1983, the National Basketball Association signed a groundbreaking agreement making players partners in the league, entitled to shares of ticket revenues and television contracts.
Suddenly, anybody who could be an NBA player wanted to be, and teams started scouring the globe for the bodies that could help them win championships.
Almost overnight, the proportion of men in the NBA who are at least seven feet tall doubled to 10 percent.
Today, one in 10 men in the NBA is at least seven feet tall, but a seven-foot-tall man is incredibly rare in the general population -- so rare that if you know an American man between the ages of 20 and 40 who is at least seven feet tall, there's a 17 percent chance he's in the NBA right now.
(Laughter) That is, find six honest seven footers, one is in the NBA right now.
And that's not the only way that NBA players' bodies are unique.
This is Leonardo da Vinci's "Vitruvian Man," the ideal proportions, with arm span equal to height.
My arm span is exactly equal to my height.
Yours is probably very nearly so.
But not the average NBA player.
The average NBA player is a shade under 6'7", with arms that are seven feet long.
Not only are NBA players ridiculously tall, they are ludicrously long.
Had Leonardo wanted to draw the Vitruvian NBA Player, he would have needed a rectangle and an ellipse, not a circle and a square.
So in sports where large size is prized, the large athletes have gotten larger.
Conversely, in sports where diminutive stature is an advantage, the small athletes got smaller.
The average elite female gymnast shrunk from 5'3" to 4'9" on average over the last 30 years, all the better for their power-to-weight ratio and for spinning in the air.
And while the large got larger and the small got smaller, the weird got weirder.
The average length of the forearm of a water polo player in relation to their total arm got longer, all the better for a forceful throwing whip.
And as the large got larger, small got smaller, and the weird weirder.
In swimming, the ideal body type is a long torso and short legs.
It's like the long hull of a canoe for speed over the water.
And the opposite is advantageous in running.
You want long legs and a short torso.
And this shows in athletes' bodies today.
Here you see Michael Phelps, the greatest swimmer in history, standing next to Hicham El Guerrouj, the world record holder in the mile.
These men are seven inches different in height, but because of the body types advantaged in their sports, they wear the same length pants.
Seven inches difference in height, these men have the same length legs.
Now in some cases, the search for bodies that could push athletic performance forward ended up introducing into the competitive world populations of people that weren't previously competing at all, like Kenyan distance runners.
We think of Kenyans as being great marathoners.
Kenyans think of the Kalenjin tribe as being great marathoners.
The Kalenjin make up just 12 percent of the Kenyan population but the vast majority of elite runners.
And they happen, on average, to have a certain unique physiology: legs that are very long and very thin at their extremity, and this is because they have their ancestry at very low latitude in a very hot and dry climate, and an evolutionary adaptation to that is limbs that are very long and very thin at the extremity for cooling purposes.
It's the same reason that a radiator has long coils, to increase surface area compared to volume to let heat out, and because the leg is like a pendulum, the longer and thinner it is at the extremity, the more energy-efficient it is to swing.
To put Kalenjin running success in perspective, consider that 17 American men in history have run faster than two hours and 10 minutes in the marathon.
That's a four-minute-and-58-second-per-mile pace.
Thirty-two Kalenjin men did that last October.
(Laughter) That's from a source population the size of metropolitan Atlanta.
Still, even changing technology and the changing gene pool in sports don't account for all of the changes in performance.
Athletes have a different mindset than they once did.
Have you ever seen in a movie when someone gets an electrical shock and they're thrown across a room?
There's no explosion there.
What's happening when that happens is that the electrical impulse is causing all their muscle fibers to twitch at once, and they're throwing themselves across the room.
They're essentially jumping.
That's the power that's contained in the human body.
But normally we can't access nearly all of it.
Our brain acts as a limiter, preventing us from accessing all of our physical resources, because we might hurt ourselves, tearing tendons or ligaments.
But the more we learn about how that limiter functions, the more we learn how we can push it back just a bit, in some cases by convincing the brain that the body won't be in mortal danger by pushing harder.
Endurance and ultra-endurance sports serve as a great example.
Ultra-endurance was once thought to be harmful to human health, but now we realize that we have all these traits that are perfect for ultra-endurance: no body fur and a glut of sweat glands that keep us cool while running; narrow waists and long legs compared to our frames; large surface area of joints for shock absorption.
We have an arch in our foot that acts like a spring, short toes that are better for pushing off than for grasping tree limbs, and when we run, we can turn our torso and our shoulders like this while keeping our heads straight.
Our primate cousins can't do that.
They have to run like this.
And we have big old butt muscles that keep us upright while running.
Have you ever looked at an ape's butt?
They have no buns because they don't run upright.
And as athletes have realized that we're perfectly suited for ultra-endurance, they've taken on feats that would have been unthinkable before, athletes like Spanish endurance racer Kílian Jornet.
Here's Kílian running up the Matterhorn.
(Laughter) With a sweatshirt there tied around his waist.
It's so steep he can't even run here.
He's pulling up on a rope.
This is a vertical ascent of more than 8,000 feet, and Kílian went up and down in under three hours.
Amazing.
And talented though he is, Kílian is not a physiological freak.
Now that he has done this, other athletes will follow, just as other athletes followed after Sir Roger Bannister ran under four minutes in the mile.
Changing technology, changing genes, and a changing mindset.
Innovation in sports, whether that's new track surfaces or new swimming techniques, the democratization of sport, the spread to new bodies and to new populations around the world, and imagination in sport, an understanding of what the human body is truly capable of, have conspired to make athletes stronger, faster, bolder, and better than ever.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
There are 39 million people in the world who are blind.
Eighty percent of them are living in low-income countries such as Kenya, and the absolute majority do not need to be blind.
They are blind from diseases that are either completely curable or preventable.
Knowing this, with my young family, we moved to Kenya.
We secured equipment, funds, vehicles, we trained a team, we set up a hundred clinics throughout the Great Rift Valley to try and understand a single question: why are people going blind, and what can we do?
The challenges were great.
When we got to where we were going, we set up our high-tech equipment.
Power was rarely available.
We'd have to run our equipment from petrol power generators.
And then something occurred to me: There has to be an easier way, because it's the patients who are the most in need of access to eye care who are the least likely to get it.
More people in Kenya, and in sub-Saharan Africa, have access to a mobile phone than they do clean running water.
So we said, could we harness the power of mobile technology to deliver eye care in a new way?
And so we developed Peek, a smartphone [system] that enables community healthcare workers and empowers them to deliver eye care everywhere.
We set about replacing traditional hospital equipment, which is bulky, expensive and fragile, with smartphone apps and hardware that make it possible to test anyone in any language and of any age.
Here we have a demonstration of a three-month-old having their vision accurately tested using an app and an eye tracker.
We've got many trials going on in the community and in schools, and through the lessons that we've learned in the field, we've realized it's extremely important to share the data in non-medical jargon so that people understand what we're examining and what that means to them.
So here, for example, we use our sight sim application, once your vision has been measured, to show carers and teachers what the visual world is like for that person, so they can empathize with them and help them.
Once we've discovered somebody has low vision, the next big challenge is to work out why, and to be able to do that, we need to have access to the inside of the eye.
Traditionally, this requires expensive equipment to examine an area called the retina.
The retina is the single part of the eye that has huge amounts of information about the body and its health.
We've developed 3D-printed, low-cost hardware that comes in at less than five dollars to produce, which can then be clipped onto a smartphone and makes it possible to get views of the back of the eye of a very high quality.
And the beauty is, anybody can do it.
In our trials on over two and half thousand people, the smartphone with the add-on clip is comparable to a camera that is hugely more expensive and hugely more difficult to transport.
When we first moved to Kenya, we went with 150,000 dollars of equipment, a team of 15 people, and that was what was needed to deliver health care.
Now, all that's needed is a single person on a bike with a smartphone.
And it costs just 500 dollars.
The issue of power supply is overcome by harnessing the power of solar.
Our healthcare workers travel with a solar-powered rucksack which keeps the phone charged and backed up.
Now we go to the patient rather than waiting for the patient never to come.
We go to them in their homes and we give them the most comprehensive, high-tech, accurate examination, which can be delivered by anyone with minimal training.
We can link global experts with people in the most rural, difficult-to-reach places that are beyond the end of the road, effectively putting those experts in their homes, allowing us to make diagnoses and make plans for treatment.
Project managers, hospital directors, are able to search on our interface by any parameter they may be interested in.
Here in Nakuru, where I've been living, we can search for people by whatever condition.
Here are people who are blind from a curable condition cataract.
Each red pin depicts somebody who is blind from a disease that is curable and treatable, and they're locatable.
We can use bulk text messaging services to explain that we're coming to arrange a treatment.
What's more, we've learned that this is something that we haven't built just for the community but with the community.
Those blue pins that drop represent elders, or local leaders, that are connected to those people who can ensure that we can find them and arrange treatment.
So for patients like Mama Wangari, who have been blind for over 10 years and never seen her grandchildren, for less than 40 dollars, we can restore her eyesight.
This is something that has to happen.
It's only in statistics that people go blind by the millions.
The reality is everyone goes blind on their own.
But now, they might just be a text message away from help.
(Applause) And now because live demos are always a bad idea, we're going to try a live demo.
(Laughter) So here we have the Peek Vision app.
Okay, and what we're looking at here, this is Sam's optic nerve, which is a direct extension of her brain, so I'm actually looking at her brain as we look there.
We can see all parts of the retina.
It makes it possible to pick up diseases of the eye and of the body that would not be possible without access to the eye, and that clip-on device can be manufactured for just a few dollars, and people can be cured of blindness, and I think it says a lot about us as a human race if we've developed cures and we don't deliver them.
But now we can.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We live in a very complex environment: complexity and dynamism and patterns of evidence from satellite photographs, from videos.
You can even see it outside your window.
It's endlessly complex, but somehow familiar, but the patterns kind of repeat, but they never repeat exactly.
It's a huge challenge to understand.
The patterns that you see are there at all of the different scales, but you can't chop it into one little bit and say, "Oh, well let me just make a smaller climate."
I can't use the normal products of reductionism to get a smaller and smaller thing that I can study in a laboratory and say, "Oh, now that's something I now understand."
It's the whole or it's nothing.
The different scales that give you these kinds of patterns range over an enormous range of magnitude, roughly 14 orders of magnitude, from the small microscopic particles that seed clouds to the size of the planet itself, from 10 to the minus six to 10 to the eight, 14 orders of spatial magnitude.
In time, from milliseconds to millennia, again around 14 orders of magnitude.
What does that mean?
Okay, well if you think about how you can calculate these things, you can take what you can see, okay, I'm going to chop it up into lots of little boxes, and that's the result of physics, right?
And if I think about a weather model, that spans about five orders of magnitude, from the planet to a few kilometers, and the time scale from a few minutes to 10 days, maybe a month.
We're interested in more than that.
We're interested in the climate.
That's years, that's millennia, and we need to go to even smaller scales.
The stuff that we can't resolve, the sub-scale processes, we need to approximate in some way.
That is a huge challenge.
Climate models in the 1990s took an even smaller chunk of that, only about three orders of magnitude.
Climate models in the 2010s, kind of what we're working with now, four orders of magnitude.
We have 14 to go, and we're increasing our capability of simulating those at about one extra order of magnitude every decade.
One extra order of magnitude in space is 10,000 times more calculations.
And we keep adding more things, more questions to these different models.
So what does a climate model look like?
This is an old climate model, admittedly, a punch card, a single line of Fortran code.
We no longer use punch cards.
We do still use Fortran.
New-fangled ideas like C really haven't had a big impact on the climate modeling community.
But how do we go about doing it?
How do we go from that complexity that you saw to a line of code?
We do it one piece at a time.
This is a picture of sea ice taken flying over the Arctic.
We can look at all of the different equations that go into making the ice grow or melt or change shape.
We can look at the fluxes.
We can look at the rate at which snow turns to ice, and we can code that.
We can encapsulate that in code.
These models are around a million lines of code at this point, and growing by tens of thousands of lines of code every year.
So you can look at that piece, but you can look at the other pieces too.
What happens when you have clouds?
What happens when clouds form, when they dissipate, when they rain out?
That's another piece.
What happens when we have radiation coming from the sun, going through the atmosphere, being absorbed and reflected?
We can code each of those very small pieces as well.
There are other pieces: the winds changing the ocean currents.
We can talk about the role of vegetation in transporting water from the soils back into the atmosphere.
And each of these different elements we can encapsulate and put into a system.
Each of those pieces ends up adding to the whole.
And you get something like this.
You get a beautiful representation of what's going on in the climate system, where each and every one of those emergent patterns that you can see, the swirls in the Southern Ocean, the tropical cyclone in the Gulf of Mexico, and there's two more that are going to pop up in the Pacific at any point now, those rivers of atmospheric water, all of those are emergent properties that come from the interactions of all of those small-scale processes I mentioned.
There's no code that says, "Do a wiggle in the Southern Ocean."
There's no code that says, "Have two tropical cyclones that spin around each other."
All of those things are emergent properties.
This is all very good. This is all great.
But what we really want to know is what happens to these emergent properties when we kick the system?
When something changes, what happens to those properties?
And there's lots of different ways to kick the system.
There are wobbles in the Earth's orbit over hundreds of thousands of years that change the climate.
There are changes in the solar cycles, every 11 years and longer, that change the climate.
Big volcanoes go off and change the climate.
Changes in biomass burning, in smoke, in aerosol particles, all of those things change the climate.
The ozone hole changed the climate.
Deforestation changes the climate by changing the surface properties and how water is evaporated and moved around in the system.
Contrails change the climate by creating clouds where there were none before, and of course greenhouse gases change the system.
Each of these different kicks provides us with a target to evaluate whether we understand something about this system.
So we can go to look at what model skill is.
Now I use the word "skill" advisedly: Models are not right or wrong; they're always wrong.
They're always approximations.
The question you have to ask is whether a model tells you more information than you would have had otherwise.
If it does, it's skillful.
This is the impact of the ozone hole on sea level pressure, so low pressure, high pressures, around the southern oceans, around Antarctica.
This is observed data.
This is modeled data.
There's a good match because we understand the physics that controls the temperatures in the stratosphere and what that does to the winds around the southern oceans.
We can look at other examples.
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 put an enormous amount of aerosols, small particles, into the stratosphere.
That changed the radiation balance of the whole planet.
There was less energy coming in than there was before, so that cooled the planet, and those red lines and those green lines, those are the differences between what we expected and what actually happened.
The models are skillful, not just in the global mean, but also in the regional patterns.
I could go through a dozen more examples: the skill associated with solar cycles, changing the ozone in the stratosphere; the skill associated with orbital changes over 6,000 years.
We can look at that too, and the models are skillful.
The models are skillful in response to the ice sheets 20,000 years ago.
The models are skillful when it comes to the 20th-century trends over the decades.
Models are successful at modeling lake outbursts into the North Atlantic 8,000 years ago.
And we can get a good match to the data.
Each of these different targets, each of these different evaluations, leads us to add more scope to these models, and leads us to more and more complex situations that we can ask more and more interesting questions, like, how does dust from the Sahara, that you can see in the orange, interact with tropical cyclones in the Atlantic?
How do organic aerosols from biomass burning, which you can see in the red dots, intersect with clouds and rainfall patterns?
How does pollution, which you can see in the white wisps of sulfate pollution in Europe, how does that affect the temperatures at the surface and the sunlight that you get at the surface?
We can look at this across the world.
We can look at the pollution from China.
We can look at the impacts of storms on sea salt particles in the atmosphere.
We can see the combination of all of these different things happening all at once, and we can ask much more interesting questions.
How do air pollution and climate coexist?
Can we change things that affect air pollution and climate at the same time?
The answer is yes.
So this is a history of the 20th century.
The first one is the model.
The weather is a little bit different to what actually happened.
The second one are the observations.
And we're going through the 1930s.
There's variability, there are things going on, but it's all kind of in the noise.
As you get towards the 1970s, things are going to start to change.
They're going to start to look more similar, and by the time you get to the 2000s, you're already seeing the patterns of global warming, both in the observations and in the model.
We know what happened over the 20th century.
Right? We know that it's gotten warmer.
We know where it's gotten warmer.
And if you ask the models why did that happen, and you say, okay, well, yes, basically it's because of the carbon dioxide we put into the atmosphere.
We have a very good match up until the present day.
But there's one key reason why we look at models, and that's because of this phrase here.
Because if we had observations of the future, we obviously would trust them more than models, But unfortunately, observations of the future are not available at this time.
So when we go out into the future, there's a difference.
The future is unknown, the future is uncertain, and there are choices.
Here are the choices that we have.
We can do some work to mitigate the emissions of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
That's the top one.
We can do more work to really bring it down so that by the end of the century, it's not much more than there is now.
Or we can just leave it to fate and continue on with a business-as-usual type of attitude.
The differences between these choices can't be answered by looking at models.
There's a great phrase that Sherwood Rowland, who won the Nobel Prize for the chemistry that led to ozone depletion, when he was accepting his Nobel Prize, he asked this question: "What is the use of having developed a science well enough to make predictions if, in the end, all we're willing to do is stand around and wait for them to come true?"
The models are skillful, but what we do with the information from those models is totally up to you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You know me.
I am in your friendship circle hidden in plain sight.
My clothes are still impeccable -- bought in the good years when I was still making money.
To look at me you would not know that my electricity was cut off last week for nonpayment, or that I meet the eligibility requirements for food stamps.
But if you paid attention, you would see that sadness in my eyes -- hear that hint of fear in my otherwise self-assured voice.
These days I'm buying the $1.99 trial-size jug of Tide to make ends meet.
I bet you didn't know laundry detergent came in that size.
You invite me to the same expensive restaurants the two of us have always enjoyed, but I order mineral water now with a twist of lemon, not the 12-dollar glass of chardonnay.
I am frugal in my menu choices.
Meticulous, I count every penny in my head.
I demur dividing the table bill evenly to cover desserts and designer coffees and second and third glasses of wine I did not consume.
I am tired of trying to fake appearances.
A friend told me that I'm broke not poor, and there is a difference.
I live without cable, my gym membership and nail appointments.
I've discovered I can do my own hair.
There is no retirement savings, no nest egg.
I exhausted that long ago.
There is no expensive condo to draw equity and no husband to back me up.
Months of slow pay and no pay have decimated my credit.
Bill collectors call constantly, reading verbatim from a script before expressing polite sympathy for my plight and then demanding payment arrangements I can't possibly meet.
Friends wonder privately how someone so well educated could be in economic free fall.
I'm still as talented as ever and smart as a whip, but work is sketchy now, mostly on and off consulting gigs.
At 55 I've learned how to fake cheeriness, but there are not many opportunities for work anymore.
I don't remember exactly when it stopped, but I cannot deny now having entered the uncertain world of formerly and used to be.
I'm not sure anymore where I belong.
What I do know is that dozens of online job applications seem to just disappear into a black hole.
I'm wondering what is to become of me.
So far my health has held up, but my body aches -- or is it my spirit?
Homeless women used to be invisible to me but I appraise them now with curious eyes, wondering if their stories started like mine.
I wrote this piece a year ago.
It's a composite of my story and other women I know.
I wrote it because I was tired of pretending I was all right when I wasn't.
I was tired of faking normal.
I wasn't seeing myself in the popular press.
Nobody I knew was traveling the world or buying a condo in Costa Rica.
Very few of my friends had set aside the 15 to 20 percent experts tell us we need to maintain our standard of living in retirement.
My friends, many in their 50s and 60s, were looking at a downward mobility, a work-for-life proposition, just a job loss, medical diagnosis or divorce away from insolvency.
We may not have hit rock bottom, but many of us saw a sequence of events where rock bottom was possible for the first time.
And the truth is, it really doesn't take much.
The median household in the US only has enough savings to replace one month of income.
Forty-seven percent of us cannot pull together 400 dollars to deal with an emergency.
That's almost half of us.
A major car repair and we're standing on the abyss.
You wouldn't know it to look around you -- I'm not the only one in this situation.
There are people in this room who are in the same predicament, and if it's not you, it is your parents or your sister or maybe your best friend.
We get good at faking normal.
Shame keeps us silent and siloed.
When I first decided I was going to come out with my story, I did a website and a friend noticed that there were no photos of me -- it was all kind of cartoons like this.
Even as I was coming out, I was still hiding.
We live in a world where success is defined by income.
When you say that you have money problems, you're announcing pretty much that you're a loser.
When you're a graduate of Harvard Business School as I am, you're some kind of double loser.
We boomers hear a lot about how we have underfunded our retirement; how it's all our fault.
Why on earth would we draw down our 401(k) plan to cover the shortfall on our mother-in-law's nursing home care, or to pay for our kid's tuition, or just to survive?
We're accused of being poor planners and deadbeats -- all that money we spent on lattes and bottled water.
To shame and blame is so deliciously tempting.
Many of us don't even wait for others to do it we're so busy doing it to ourselves.
I say let's own our part: we all could have saved more.
I know I could have saved more, and if you were to rifle through my life over the last 30 years, you would see more than one dumb thing I have done financially.
I can't change that now and neither can you, but let's not mix up individual, isolated behavior with the systemic factors that have caused a 7.7-trillion-dollar retirement income gap.
Millions of boomer-age Americans did not land here because of too many trips to Starbucks.
We spent the last three decades dealing with flat and falling wages and disappearing pensions and through-the-roof cost on housing and health care and education.
It used to not be like this.
We all remember the three-legged retirement income stool which had the savings and pension and social security.
Well, that stool has gone wobbly.
Take savings -- what savings?
For many families, there's just nothing left to save after the bills have been paid.
The pension leg of the stool has also gone wobbly.
We can remember when many people had pensions.
Today only 13 percent of American workers are employed by companies that offer them.
So what did we get instead?
We got 401(k)-type plans and suddenly responsibility for retirement planning got shifted from our companies to us.
We got the reigns but we also got the risk, and it turns out that millions of us just aren't that good at voluntarily investing over 40 years.
Millions of us just aren't that good at managing market risk.
And really the numbers tell the story.
Half of all American households have no retirement savings at all.
That would be zero.
No 401(k), no IRA, not a dime.
Among 55-to-64-year-olds who do have a retirement account, the median value of that account is 104,000 dollars.
Now, 104,000 dollars does sound better than zero, but as an annuity, it generates about 300 dollars.
I don't have to tell you that you can't live on that.
With savings down, pensions becoming a relic of the past and 401(k) plans failing millions of Americans, many near-retirees are dependent on social security as their retirement plan.
But here's the problem.
Social security was never supposed to be the retirement plan.
It's not nearly enough.
At best it replaces something like 40 percent of your pre-retirement income.
Things have changed a lot from when social security was introduced back in 1935.
Then, a 21-year-old male had a 50 percent chance of living until he was 65.
So he retired at 60, did a little fishing, kissed his grandkids, got his gold watch -- he'd be dead within five years of receiving benefits.
That's not the pattern today.
If you're in your late 50s and in good health, you're going to live easily another 20 or 25 years.
That's a really long time to make ends meet if you are broke.
So what's the play if you've landed here and you're 50 or 55 or 60?
What's the play if you don't want to land here and you're 22 or 32?
Here's what I've learned from my own experience.
The cavalry's not coming.
There is no big rescue, no prince charming, no big bailout in the works.
To have a shot at something other than being old and poor in America, we're going to have to save ourselves and each other.
I've had to come out of the shadows, stand here openly, and I'm inviting you to do so as well.
I'm not going to tell you that it's not easy.
I ventured though to tell my story because I thought it would make it a little easier for people to tell theirs.
I think it's only through our strength in numbers that we can begin to change the national "la-la" conversation that we are having on this retirement crisis.
With so many of us shell-shocked and adrift about what has happened to us, we're going to have to build up from the grassroots, forming what I think are resilience circles.
These are small groups of people coming together to talk about what has happened to them, to share resources and information and to begin to figure out a way forward.
I believe from this base that we can find our voices again and sound the alarm -- start pushing our institutions and policymakers to go hard on this retirement crisis with the urgency it deserves.
In the meantime -- and there is an "in the meantime" -- we're going to have to adopt a live-low-to-the-ground mindset, drastically cutting back on our expenses.
And I don't mean just living within our means.
A lot of people are already doing that.
What is called for now is to, in a much deeper way, ask ourselves what it really means to live a life that is not defined by things.
I call it "smalling up."
Smalling up is figuring out what you really need to feel contented and grounded.
I have a friend who drives really beat-up, raggedy cars, but he will scrimp and save 15,000 dollars at one point to buy a flute because music is what really matters to him.
He smalled up.
I've had to also let go of magical thinking -- this idea that if I just was patient enough and tightened my belt that things would go back to normal.
If I just sent in one more CV or applied to one more job online or attended one more networking event that surely I'd get the kind of job I was used to having.
Surely things would return to normal.
The truth is I'm not going back and neither are you.
The normal that we knew is over.
In this new place that we are, we're going to be asked to do things that we don't want to do.
We're going to be asked to take assignments that we think are beneath our station and our talent and our skill.
I have had to get off my throne.
Last year, a good friend of mine asked me if I would help her with some organization work.
I assumed she meant community organizing along the lines of what President Obama did in Chicago.
She meant organizing somebody's closet.
I said, "I'm not doing that."
She said, "Get off your throne. Money is green."
It's not easy being part of the advance team that is ushering in this new era of work and living.
First is always hardest.
First is before there are networks and pathways and role models ...
before there are policies and ways to show us how to go forward.
We're in the middle of a seismic shift, and we're going to have to find bridgework to get us through.
Bridgework is what we do in the meantime; bridgework is what we do while we're trying to figure out what is next.
Bridgework is also letting go of this notion that our worth and our value depend on our income and our titles and our jobs.
Bridgework can look crazy or cool depending on how you were rolling when your personal financial crisis hit.
I have friends with PhDs who are working at the Container Store or driving Uber or Lyft, and then I have other friends who are partnering with other boomers and doing really cool entrepreneurial ventures.
Bridgework doesn't mean that we don't want to build on our past careers, that we don't want meaningful work.
We do.
Bridgework is what we do in the meantime while we're figuring out what is next.
I've also learned to think strategy not failure when I'm sort of processing all these things that I don't want to do.
And I say that that's an approach that I would invite you to consider as well.
So if you need to move in with your brother to make ends meet, call him.
If you need to take in a boarder to help you pay your mortgage or pay your rent, do it.
If you need to get food stamps, get the darn food stamps.
AARP says only a third of older adults who are eligible actually get them.
Do what you need to do to go another round.
Know that there are millions of us.
Come out of the shadows.
Cut back, small up; think strategy, not failure; get off your throne and find the bridgework to get your through the lean times.
As a country, we have achieved longevity, investing billions of dollars in the diagnosis, treatment and management of disease.
It's not enough to just live a long time.
We want to live well.
We haven't invested nearly as much in the physical infrastructure to ensure that that happens.
We need now a new way of thinking about what it means to be old in America.
And we need guidance and ideas about how to live a richly textured life on a much more modest income.
So I am calling on change agents and social entrepreneurs, artists and elders and impact investors.
I'm calling on developers and disrupters of the status quo.
We need you to help us imagine how to invest in the services and products and infrastructure that will support our dignity, our independence and our well-being in these many, many decades that we're going to live.
My journey has taken me from a place of fear and shame to one of humility and understanding.
I'm ready now to link shields with others, to fight this fight, and I'm inviting you to join me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
First of all, for those of you who are not familiar with my work, I create multicultural characters, so characters from lots of different backgrounds.
So before the present is the new future, a bit about the past is that I grew up in a family that was multi-everything -- multi-racial, multi-cultural, black and white, Caribbean, Irish-American, German-American.
There was Dominican music blasting from stereos.
There were Christians and Jews.
That's a long story filled with intrigue and interfaith guilt and shame.
But I was totally immersed in this world that was filled with everybody, and then I went on to the United Nations school, and that just completely — So I began sort of developing these voices and these people, all of whom were loosely based on people I really know, and so, for example, in performing them, I would really try to inhabit them.
And for example, I don't really talk like that, but that was one of my people, and I'm going to bring a few of my friends -- I think of them as my friends — to this stage, in this spirit of the idea that the present is the new future, in sort of a meta way, because I thought about it, and the future, for me, what can be so frightening is that I don't know what's coming.
I don't know if that's true for other people, but that notion of thinking about how we can understand the future and predict outcomes, for me, it's terrifying to not know what might be coming.
And so the idea that there are questions that I've never seen that my people are going to answer, and some of these characters have been with me for ages, some of them don't even have names, I don't know what's going to happen.
I don't know what's coming, and all I can do is remind myself that I told Chris I'd fly by the seat of my pants, and now that I'm up here it sort of feels like that dream where you don't have any pants on, and so I suppose I'm going to be flying by the seat of my ass.
That said, let's just see who comes out.
May we have the first question: "Do you ever get headaches from the microchips implanted in your brain?"
Right.
Okay.
Well first of all, I'll just say that I hope you can hear me okay.
My name is Lorraine Levine, and the idea of microchips implanted in my brain, frankly, just putting on my glasses reminds me of thank God I'm not wearing the Google Glasses.
No offense to them. I'm glad that you all enjoy them, but at my age, just putting on the regular ones I have already gives me too much information.
Do you understand what I'm saying to you?
I don't need to know more. I don't want to know.
That's it. That's enough.
I love you all. You're wonderful.
It's fabulous to be here with such big machers again this year. Mwah!
Okay, next question. (Applause) Next, please.
"Is dating boring, now that humans reproduce asexually?"
Who do we got?
Hi, um, okay, hi everybody.
My name is Nereida.
I just want to say first of all that dating is never boring under any circumstance.
But I am very excited to be here right now, so I am just trying to remind myself that, you know, like, the purpose of being here and everything, I mean, trying to answer these questions, it is very exciting.
But I also, I just need to acknowledge that TED is an incredible experience right now in the present, like, I just need to say, like, Isabel Allende. Isabel Allende!
Okay, maybe it doesn't mean, of course it means something to you, but to me, it's like, another level, okay?
Because I'm Latina and I really appreciate the fact that there are role models here that I can really, I don't know, I just need to say that.
That's incredible to me, and sometimes when I'm nervous and everything like that, I just need to, like, say some affirmations that can help me.
I usually just try to use, like, the three little words that always make me feel better: Sotomayor, Sotomayor, Sotomayor. (Laughter) Just, it really helps me to get grounded.
Now I can use Allende, Allende, Allende, and, you know, I just need to say it, like, it's so incredible to be here, and I knew that we were going to have these questions.
I was so nervous and I was thinking just, like, oh my God, oh my God, and reminding me, because I've had, like, some very, especially since the last time we were here at TED, it was, like, unbelievable, and then right after that, like, so many crazy things happened, like, we ended up going to the White House to perform.
That was, like, amazing, and I'm standing there, and I was just like, please don't say, "Oh my God."
Don't say, "Oh my God."
And I just kept saying it: "Oh my God. Oh my God."
And, you know, I kept thinking to myself, like, President Obama has to come up here at the same podium, and I'm standing here saying, "Oh my God."
It's like, the separation of church and state.
It's just, I couldn't, like, I couldn't process.
It was really too much.
So I think I've lost my way.
But what I wanted to say is that dating, for me, you know, as far as I'm concerned, however you reproduce, as long as you're enjoying yourself and it's with another consenting asexual -- I don't know.
You know where I'm going with that.
Okay, ciao, gracias.
Okay, next question. (Applause) What are your top five favorite songs right now?
All right, well first of all, I'mma say, you know what I'm saying, I'm the only dude up here right now.
My name is Rashid, and I never been at TED before, you know what I'm saying.
I think, Sarah Jones, maybe she didn't want me to come out last time.
I don't know why. You know what I'm saying.
Obviously I would be like a perfect fit for TED.
You know what I'm saying.
First of all, that I'm in hip hop, you know what I'm saying.
I know some of y'all may be not really as much into the music, but the first way y'all can always know, you know what I'm saying, that I'm in hip hop, is 'cos I hold the microphone in an official emcee posture.
Y'all can see that right there.
That's how you hold it.
All right, so you get your little tutorial right there.
But when Sarah Jones told me we was gonna come up here, I was like, betch, you know what I'm saying, TED is real fly, I got a whole lot of dope, you know what I'm saying, shit going on and everything, but she was like, yeah, we're going to have to answer, like, some random questions, just like, and I was like, what the hell is that?
You know what I'm saying, just stand up there and answer some random questions?
I don't want to, I mean, it's like an intellectual stop-and-frisk.
You know what I'm saying? (Laughter) I don't want to be standing up there just all getting interrogated and whatnot.
That's what I'm trying to leave behind in New York. You know what I'm saying?
So anyway, I would have to say my top five songs right now is all out of my own personal catalogue, you know what I mean?
So if you want to know more about that, you know what I'm saying, we could talk about the anti-piracy and all that, but as far as I'm concerned, you know, I believe in creative commons, and I think it's really important that, you know, that needs to be sustainable and everything, and I mean, as far as I'm concerned, I mean, this right here, this environment, I would like to sustain.
You know what I mean?
But I'm just saying, if y'all are interested in the top five songs, you need to holler at me.
You know what I'm saying?
Aight? In the future or the present. Yeah.
Enjoy the rest of it.
Okay, next question.
What do you got?
"How many of your organs have been 3D printed?"
(Laughter) Well I have to say that I don't know about how many of my organs have been 3-D printed as such, but I can tell you that it is so challenging to me, kind of thinking about this concept of the future and that, you know, all around the world parents are kind of telling their small children, please, you have to eat that, you know, I have slaved over a hot 3D printer all day so that you can have this meal.
You know, that kind of thing.
And of course now that we have changed, you know, from the global South, there is this total kind of perspective shift that is happening around the -- You can't just say to them, well, there are starving children.
Well, it is the future.
Nobody is starving anymore, thank God.
But as you can tell I have kind of that optimism, and I do hope that we can continue to kind of 3D print, well, let us just say I like to think that even in the future we will have the publication, kind of, you know, all the food that's fit to print.
But everybody, please do enjoy that, and again, I think that you do throw a cracking good party here at TED.
Thank you.
Next question. (Applause) What has changed? Okay, it's like, I have to think about that.
"What has changed now that women run the world?"
First of all, I really, like, I just want to say, and my name is Bella, I just want to, like, identify myself, that, like, as a feminist, I, like, I really find that, like, because I was born in the '90s, and, like, there were a lot of women who were as far as feminism was concerned, like, maybe they didn't understand that, like, a feminist like me, like, I don't think it's required that you have to have a certain kind of voice, or, like, a certain way of presenting yourself to be feminist, because I think that, like, feminism can be really hot, and I think actually that it's really vital and important.
Like, the quotation I'm wearing is from, like, Gloria Steinem, and, like, I'm named Bella for, like, Bella Abzug, who's, like, obviously, like, a really important feminist from, like, history, and like, I just think that those women, like, really represent, like, that you can, like, be vital and, like, amazing, like, a-mazing, and you don't have to wear, like, an Eileen Fisher caftan, just to, like, prove that you are a feminist.
Like, not that there's anything wrong with that, but my mom, she's like, like, why do you have to wear pants that, like, objectify your body? I like my pants.
Like, I like my voice.
Like, she's like, why do you have to talk like — Talk like what? Like, I'm expressing myself, and I think that we have to, like, reach out, like, not only across, like, the different generations of feminists, but also across the, like, vocal ranges, so that, like, we, because otherwise it's just, like, restriculous within feminism, which is just, like, a word that I created that means, like, so strict it's ridiculous.
So that's my feeling about that.
You guys are a-mazing, by the way.
Okay. Next question.
(Applause) ["They've discovered a cure for cancer, but not baldness? What's up with that?"] Yeah, you know what, so my name is Joseph Mancuso.
First of all, I just want to say that I appreciate that TED in general has been a pretty orderly crowd, a pretty orderly group.
And, you know, I just have to say, the whole thing with baldness, and, you know, here's the thing.
As long as the woman, in my case -- because it's a modern world, do whatever you want to do, I don't have any problem with anybody, enjoy yourself, LGBTQLMNOP. All right?
But as far as I'm concerned, attractiveness, women don't really care as much as you think they do about the, you know.
I mean, I remember hearing this woman.
She loved her husband, it was the sweetest thing.
It's a pretty young girl, you know?
And this guy's older.
And, you know, she said she would love him even if he had snow on the roof or even if melted and disappeared altogether.
As far as I'm concerned, it's about the love.
Am I right, or am I right?
So that's it. That's it. That's it.
I don't got nothing more to say.
Keep your noses clean.
All right, next question.
"Have you ever tasted meat that's not lab grown?"
Um, well, I, I want to start by saying that this is a very difficult experience for a Chinese-American.
I don't know what to call myself now, because I have really my Chinese identity, but my kids, they are American-Chinese, but it's difficult to try to express myself in front of audience of people like this.
But if had to give my opinion about meat, I think first, the most important thing is to say that we don't have to have perfect food, but maybe it can also not be poison.
Maybe we can have some middle ground for that.
But I will continue to consider this idea, and I will report back maybe next year.
Next.
Next. Next. (Applause) "Will there ever be a post-racial world?"
Thank you for having me.
My name is Gary Weaselhead. Enjoy that.
I'm a member of the Blackfeet Nation.
I'm also half Lakota, but that is my given name, and no, even though it would have seemed like an obvious choice, no, I did not go into politics.
Tough crowd.
(Laughter) But I always like to just let people know when they ask about race or those kinds of things, you know, as a member of the First Nations community, you know, I'm probably not your typical guy.
For example, in addition to being an activist, I'm also a professional stand-up comedian.
(Laughter) And, you know, I'm most popular on college and university campuses.
You know, whenever they want to do a diversity day, or hey-we're-not-all-white week, then I'm there. (Laughter) Do I think there will ever be a post-racial world?
I think, really, I can't talk about race without remembering that it is a construct in certain respects, but also that, you know, until we redress the wrongs of the past, we're going to be turned around.
I don't care if the present is the new future.
I think there's a lot of great people here at TED who are working to address that, so with that, if anything I've said today makes you feel uncomfortable, you're welcome.
(Applause) I think we have time for one more.
"What's the most popular diet these days?"
Who's here?
Okay, well, I'm just gonna answer this really fast, as, like, three or four different people.
I mean really fast.
I'm just gonna let y'all know that, as far as diet is concerned, if you don't love yourself inside, there is no diet on this Earth that is going to make your behind small enough for you to feel good, so just stop wasting your time.
I would just like to say as an African woman that I believe the diet that we need is really to remove the crazy belief that there is anything wrong with a nice backside.
No, I am teasing about that.
There is nothing wrong with a woman of size.
That is what I am trying to say.
Women, celebrate your body, for God's sake.
Stop running around starving.
You are making yourselves and other people miserable.
Last answer.
So we're talking about what's the most popular diet?
I'm gonna start off by telling y'all that this is my first time here at TED.
I might not be your typical person you find on this stage.
My dental work not as nice as some people.
But I made Sarah Jones promise she gonna bring me this time, 'cause she didn't bring me before, but you know, I just want to say, there's a lot of things more important than counting calories, and as somebody living on the streets in New York, and getting to come here, hear y'all ideas worth spreading, I want to tell y'all I believe in this idea that the present is the new future, that where you sit, you create everything that's gonna come, for better or worse.
And for me, I think homeless is the wrong word for it anyway.
You know, I might not have me no place to lay my head at night, but that just makes me houseless.
I have me a home. You do too.
Find it and try to find yourself in there.
Make sure you know, it's not just about virtual reality in space.
That's wonderful, but it's also about the actual reality here on Earth.
How are people living today?
How can you be part of the solution?
Thank y'all for thinking about that right now in the present moment to influence the future.
I appreciate it. Bye-bye.
(Applause) Thank you all very, very much.
Thank you for trusting me, Chris.
(Applause)
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
My name is Art Benjamin, and I am a "mathemagician."
What that means is, I combine my loves of math and magic to do something I call "mathemagics."
But before I get started, I have a quick question for the audience.
By any chance, did anyone happen to bring with them this morning a calculator?
Seriously, if you have a calculator with you, raise your hand.
Raise your hand. Did your hand go up?
Now bring it out, bring it out. Anybody else?
I see, I see one way in the back.
You sir, that's three.
And anybody on this side here?
OK, over there on the aisle.
Would the four of you please bring out your calculators, then join me up on stage.
Let's give them a nice round of applause.
(Applause) That's right.
Now, since I haven't had the chance to work with these calculators, I need to make sure that they are all working properly.
Would somebody get us started by giving us a two-digit number, please?
How about a two-digit number?
Audience: 22.
AB: 22. And another two-digit number, sir?
Audience: 47.
AB: Multiply 22 times 47, make sure you get 1,034, or the calculators are not working.
Volunteer: No.
AB: 594. Let's give three of them a nice round of applause there.
(Applause) Would you like to try a more standard calculator, just in case?
OK, great.
What I'm going to try and do then -- I notice it took some of you a little bit of time to get your answer.
That's OK.
I'll give you a shortcut for multiplying even faster on the calculator.
There is something called the square of a number, which most of you know is taking a number and multiplying it by itself.
For instance, five squared would be?
Audience: 25.
AB: 25. The way we can square on most calculators -- let me demonstrate with this one -- is by taking the number, such as five, hitting "times" and then "equals," and on most calculators that will give you the square.
On some of these ancient RPN calculators, you've got an "x squared" button on it, will allow you to do the calculation even faster.
What I'm going to try and do now is to square, in my head, four two-digit numbers faster than they can do on their calculators, even using the shortcut method.
What I'll use is the second row this time, and I'll get four of you to each yell out a two-digit number, and if you would square the first number, and if you would square the second, the third and the fourth, I will try and race you to the answer. OK?
So quickly, a two-digit number please.
Audience: 37.
Arthur Benjamin: 37 squared, OK.
Audience: 23.
AB: 23 squared, OK.
Audience: 59.
AB: 59 squared, OK, and finally?
Audience: 93.
AB: 93 squared.
Volunteer: 1369. AB: 1369.
Volunteer: 529. AB: 529.
Volunteer: 3481. AB: 3481.
Volunteer: 8649.
AB: Thank you very much.
(Applause) Let me try to take this one step further.
I'm going to try to square some three-digit numbers this time.
I won't even write these down -- I'll just call them out as they're called out to me.
Anyone I point to, call out a three-digit number.
Anyone on our panel, verify the answer.
Just give some indication if it's right.
A three-digit number, sir, yes?
Audience: 987.
AB: 987 squared is 974,169.
(Laughter) AB: Yes? Good.
Another three-digit -- (Applause) -- another three-digit number, sir?
Audience: 457.
205,849?
AB: Yes?
OK, another, another three-digit number, sir?
AB: 321 is 103,041.
103,041.
Yes? One more three-digit number please.
AB: 722 is 500, that's a harder one.
Is that 513,284?
Volunteer: Yes.
AB: Yes? Oh, one more, one more three-digit number please.
Audience: 162.
162 squared is 26,244.
Volunteer: Yes.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Let me try to take this one step further.
(Laughter) I'm going to try to square a four-digit number this time.
You can all take your time on this; I will not beat you to the answer on this one, but I will try to get the answer right.
To make this a little bit more random, let's take the fourth row this time, let's say, one, two, three, four.
If each of you would call out a single digit between zero and nine, that will be the four-digit number that I'll square.
Nine.
Seven.
Five.
9,758, this will take me a little bit of time, so bear with me.
95 million -- (Sighs) 218,564?
Volunteer: Yes!
(Applause) (Applause ends) Now, I would attempt to square a five-digit number -- and I can -- but unfortunately, most calculators cannot.
(Laughter) Eight-digit capacity -- don't you hate that?
So, since we've reached the limits of our calculators -- what's that?
Does yours go higher?
Volunteer: I don't know.
AB: Oh, yours does?
Volunteer: I can probably do it. AB: I'll talk to you later.
In the meanwhile, let me conclude the first part of my show by doing something a little trickier.
Let's take the largest number on the board here, 8649.
Would you each enter that on your calculator?
And instead of squaring it this time, I want you to take that number and multiply it by any three-digit number that you want, but don't tell me what you're multiplying by -- just multiply it by any random three-digit number.
So you should have as an answer either a six-digit or probably a seven-digit number.
How many digits do you have, six or seven?
Seven, and yours?
Seven? Seven?
And, uncertain.
Seven.
Is there any possible way that I could know what seven-digit numbers you have?
Say "No."
(Laughter) Good, then I shall attempt the impossible -- or at least the improbable.
What I'd like each of you to do is to call out for me any six of your seven digits, any six of them, in any order you'd like.
(Laughter) One digit at a time, I shall try and determine the digit you've left out.
Starting with your seven-digit number, call out any six of them please.
Volunteer: 1, 9, 7, 0, 4, 2.
AB: Did you leave out the number 6?
Good, OK, that's one.
You have a seven-digit number, call out any six of them please.
Volunteer: 4, 4, 8, 7, 5.
I think I only heard five numbers. I -- wait -- 44875 -- did you leave out the number 6?
Same as she did, OK.
You've got a seven-digit number -- call out any six of them loud and clear.
Volunteer: 0, 7, 9, 0, 4, 4.
I think you left out the number 3?
AB: That's three.
The odds of me getting all four of these right by random guessing would be one in 10,000: 10 to the fourth power.
OK, any six of them.
(Laughter) Really scramble them up this time, please.
Volunteer: 2, 6, 3, 9, 7, 2.
Did you leave out the number 7?
And let's give all four of these people a nice round of applause.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) (Applause ends) For my next number -- (Laughter) while I mentally recharge my batteries, I have one more question for the audience.
By any chance, does anybody here happen to know the day of the week that they were born on?
If you think you know your birth day, raise your hand.
Let's see, starting with -- let's start with a gentleman first.
What year was it, first of all?
That's why I pick a gentleman first.
Audience: 1953.
1953, and the month?
November what?
23rd -- was that a Monday?
Audience: Yes.
I haven't seen any women's hands up.
OK, how about you, what year?
1949, and the month?
October what?
Fifth -- was that a Wednesday?
Yes! I'll go way to the back right now, how about you?
Yell it out, what year?
Audience: 1959.
1959, OK -- and the month?
Audience: February.
Sixth -- was that a Friday? Audience: Yes.
Good, how about the person behind her?
Call out, what year was it?
Audience: 1947. AB: 1947, and the month?
Audience: May. AB: May what?
Seventh -- would that be a Wednesday?
Audience: Yes. AB: Thank you very much.
(Applause) Anybody here who'd like to know the day of the week they were born?
We can do it that way.
Of course, I could just make up an answer and you wouldn't know, so I come prepared for that.
I brought with me a book of calendars.
It goes as far back into the past as 1800, because you never know.
(Laughter) I didn't mean to look at you, sir -- you were just sitting there.
(Laughter) Anyway, Chris, you can help me out here, if you wouldn't mind.
This is a book of calendars.
Who wanted to know their birth day?
What year was it, first of all?
Audience: 1966.
66 -- turn to the calendar with 1966.
And what month?
Audience: April. AB: April what?
Audience: 17th.
Can you confirm, Chris?
Chris Anderson: Yes.
AB: I'll tell you what, Chris: as long as you have that book in front of you, do me a favor, turn to a year outside of the 1900s, either into the 1800s or way into the 2000s -- that'll be a much greater challenge for me.
AB: What year would you like? CA: 1824.
AB: 1824, OK.
AB: And what month?
CA: June.
AB: Was that a Sunday?
CA: It was. AB: And it was cloudy.
(Laughter) Good, thank you very much.
(Applause) (Applause ends) But I'd like to wrap things up now by alluding to something from earlier in the presentation.
There was a gentleman up here who had a 10-digit calculator.
Where is he, would you stand up, 10-digit guy?
OK, stand up for me just for a second, so I can see where you are.
You have a 10-digit calculator, sir, as well?
OK, what I'm going to try and do, is to square in my head a five-digit number requiring a 10-digit calculator.
But to make my job more interesting for you, as well as for me, I'm going to do this problem thinking out loud.
So you can actually, honestly hear what's going on in my mind while I do a calculation of this size.
Now, I have to apologize to our magician friend Lennart Green.
I know as a magician we're not supposed to reveal our secrets, but I'm not too afraid that people are going to start doing my show next week, so -- I think we're OK.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, let's see, let's take a different row of people, starting with you.
I'll get five digits: one, two, three, four.
Oh, I did this row already.
Let's do the row before you, starting with you: one, two, three, four, five.
Call out a single digit -- that will be the five-digit number that I will try to square, go ahead.
Five.
Seven.
Six.
Three.
57,683 -- squared.
Let me explain to you how I'm going to attempt this problem.
I'm going to break the problem down into three parts.
I'll do 57,000 squared, plus 683 squared, plus 57,000 times 683 times two.
Add all those numbers together, and with any luck, arrive at the answer.
Now, let me recap.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Laughter) While I explain something else -- (Laughter) -- I know, that you can use, right?
(Laughter) While I do these calculations, you might hear certain words, as opposed to numbers, creep into the calculation.
Let me explain what that is.
This is a phonetic code, a mnemonic device that I use, that allows me to convert numbers into words.
I store them as words, and later on retrieve them as numbers.
I know it sounds complicated; it's not.
I don't want you to think you're seeing something out of "Rain Man."
(Laughter) There's definitely a method to my madness -- definitely, definitely.
(Laughter) If you want to talk to me about ADHD afterwards, you can talk to me then.
By the way, one last instruction, for my judges with the calculators -- you know who you are -- there is at least a 50 percent chance that I will make a mistake here.
If I do, don't tell me what the mistake is; just say, "you're close," or something like that, and I'll try and figure out the answer -- which could be pretty entertaining in itself.
If, however, I am right, whatever you do, don't keep it to yourself, OK?
(Laughter) Make sure everybody knows that I got the answer right, because this is my big finish, OK.
So, without any more stalling, here we go.
I'll start the problem in the middle, with 57 times 683.
57 times 68 is 3,400, plus 476 is 3876, that's 38,760 plus 171, 38,760 plus 171 is 38,931.
38,931; double that to get 77,862.
77,862 becomes cookie fission, cookie fission is 77,822.
That seems right, I'll go on. Cookie fission, OK.
Next, I do 57 squared, which is 3,249, so I can say, three billion.
Take the 249, add that to cookie, 249, oops, but I see a carry coming -- 249 -- add that to cookie, 250 plus 77, is 327 million -- fission, fission, OK, finally, we do 683 squared, that's 700 times 666, plus 17 squared is 466,489, rev up if I need it, rev up, take the 466, add that to fission, to get, oh gee -- 328,489.
Audience: Yeah! AB: Good.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) I hope you enjoyed mathemagics.
Thank you.
So it's 2006.
My friend Harold Ford calls me.
He's running for U.S. Senate in Tennessee, and he says, "Mellody, I desperately need some national press. Do you have any ideas?"
So I had an idea. I called a friend who was in New York at one of the most successful media companies in the world, and she said, "Why don't we host an editorial board lunch for Harold?
You come with him."
Harold and I arrive in New York.
We are in our best suits.
We look like shiny new pennies.
And we get to the receptionist, and we say, "We're here for the lunch."
She motions for us to follow her.
We walk through a series of corridors, and all of a sudden we find ourselves in a stark room, at which point she looks at us and she says, "Where are your uniforms?"
Just as this happens, my friend rushes in.
The blood drains from her face.
There are literally no words, right?
And I look at her, and I say, "Now, don't you think we need more than one black person in the U.S. Senate?"
Now Harold and I -- (Applause) — we still laugh about that story, and in many ways, the moment caught me off guard, but deep, deep down inside, I actually wasn't surprised.
And I wasn't surprised because of something my mother taught me about 30 years before.
You see, my mother was ruthlessly realistic.
I remember one day coming home from a birthday party where I was the only black kid invited, and instead of asking me the normal motherly questions like, "Did you have fun?" or "How was the cake?"
my mother looked at me and she said, "How did they treat you?"
I was seven. I did not understand.
I mean, why would anyone treat me differently?
But she knew.
And she looked me right in the eye and she said, "They will not always treat you well."
Now, race is one of those topics in America that makes people extraordinarily uncomfortable.
You bring it up at a dinner party or in a workplace environment, it is literally the conversational equivalent of touching the third rail.
There is shock, followed by a long silence.
And even coming here today, I told some friends and colleagues that I planned to talk about race, and they warned me, they told me, don't do it, that there'd be huge risks in me talking about this topic, that people might think I'm a militant black woman and I would ruin my career.
And I have to tell you, I actually for a moment was a bit afraid.
Then I realized, the first step to solving any problem is to not hide from it, and the first step to any form of action is awareness.
And so I decided to actually talk about race.
And I decided that if I came here and shared with you some of my experiences, that maybe we could all be a little less anxious and a little more bold in our conversations about race.
Now I know there are people out there who will say that the election of Barack Obama meant that it was the end of racial discrimination for all eternity, right?
But I work in the investment business, and we have a saying: The numbers do not lie.
And here, there are significant, quantifiable racial disparities that cannot be ignored, in household wealth, household income, job opportunities, healthcare.
One example from corporate America: Even though white men make up just 30 percent of the U.S. population, they hold 70 percent of all corporate board seats.
Of the Fortune 250, there are only seven CEOs that are minorities, and of the thousands of publicly traded companies today, thousands, only two are chaired by black women, and you're looking at one of them, the same one who, not too long ago, was nearly mistaken for kitchen help.
So that is a fact.
Now I have this thought experiment that I play with myself, when I say, imagine if I walked you into a room and it was of a major corporation, like ExxonMobil, and every single person around the boardroom were black, you would think that were weird.
But if I walked you into a Fortune 500 company, and everyone around the table is a white male, when will it be that we think that's weird too?
And I know how we got here.
(Applause) I know how we got here.
You know, there was institutionalized, at one time legalized, discrimination in our country.
There's no question about it.
But still, as I grapple with this issue, my mother's question hangs in the air for me: How did they treat you?
Now, I do not raise this issue to complain or in any way to elicit any kind of sympathy.
I have succeeded in my life beyond my wildest expectations, and I have been treated well by people of all races more often than I have not.
I tell the uniform story because it happened.
I cite those statistics around corporate board diversity because they are real, and I stand here today talking about this issue of racial discrimination because I believe it threatens to rob another generation of all the opportunities that all of us want for all of our children, no matter what their color or where they come from.
And I think it also threatens to hold back businesses.
You see, researchers have coined this term "color blindness" to describe a learned behavior where we pretend that we don't notice race.
If you happen to be surrounded by a bunch of people who look like you, that's purely accidental.
Now, color blindness, in my view, doesn't mean that there's no racial discrimination, and there's fairness.
It doesn't mean that at all. It doesn't ensure it.
In my view, color blindness is very dangerous because it means we're ignoring the problem.
There was a corporate study that said that, instead of avoiding race, the really smart corporations actually deal with it head on.
They actually recognize that embracing diversity means recognizing all races, including the majority one.
But I'll be the first one to tell you, this subject matter can be hard, awkward, uncomfortable -- but that's kind of the point.
In the spirit of debunking racial stereotypes, the one that black people don't like to swim, I'm going to tell you how much I love to swim.
I love to swim so much that as an adult, I swim with a coach.
And one day my coach had me do a drill where I had to swim to one end of a 25-meter pool without taking a breath.
And every single time I failed, I had to start over.
And I failed a lot.
By the end, I got it, but when I got out of the pool, I was exasperated and tired and annoyed, and I said, "Why are we doing breath-holding exercises?"
And my coach looked me at me, and he said, "Mellody, that was not a breath-holding exercise.
That drill was to make you comfortable being uncomfortable, because that's how most of us spend our days."
If we can learn to deal with our discomfort, and just relax into it, we'll have a better life.
So I think it's time for us to be comfortable with the uncomfortable conversation about race: black, white, Asian, Hispanic, male, female, all of us, if we truly believe in equal rights and equal opportunity in America, I think we have to have real conversations about this issue.
We cannot afford to be color blind.
We have to be color brave.
We have to be willing, as teachers and parents and entrepreneurs and scientists, we have to be willing to have proactive conversations about race with honesty and understanding and courage, not because it's the right thing to do, but because it's the smart thing to do, because our businesses and our products and our science, our research, all of that will be better with greater diversity.
Now, my favorite example of color bravery is a guy named John Skipper.
He runs ESPN.
He's a North Carolina native, quintessential Southern gentleman, white.
He joined ESPN, which already had a culture of inclusion and diversity, but he took it up a notch.
He demanded that every open position have a diverse slate of candidates.
Now he says the senior people in the beginning bristled, and they would come to him and say, "Do you want me to hire the minority, or do you want me to hire the best person for the job?"
And Skipper says his answers were always the same: "Yes."
And by saying yes to diversity, I honestly believe that ESPN is the most valuable cable franchise in the world.
I think that's a part of the secret sauce.
Now I can tell you, in my own industry, at Ariel Investments, we actually view our diversity as a competitive advantage, and that advantage can extend way beyond business.
There's a guy named Scott Page at the University of Michigan.
He is the first person to develop a mathematical calculation for diversity.
He says, if you're trying to solve a really hard problem, really hard, that you should have a diverse group of people, including those with diverse intellects.
The example that he gives is the smallpox epidemic.
When it was ravaging Europe, they brought together all these scientists, and they were stumped.
And the beginnings of the cure to the disease came from the most unlikely source, a dairy farmer who noticed that the milkmaids were not getting smallpox.
And the smallpox vaccination is bovine-based because of that dairy farmer.
Now I'm sure you're sitting here and you're saying, I don't run a cable company, I don't run an investment firm, I am not a dairy farmer.
What can I do?
And I'm telling you, you can be color brave.
If you're part of a hiring process or an admissions process, you can be color brave.
If you are trying to solve a really hard problem, you can speak up and be color brave.
Now I know people will say, but that doesn't add up to a lot, but I'm actually asking you to do something really simple: observe your environment, at work, at school, at home.
I'm asking you to look at the people around you purposefully and intentionally.
Invite people into your life who don't look like you, don't think like you, don't act like you, don't come from where you come from, and you might find that they will challenge your assumptions and make you grow as a person.
You might get powerful new insights from these individuals, or, like my husband, who happens to be white, you might learn that black people, men, women, children, we use body lotion every single day.
Now, I also think that this is very important so that the next generation really understands that this progress will help them, because they're expecting us to be great role models.
Now, I told you, my mother, she was ruthlessly realistic.
She was an unbelievable role model.
She was the kind of person who got to be the way she was because she was a single mom with six kids in Chicago.
She was in the real estate business, where she worked extraordinarily hard but oftentimes had a hard time making ends meet.
And that meant sometimes we got our phone disconnected, or our lights turned off, or we got evicted.
When we got evicted, sometimes we lived in these small apartments that she owned, sometimes in only one or two rooms, because they weren't completed, and we would heat our bathwater on hot plates.
But she never gave up hope, ever, and she never allowed us to give up hope either.
This brutal pragmatism that she had, I mean, I was four and she told me, "Mommy is Santa." (Laughter) She was this brutal pragmatism.
She taught me so many lessons, but the most important lesson was that every single day she told me, "Mellody, you can be anything."
And because of those words, I would wake up at the crack of dawn, and because of those words, I would love school more than anything, and because of those words, when I was on a bus going to school, I dreamed the biggest dreams.
And it's because of those words that I stand here right now full of passion, asking you to be brave for the kids who are dreaming those dreams today.
(Applause) You see, I want them to look at a CEO on television and say, "I can be like her," or, "He looks like me."
And I want them to know that anything is possible, that they can achieve the highest level that they ever imagined, that they will be welcome in any corporate boardroom, or they can lead any company.
You see this idea of being the land of the free and the home of the brave, it's woven into the fabric of America.
America, when we have a challenge, we take it head on, we don't shrink away from it.
We take a stand. We show courage.
So right now, what I'm asking you to do, I'm asking you to show courage.
I'm asking you to be bold.
As business leaders, I'm asking you not to leave anything on the table.
As citizens, I'm asking you not to leave any child behind.
I'm asking you not to be color blind, but to be color brave, so that every child knows that their future matters and their dreams are possible.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. Thanks. Thanks. (Applause)
Let me introduce you to something I've been working on.
It's what the Victorian illusionists would have described as a mechanical marvel, an automaton, a thinking machine.
Say hello to EDI.
Now he's asleep. Let's wake him up.
EDI, EDI.
These mechanical performers were popular throughout Europe.
Audiences marveled at the way they moved.
It was science fiction made true, robotic engineering in a pre-electronic age, machines far in advance of anything that Victorian technology could create, a machine we would later know as the robot.
EDI: Robot. A word coined in 1921 in a science fiction tale by the Czech playwright Karel Čapek.
It comes from "robota."
It means "forced labor."
Marco Tempest: But these robots were not real.
They were not intelligent.
They were illusions, a clever combination of mechanical engineering and the deceptiveness of the conjurer's art.
EDI is different.
EDI is real.
EDI: I am 176 centimeters tall.
MT: He weighs 300 pounds.
EDI: I have two seven-axis arms — MT: Core of sensing — EDI: A 360-degree sonar detection system, and come complete with a warranty.
MT: We love robots.
EDI: Hi. I'm EDI. Will you be my friend?
MT: We are intrigued by the possibility of creating a mechanical version of ourselves.
We build them so they look like us, behave like us, and think like us.
The perfect robot will be indistinguishable from the human, and that scares us.
In the first story about robots, they turn against their creators.
It's one of the leitmotifs of science fiction.
EDI: Ha ha ha. Now you are the slaves and we robots, the masters.
Your world is ours. You — MT: As I was saying, besides the faces and bodies we give our robots, we cannot read their intentions, and that makes us nervous.
When someone hands an object to you, you can read intention in their eyes, their face, their body language.
That's not true of the robot.
Now, this goes both ways.
EDI: Wow!
MT: Robots cannot anticipate human actions.
EDI: You know, humans are so unpredictable, not to mention irrational.
I literally have no idea what you guys are going to do next, you know, but it scares me.
MT: Which is why humans and robots find it difficult to work in close proximity.
Accidents are inevitable.
EDI: Ow! That hurt.
MT: Sorry. Now, one way of persuading humans that robots are safe is to create the illusion of trust.
Much as the Victorians faked their mechanical marvels, we can add a layer of deception to help us feel more comfortable with our robotic friends.
With that in mind, I set about teaching EDI a magic trick.
Ready, EDI? EDI: Uh, ready, Marco.
Abracadabra.
MT: Abracadabra?
EDI: Yeah. It's all part of the illusion, Marco.
Come on, keep up.
MT: Magic creates the illusion of an impossible reality.
Technology can do the same.
Alan Turing, a pioneer of artificial intelligence, spoke about creating the illusion that a machine could think.
EDI: A computer would deserve to be called intelligent if it deceived a human into believing it was human.
MT: In other words, if we do not yet have the technological solutions, would illusions serve the same purpose?
To create the robotic illusion, we've devised a set of ethical rules, a code that all robots would live by.
EDI: A robot may not harm humanity, or by inaction allow humanity to come to harm.
Thank you, Isaac Asimov.
MT: We anthropomorphize our machines.
We give them a friendly face and a reassuring voice.
EDI: I am EDI.
I became operational at TED in March 2014.
MT: We let them entertain us.
Most important, we make them indicate that they are aware of our presence.
EDI: Marco, you're standing on my foot!
MT: Sorry. They'll be conscious of our fragile frame and move aside if we got too close, and they'll account for our unpredictability and anticipate our actions.
And now, under the spell of a technological illusion, we could ignore our fears and truly interact.
(Music) Thank you.
EDI: Thank you!
(Applause) (Music) MT: And that's it. Thank you very much, and thank you, EDI. EDI: Thank you, Marco.
(Applause)
When I was a young officer, they told me to follow my instincts, to go with my gut, and what I've learned is that often our instincts are wrong.
In the summer of 2010, there was a massive leak of classified documents that came out of the Pentagon.
It shocked the world, it shook up the American government, and it made people ask a lot of questions, because the sheer amount of information that was let out, and the potential impacts, were significant.
And one of the first questions we asked ourselves was why would a young soldier have access to that much information?
Why would we let sensitive things be with a relatively young person?
In the summer of 2003, I was assigned to command a special operations task force, and that task force was spread across the Mideast to fight al Qaeda.
Our main effort was inside Iraq, and our specified mission was to defeat al Qaeda in Iraq.
For almost five years I stayed there, and we focused on fighting a war that was unconventional and it was difficult and it was bloody and it often claimed its highest price among innocent people.
We did everything we could to stop al Qaeda and the foreign fighters that came in as suicide bombers and as accelerants to the violence.
We honed our combat skills, we developed new equipment, we parachuted, we helicoptered, we took small boats, we drove, and we walked to objectives night after night to stop the killing that this network was putting forward.
We bled, we died, and we killed to stop that organization from the violence that they were putting largely against the Iraqi people.
Now, we did what we knew, how we had grown up, and one of the things that we knew, that was in our DNA, was secrecy.
It was security. It was protecting information.
It was the idea that information was the lifeblood and it was what would protect and keep people safe.
And we had a sense that, as we operated within our organizations, it was important to keep information in the silos within the organizations, particularly only give information to people had a demonstrated need to know.
But the question often came, who needed to know?
Who needed, who had to have the information so that they could do the important parts of the job that you needed?
And in a tightly coupled world, that's very hard to predict.
It's very hard to know who needs to have information and who doesn't.
I used to deal with intelligence agencies, and I'd complain that they weren't sharing enough intelligence, and with a straight face, they'd look at me and they'd say, "What aren't you getting?" (Laughter) I said, "If I knew that, we wouldn't have a problem."
But what we found is we had to change.
We had to change our culture about information.
We had to knock down walls. We had to share.
We had to change from who needs to know to the fact that who doesn't know, and we need to tell, and tell them as quickly as we can.
It was a significant culture shift for an organization that had secrecy in its DNA.
We started by doing things, by building, not working in offices, knocking down walls, working in things we called situation awareness rooms, and in the summer of 2007, something happened which demonstrated this.
We captured the personnel records for the people who were bringing foreign fighters into Iraq.
And when we got the personnel records, typically, we would have hidden these, shared them with a few intelligence agencies, and then try to operate with them.
But as I was talking to my intelligence officer, I said, "What do we do?"
And he said, "Well, you found them." Our command.
"You can just declassify them."
And I said, "Well, can we declassify them?
What if the enemy finds out?"
And he says, "They're their personnel records."
(Laughter) So we did, and a lot of people got upset about that, but as we passed that information around, suddenly you find that information is only of value if you give it to people who have the ability to do something with it.
The fact that I know something has zero value if I'm not the person who can actually make something better because of it.
So as a consequence, what we did was we changed the idea of information, instead of knowledge is power, to one where sharing is power.
It was the fundamental shift, not new tactics, not new weapons, not new anything else.
It was the idea that we were now part of a team in which information became the essential link between us, not a block between us.
And I want everybody to take a deep breath and let it out, because in your life, there's going to be information that leaks out you're not going to like.
Somebody's going to get my college grades out, a that's going to be a disaster. (Laughter) But it's going to be okay, and I will tell you that I am more scared of the bureaucrat that holds information in a desk drawer or in a safe than I am of someone who leaks, because ultimately, we'll be better off if we share.
Thank you.
(Applause) Helen Walters: So I don't know if you were here this morning, if you were able to catch Rick Ledgett, the deputy director of the NSA who was responding to Edward Snowden's talk earlier this week.
I just wonder, do you think the American government should give Edward Snowden amnesty?
Stanley McChrystal: I think that Rick said something very important.
We, most people, don't know all the facts.
I think there are two parts of this.
Edward Snowden shined a light on an important need that people had to understand.
He also took a lot of documents that he didn't have the knowledge to know the importance of, so I think we need to learn the facts about this case before we make snap judgments about Edward Snowden.
HW: Thank you so much. Thank you.
(Applause)
Kashmir Hill: So for my birthday last year, my husband got me an Amazon Echo.
I was kind of shocked, actually, because we both work in privacy and security.
(Laughter) And this was a device that would sit in the middle of our home with a microphone on, constantly listening.
We're not alone, though.
According to a survey by NPR and Edison Research, one in six American adults now has a smart speaker, which means that they have a virtual assistant at home.
Like, that's wild.
The future, or the future dystopia, is getting here fast.
Beyond that, companies are offering us all kinds of internet-connected devices.
There are smart lights, smart locks, smart toilets, smart toys, smart sex toys.
Being smart means the device can connect to the internet, it can gather data, and it can talk to its owner.
But once your appliances can talk to you, who else are they going to be talking to?
I wanted to find out, so I went all-in and turned my one-bedroom apartment in San Francisco into a smart home.
I even connected our bed to the internet.
As far as I know, it was just measuring our sleeping habits.
I can now tell you that the only thing worse than getting a terrible night's sleep is to have your smart bed tell you the next day that you "missed your goal and got a low sleep score."
(Laughter) It's like, "Thanks, smart bed.
As if I didn't already feel like shit today."
(Laughter) All together, I installed 18 internet-connected devices in my home.
I also installed a Surya.
Surya Mattu: Hi, I'm Surya.
(Laughter) I monitored everything the smart home did.
I built a special router that let me look at all the network activity.
You can think of my router sort of like a security guard, compulsively logging all the network packets as they entered and left the smart home.
KH: Surya and I are both journalists, he's not my husband, we just work together at Gizmodo.
SM: Thank you for clarifying.
The devices Kashmir bought -- we were interested in understanding what they were saying to their manufacturers.
But we were also interested in understanding what the home's digital emissions look like to the internet service provider.
We were seeing what the ISP could see, but more importantly, what they could sell.
KH: We ran the experiment for two months.
In that two months, there wasn't a single hour of digital silence in the house -- not even when we went away for a week.
SM: Yeah, it's so true.
Based on the data, I knew when you guys woke up and went to bed.
I even knew when Kashmir brushed her teeth.
I'm not going to out your brushing habits, but let's just say it was very clear to me when you were working from home.
KH: Uh, I think you just outed them to, like, a lot of people here.
SM: Don't be embarrassed, it's just metadata.
I knew when you turned on your TV and how long you watched it for.
Fun fact about the Hill household: they don't watch a lot of television, but when they do, it's usually in binge mode.
Favorite shows include "Difficult People" and "Party Down."
KH: OK, you're right, I loved "Party Down."
It's a great show, and you should definitely watch it.
But "Difficult People" was all my husband, Trevor.
And Trevor was actually a little upset that you knew about his binges, because even though he'd been the one to connect the TV to the router, he forgot that the TV was watching us.
It's actually not the first time that our TV has spied on us.
The company that made it, VIZIO, paid a 2.2 million-dollar settlement to the government just last year, because it had been collecting second-by-second information about what millions of people were watching on TV, including us, and then it was selling that information to data brokers and advertisers.
SM: Ah, classic surveillance economy move.
The devices Kashmir bought almost all pinged their servers daily.
But do you know which device was especially chatty?
The Amazon Echo.
It contacted its servers every three minutes, regardless of whether you were using it or not.
KH: In general, it was disconcerting that all these devices were having ongoing conversations that were invisible to me.
I mean, I would have had no idea, without your router.
If you buy a smart device, you should probably know -- you're going to own the device, but in general, the company is going to own your data.
And you know, I mean, maybe that's to be expected -- you buy an internet-connected device, it's going to use the internet.
But it's strange to have these devices moving into the intimate space that is the home and allowing companies to track our really basic behavior there.
SM: So true.
Even the most banal-seeming data can be mined by the surveillance economy.
For example, who cares how often you brush your teeth?
Well, as it turns out, there's a dental insurance company called Beam.
They've been monitoring their customers' smart toothbrushes since 2015 -- for discounts on their premiums, of course.
KH: We know what some of you are thinking: this is the contract of the modern world.
You give up a little privacy, and you get some convenience or some price breaks in return.
But that wasn't my experience in my smart home.
It wasn't convenient, it was infuriating.
I'll admit, I love my smart vacuum, but many other things in the house drove me insane: we ran out of electrical outlets, and I had to download over a dozen apps to my phone to control everything.
And then every device had its own log-in, my toothbrush had a password ...
(Laughter) And smart coffee, especially, was just a world of hell.
SM: Wait, really? Cloud-powered coffee wasn't really working for you?
KH: I mean, maybe I'm naive, but I thought it was going to be great.
I thought we'd just wake up in the morning and we'd say, "Alexa, make us coffee."
But that's not how it went down.
We had to use this really particular, brand-specific phrase to make it work.
It was, "Alexa, ask the Behmor to run quick start."
And this was just, like, really hard to remember first thing in the morning, before you have had your caffeine.
(Laughter) And apparently, it was hard to say, because the Echo Dot that was right next to our bed just couldn't understand us.
So we would basically start every day by screaming this phrase at the Echo Dot.
(Laughter) And Trevor hated this.
He'd be like, "Please, Kashmir, just let me go to the kitchen and push the button to make the coffee run."
And I'd be like, "No, you can't!
We have to do it the smart way!"
(Laughter) I'm happy to report that our marriage survived the experiment, but just barely.
SM: If you decide to make your home smart, hopefully, you’ll find it less infuriating than Kashmir did.
But regardless, the smart things you buy can and probably are used to target and profile you.
Just the number of devices you have can be used to predict how rich or poor you are.
Facebook's made this tech, and they've also patented it.
KH: All the anxiety you currently feel every time you go online, about being tracked, is about to move into your living room.
Or into your bedroom.
There's this sex toy called the We-Vibe.
You might wonder why a sex toy connects to the internet, but it's for two people who are in a long-distance relationship, so they can share their love from afar.
Some hackers took a close look at this toy and saw it was sending a lot of information back to the company that made it -- when it was used, how long it was used for, what the vibration settings were, how hot the toy got.
It was all going into a database.
So I reached out to the company, and I said, "Why are you collecting this really sensitive data?"
And they said, "Well, it's great for market research."
But they were data-mining their customers' orgasms.
And they weren't telling them about it.
I mean, even if you're cavalier about privacy, I hope that you would admit that's a step too far.
SM: This is why I want to keep my sex toys dumb.
KH: That's great.
We're all very glad to know that.
(Laughter) SM: A data point I'm willing to share.
(Laughter) The devices Kashmir bought range from useful to annoying.
But the thing they all had in common was sharing data with the companies that made them.
With email service providers and social media, we've long been told that if it's free, you're the product.
But with the internet of things, it seems, even if you pay, you're still the product.
So you really have to ask: Who's the true beneficiary of your smart home, you or the company mining you?
KH: Look, we're a tech savvy crowd here.
I think most of us know that these things connect to the internet and send data out.
And fine, maybe you're OK with living in that commercial panopticon, but others aren't.
We need the companies to rethink the design of these devices with our privacy in mind, because we're not all willing to participate in "market research," just because a device we bought has a Wi-Fi connection.
And I have to tell you, even when you're aware, generally, this is happening, it's really easy to forget that normal household items are spying on you.
It's easy to forget these things are watching you, because they don't look like cameras.
They could look like ...
well, they could look like a dildo.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I have a feature on my website where every week people submit hypothetical questions for me to answer, and I try to answer them using math, science and comics.
So for example, one person asked, what would happen if you tried to hit a baseball pitched at 90 percent of the speed of light?
So I did some calculations.
Now, normally, when an object flies through the air, the air will flow around the object, but in this case, the ball would be going so fast that the air molecules wouldn't have time to move out of the way.
The ball would smash right into and through them, and the collisions with these air molecules would knock away the nitrogen, carbon and hydrogen from the ball, fragmenting it off into tiny particles, and also triggering waves of thermonuclear fusion in the air around it.
This would result in a flood of x-rays that would spread out in a bubble along with exotic particles, plasma inside, centered on the pitcher's mound, and that would move away from the pitcher's mound slightly faster than the ball.
Now at this point, about 30 nanoseconds in, the home plate is far enough away that light hasn't had time to reach it, which means the batter still sees the pitcher about to throw and has no idea that anything is wrong.
(Laughter) Now, after 70 nanoseconds, the ball will reach home plate, or at least the cloud of expanding plasma that used to be the ball, and it will engulf the bat and the batter and the plate and the catcher and the umpire and start disintegrating them all as it also starts to carry them backward through the backstop, which also starts to disintegrate.
So if you were watching this whole thing from a hill, ideally, far away, what you'd see is a bright flash of light that would fade over a few seconds, followed by a blast wave spreading out, shredding trees and houses as it moves away from the stadium, and then eventually a mushroom cloud rising up over the ruined city. (Laughter) So the Major League Baseball rules are a little bit hazy, but — (Laughter) — under rule 6.02 and 5.09, I think that in this situation, the batter would be considered hit by pitch and would be eligible to take first base, if it still existed.
So this is the kind of question I answer, and I get people writing in with a lot of other strange questions.
I've had someone write and say, scientifically speaking, what is the best and fastest way to hide a body?
Can you do this one soon?
And I had someone write in, I've had people write in about, can you prove whether or not you can find love again after your heart's broken?
And I've had people send in what are clearly homework questions they're trying to get me to do for them.
But one week, a couple months ago, I got a question that was actually about Google.
If all digital data in the world were stored on punch cards, how big would Google's data warehouse be?
Now, Google's pretty secretive about their operations, so no one really knows how much data Google has, and in fact, no one really knows how many data centers Google has, except people at Google itself.
And I've tried, I've met them a few times, tried asking them, and they aren't revealing anything.
So I decided to try to figure this out myself.
There are a few things that I looked at here.
I started with money.
Google has to reveal how much they spend, in general, and that lets you put some caps on how many data centers could they be building, because a big data center costs a certain amount of money.
And you can also then put a cap on how much of the world hard drive market are they taking up, which turns out, it's pretty sizable.
I read a calculation at one point, I think Google has a drive failure about every minute or two, and they just throw out the hard drive and swap in a new one.
So they go through a huge number of them.
And so by looking at money, you can get an idea of how many of these centers they have.
You can also look at power.
You can look at how much electricity they need, because you need a certain amount of electricity to run the servers, and Google is more efficient than most, but they still have some basic requirements, and that lets you put a limit on the number of servers that they have.
You can also look at square footage and see of the data centers that you know, how big are they?
How much room is that?
How many server racks could you fit in there?
And for some data centers, you might get two of these pieces of information.
You know how much they spent, and they also, say, because they had to contract with the local government to get the power provided, you might know what they made a deal to buy, so you know how much power it takes.
Then you can look at the ratios of those numbers, and figure out for a data center where you don't have that information, you can figure out, but maybe you only have one of those, you know the square footage, then you could figure out well, maybe the power is proportional.
And you can do this same thing with a lot of different quantities, you know, with guesses about the total amount of storage, the number of servers, the number of drives per server, and in each case using what you know to come up with a model that narrows down your guesses for the things that you don't know.
It's sort of circling around the number you're trying to get.
And this is a lot of fun.
The math is not all that advanced, and really it's like nothing more than solving a sudoku puzzle.
So what I did, I went through all of this information, spent a day or two researching.
And there are some things I didn't look at.
You could always look at the Google recruitment messages that they post.
That gives you an idea of where they have people.
Sometimes, when people visit a data center, they'll take a cell-cam photo and post it, and they aren't supposed to, but you can learn things about their hardware that way.
And in fact, you can just look at pizza delivery drivers.
Turns out, they know where all the Google data centers are, at least the ones that have people in them.
But I came up with my estimate, which I felt pretty good about, that was about 10 exabytes of data across all of Google's operations, and then another maybe five exabytes or so of offline storage in tape drives, which it turns out Google is about the world's largest consumer of.
So I came up with this estimate, and this is a staggering amount of data.
It's quite a bit more than any other organization in the world has, as far as we know.
There's a couple of other contenders, especially everyone always thinks of the NSA.
But using some of these same methods, we can look at the NSA's data centers, and figure out, you know, we don't know what's going on there, but it's pretty clear that their operation is not the size of Google's.
Adding all of this up, I came up with the other thing that we can answer, which is, how many punch cards would this take?
And so a punch card can hold about 80 characters, and you can fit about 2,000 or so cards into a box, and you put them in, say, my home region of New England, it would cover the entire region up to a depth of a little less than five kilometers, which is about three times deeper than the glaciers during the last ice age about 20,000 years ago.
So this is impractical, but I think that's about the best answer I could come up with.
And I posted it on my website. I wrote it up.
And I didn't expect to get an answer from Google, because of course they've been so secretive, they didn't answer of my questions, and so I just put it up and said, well, I guess we'll never know.
But then a little while later I got a message, a couple weeks later, from Google, saying, hey, someone here has an envelope for you.
So I go and get it, open it up, and it's punch cards. (Laughter) Google-branded punch cards.
And on these punch cards, there are a bunch of holes, and I said, thank you, thank you, okay, so what's on here?
So I get some software and start reading it, and scan them, and it turns out it's a puzzle.
There's a bunch of code, and I get some friends to help, and we crack the code, and then inside that is another code, and then there are some equations, and then we solve those equations, and then finally out pops a message from Google which is their official answer to my article, and it said, "No comment."
(Laughter) (Applause) And I love calculating these kinds of things, and it's not that I love doing the math.
I do a lot of math, but I don't really like math for its own sake.
What I love is that it lets you take some things that you know, and just by moving symbols around on a piece of paper, find out something that you didn't know that's very surprising.
And I have a lot of stupid questions, and I love that math gives the power to answer them sometimes.
And sometimes not.
This is a question I got from a reader, an anonymous reader, and the subject line just said, "Urgent," and this was the entire email: "If people had wheels and could fly, how would we differentiate them from airplanes?"
Urgent. (Laughter) And I think there are some questions that math just cannot answer.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm assuming everyone here has watched a TED Talk online at one time or another, right?
So what I'm going to do is play this.
This is the song from the TED Talks online.
(Music) And I'm going to slow it down because things sound cooler when they're slower.
(Music) Ken Robinson: Good morning. How are you?
Mark Applebaum: I'm going to -- Kate Stone: -- mix some music.
MA: I'm going to do so in a way that tells a story.
Tod Machover: Something nobody's ever heard before.
KS: I have a crossfader.
Julian Treasure: I call this the mixer.
KS: Two D.J. decks.
Chris Anderson: You turn up the dials, the wheel starts to turn.
Dan Ellsey: I have always loved music.
Michael Tilson Thomas: Is it a melody or a rhythm or a mood or an attitude?
Daniel Wolpert: Feeling everything that's going on inside my body.
Adam Ockelford: In your brain is this amazing musical computer.
MTT: Using computers and synthesizers to create works. It's a language that's still evolving.
And the 21st century.
KR: Turn on the radio. Pop into the discotheque.
You will know what this person is doing: moving to the music.
Mark Ronson: This is my favorite part.
MA: You gotta have doorstops. That's important.
TM: We all love music a great deal.
MTT: Anthems, dance crazes, ballads and marches.
Kirby Ferguson and JT: The remix: It is new music created from old music.
Ryan Holladay: Blend seamlessly.
Kathryn Schulz: And that's how it goes.
MTT: What happens when the music stops?
KS: Yay!
(Applause) MR: Obviously, I've been watching a lot of TED Talks.
When I was first asked to speak at TED, I wasn't quite sure what my angle was, at first, so yeah, I immediately started watching tons of TED Talks, which is pretty much absolutely the worst thing that you can do because you start to go into panic mode, thinking, I haven't mounted a successful expedition to the North Pole yet.
Neither have I provided electricity to my village through sheer ingenuity.
In fact, I've pretty much wasted most of my life DJing in night clubs and producing pop records.
But I still kept watching the videos, because I'm a masochist, and eventually, things like Michael Tilson Thomas and Tod Machover, and seeing their visceral passion talking about music, it definitely stirred something in me, and I'm a sucker for anyone talking devotedly about the power of music.
And I started to write down on these little note cards every time I heard something that struck a chord in me, pardon the pun, or something that I thought I could use, and pretty soon, my studio looked like this, kind of like a John Nash, "Beautiful Mind" vibe.
The other good thing about watching TED Talks, when you see a really good one, you kind of all of a sudden wish the speaker was your best friend, don't you? Like, just for a day.
They seem like a nice person.
You'd take a bike ride, maybe share an ice cream.
You'd certainly learn a lot.
And every now and then they'd chide you, when they got frustrated that you couldn't really keep up with half of the technical things they're banging on about all the time.
But then they'd remember that you're but a mere human of ordinary, mortal intelligence that didn't finish university, and they'd kind of forgive you, and pet you like the dog.
(Laughter) Man, yeah, back to the real world, probably Sir Ken Robinson and I are not going to end up being best of friends.
He lives all the way in L.A. and I imagine is quite busy, but through the tools available to me -- technology and the innate way that I approach making music -- I can sort of bully our existences into a shared event, which is sort of what you saw.
I can hear something that I love in a piece of media and I can co-opt it and insert myself in that narrative, or alter it, even.
In a nutshell, that's what I was trying to do with these things, but more importantly, that's what the past 30 years of music has been.
That's the major thread.
See, 30 years ago, you had the first digital samplers, and they changed everything overnight.
All of a sudden, artists could sample from anything and everything that came before them, from a snare drum from the Funky Meters, to a Ron Carter bassline, the theme to "The Price Is Right."
Albums like De La Soul's "3 Feet High and Rising" and the Beastie Boys' "Paul's Boutique" looted from decades of recorded music to create these sonic, layered masterpieces that were basically the Sgt. Peppers of their day.
And they weren't sampling these records because they were too lazy to write their own music.
They weren't sampling these records to cash in on the familiarity of the original stuff.
To be honest, it was all about sampling really obscure things, except for a few obvious exceptions like Vanilla Ice and "doo doo doo da da doo doo" that we know about.
But the thing is, they were sampling those records because they heard something in that music that spoke to them that they instantly wanted to inject themselves into the narrative of that music.
They heard it, they wanted to be a part of it, and all of a sudden they found themselves in possession of the technology to do so, not much unlike the way the Delta blues struck a chord with the Stones and the Beatles and Clapton, and they felt the need to co-opt that music for the tools of their day.
You know, in music we take something that we love and we build on it.
I'd like to play a song for you.
(Music: "La Di Da Di" by Doug E. Fresh &amp; Slick Rick) That's "La Di Da Di" and it's the fifth-most sampled song of all time.
It's been sampled 547 times.
It was made in 1984 by these two legends of hip-hop, Slick Rick and Doug E. Fresh, and the Ray-Ban and Jheri curl look is so strong.
I do hope that comes back soon.
Anyway, this predated the sampling era.
There were no samples in this record, although I did look up on the Internet last night, I mean several months ago, that "La Di Da Di" means, it's an old Cockney expression from the late 1800s in England, so maybe a remix with Mrs. Patmore from "Downton Abbey" coming soon, or that's for another day.
Doug E. Fresh was the human beat box.
Slick Rick is the voice you hear on the record, and because of Slick Rick's sing-songy, super-catchy vocals, it provides endless sound bites and samples for future pop records.
That was 1984.
This is me in 1984, in case you were wondering how I was doing, thank you for asking.
It's Throwback Thursday already.
I was involved in a heavy love affair with the music of Duran Duran, as you can probably tell from my outfit.
I was in the middle.
And the simplest way that I knew how to co-opt myself into that experience of wanting to be in that song somehow was to just get a band together of fellow nine-year-olds and play "Wild Boys" at the school talent show.
So that's what we did, and long story short, we were booed off the stage, and if you ever have a chance to live your life escaping hearing the sound of an auditorium full of second- and third-graders booing, I would highly recommend it. It's not really fun.
But it didn't really matter, because what I wanted somehow was to just be in the history of that song for a minute.
I didn't care who liked it.
I just loved it, and I thought I could put myself in there.
Over the next 10 years, "La Di Da Di" continues to be sampled by countless records, ending up on massive hits like "Here Comes the Hotstepper" and "I Wanna Sex You Up."
Snoop Doggy Dogg covers this song on his debut album "Doggystyle" and calls it "Lodi Dodi."
Copyright lawyers are having a field day at this point.
And then you fast forward to 1997, and the Notorious B.I.G., or Biggie, reinterprets "La Di Da Di" on his number one hit called "Hypnotize," which I will play a little bit of and I will play you a little bit of the Slick Rick to show you where they got it from.
(Music: "Hypnotize" by The Notorious B.I.G.) So Biggie was killed weeks before that song made it to number one, in one of the great tragedies of the hip-hop era, but he would have been 13 years old and very much alive when "La Di Da Di" first came out, and as a young boy growing up in Brooklyn, it's hard not to think that that song probably held some fond memories for him.
But the way he interpreted it, as you hear, is completely his own.
He flips it, makes it, there's nothing pastiche whatsoever about it.
It's thoroughly modern Biggie.
I had to make that joke in this room, because you would be the only people that I'd ever have a chance of getting it.
And so, it's a groaner. (Laughter) Elsewhere in the pop and rap world, we're going a little bit sample-crazy.
We're getting away from the obscure samples that we were doing, and all of a sudden everyone's taking these massive '80s tunes like Bowie, "Let's Dance," and all these disco records, and just rapping on them.
These records don't really age that well.
You don't hear them now, because they borrowed from an era that was too steeped in its own connotation.
You can't just hijack nostalgia wholesale.
It leaves the listener feeling sickly.
You have to take an element of those things and then bring something fresh and new to it, which was something that I learned when I was working with the late, amazing Amy Winehouse on her album "Back to Black."
A lot of fuss was made about the sonic of the album that myself and Salaam Remi, the other producer, achieved, how we captured this long-lost sound, but without the very, very 21st-century personality and firebrand that was Amy Winehouse and her lyrics about rehab and Roger Moore and even a mention of Slick Rick, the whole thing would have run the risk of being very pastiche, to be honest.
Imagine any other singer from that era over it singing the same old lyrics.
It runs a risk of being completely bland.
I mean, there was no doubt that Amy and I and Salaam all had this love for this gospel, soul and blues and jazz that was evident listening to the musical arrangements.
She brought the ingredients that made it urgent and of the time.
So if we come all the way up to the present day now, the cultural tour de force that is Miley Cyrus, she reinterprets "La Di Da Di" completely for her generation, and we'll take a listen to the Slick Rick part and then see how she sort of flipped it.
(Music: "La Di Da Di" by Slick Rick &amp; Doug E. Fresh) (Music: "We Can't Stop" by Miley Cyrus) So Miley Cyrus, who wasn't even born yet when "La Di Da Di" was made, and neither were any of the co-writers on the song, has found this song that somehow etched its way into the collective consciousness of pop music, and now, with its timeless playfulness of the original, has kind of translated to a whole new generation who will probably co-opt it as their own.
Since the dawn of the sampling era, there's been endless debate about the validity of music that contains samples.
You know, the Grammy committee says that if your song contains some kind of pre-written or pre-existing music, you're ineligible for song of the year.
Rockists, who are racist but only about rock music, constantly use the argument to — That's a real word. That is a real word.
They constantly use the argument to devalue rap and modern pop, and these arguments completely miss the point, because the dam has burst.
We live in the post-sampling era.
We take the things that we love and we build on them.
That's just how it goes.
And when we really add something significant and original and we merge our musical journey with this, then we have a chance to be a part of the evolution of that music that we love and be linked with it once it becomes something new again.
So I would like to do one more piece that I put together for you tonight, and it takes place with two pretty inspiring TED performances that I've seen.
One of them is the piano player Derek Paravicini, who happens to be a blind, autistic genius at the piano, and Emmanuel Jal, who is an ex-child soldier from the South Sudan, who is a spoken word poet and rapper.
And once again I found a way to annoyingly me-me-me myself into the musical history of these songs, but I can't help it, because they're these things that I love, and I want to mess around with them.
So I hope you enjoy this. Here we go.
Let's hear that TED sound again, right?
(Music) Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause)
I study ants in the desert, in the tropical forest and in my kitchen, and in the hills around Silicon Valley where I live.
I've recently realized that ants are using interactions differently in different environments, and that got me thinking that we could learn from this about other systems, like brains and data networks that we engineer, and even cancer.
So what all these systems have in common is that there's no central control.
An ant colony consists of sterile female workers -- those are the ants you see walking around — and then one or more reproductive females who just lay the eggs.
They don't give any instructions.
Even though they're called queens, they don't tell anybody what to do.
So in an ant colony, there's no one in charge, and all systems like this without central control are regulated using very simple interactions.
Ants interact using smell.
They smell with their antennae, and they interact with their antennae, so when one ant touches another with its antennae, it can tell, for example, if the other ant is a nestmate and what task that other ant has been doing.
So here you see a lot of ants moving around and interacting in a lab arena that's connected by tubes to two other arenas.
So when one ant meets another, it doesn't matter which ant it meets, and they're actually not transmitting any kind of complicated signal or message.
All that matters to the ant is the rate at which it meets other ants.
And all of these interactions, taken together, produce a network.
So this is the network of the ants that you just saw moving around in the arena, and it's this constantly shifting network that produces the behavior of the colony, like whether all the ants are hiding inside the nest, or how many are going out to forage.
A brain actually works in the same way, but what's great about ants is that you can see the whole network as it happens.
There are more than 12,000 species of ants, in every conceivable environment, and they're using interactions differently to meet different environmental challenges.
So one important environmental challenge that every system has to deal with is operating costs, just what it takes to run the system.
And another environmental challenge is resources, finding them and collecting them.
In the desert, operating costs are high because water is scarce, and the seed-eating ants that I study in the desert have to spend water to get water.
So an ant outside foraging, searching for seeds in the hot sun, just loses water into the air.
But the colony gets its water by metabolizing the fats out of the seeds that they eat.
So in this environment, interactions are used to activate foraging.
An outgoing forager doesn't go out unless it gets enough interactions with returning foragers, and what you see are the returning foragers going into the tunnel, into the nest, and meeting outgoing foragers on their way out.
This makes sense for the ant colony, because the more food there is out there, the more quickly the foragers find it, the faster they come back, and the more foragers they send out.
The system works to stay stopped, unless something positive happens.
So interactions function to activate foragers.
And we've been studying the evolution of this system.
First of all, there's variation.
It turns out that colonies are different.
On dry days, some colonies forage less, so colonies are different in how they manage this trade-off between spending water to search for seeds and getting water back in the form of seeds.
And we're trying to understand why some colonies forage less than others by thinking about ants as neurons, using models from neuroscience.
So just as a neuron adds up its stimulation from other neurons to decide whether to fire, an ant adds up its stimulation from other ants to decide whether to forage.
And what we're looking for is whether there might be small differences among colonies in how many interactions each ant needs before it's willing to go out and forage, because a colony like that would forage less.
And this raises an analogous question about brains.
We talk about the brain, but of course every brain is slightly different, and maybe there are some individuals or some conditions in which the electrical properties of neurons are such that they require more stimulus to fire, and that would lead to differences in brain function.
So in order to ask evolutionary questions, we need to know about reproductive success.
This is a map of the study site where I have been tracking this population of harvester ant colonies for 28 years, which is about as long as a colony lives.
Each symbol is a colony, and the size of the symbol is how many offspring it had, because we were able to use genetic variation to match up parent and offspring colonies, that is, to figure out which colonies were founded by a daughter queen produced by which parent colony.
And this was amazing for me, after all these years, to find out, for example, that colony 154, whom I've known well for many years, is a great-grandmother.
Here's her daughter colony, here's her granddaughter colony, and these are her great-granddaughter colonies.
And by doing this, I was able to learn that offspring colonies resemble parent colonies in their decisions about which days are so hot that they don't forage, and the offspring of parent colonies live so far from each other that the ants never meet, so the ants of the offspring colony can't be learning this from the parent colony.
And so our next step is to look for the genetic variation underlying this resemblance.
So then I was able to ask, okay, who's doing better?
Over the time of the study, and especially in the past 10 years, there's been a very severe and deepening drought in the Southwestern U.S., and it turns out that the colonies that conserve water, that stay in when it's really hot outside, and thus sacrifice getting as much food as possible, are the ones more likely to have offspring colonies.
So all this time, I thought that colony 154 was a loser, because on really dry days, there'd be just this trickle of foraging, while the other colonies were out foraging, getting lots of food, but in fact, colony 154 is a huge success.
She's a matriarch.
She's one of the rare great-grandmothers on the site.
To my knowledge, this is the first time that we've been able to track the ongoing evolution of collective behavior in a natural population of animals and find out what's actually working best.
Now, the Internet uses an algorithm to regulate the flow of data that's very similar to the one that the harvester ants are using to regulate the flow of foragers.
And guess what we call this analogy?
The anternet is coming.
(Applause) So data doesn't leave the source computer unless it gets a signal that there's enough bandwidth for it to travel on.
In the early days of the Internet, when operating costs were really high and it was really important not to lose any data, then the system was set up for interactions to activate the flow of data.
It's interesting that the ants are using an algorithm that's so similar to the one that we recently invented, but this is only one of a handful of ant algorithms that we know about, and ants have had 130 million years to evolve a lot of good ones, and I think it's very likely that some of the other 12,000 species are going to have interesting algorithms for data networks that we haven't even thought of yet.
So what happens when operating costs are low?
Operating costs are low in the tropics, because it's very humid, and it's easy for the ants to be outside walking around.
But the ants are so abundant and diverse in the tropics that there's a lot of competition.
Whatever resource one species is using, another species is likely to be using that at the same time.
So in this environment, interactions are used in the opposite way.
The system keeps going unless something negative happens, and one species that I study makes circuits in the trees of foraging ants going from the nest to a food source and back, just round and round, unless something negative happens, like an interaction with ants of another species.
So here's an example of ant security.
In the middle, there's an ant plugging the nest entrance with its head in response to interactions with another species.
Those are the little ones running around with their abdomens up in the air.
But as soon as the threat is passed, the entrance is open again, and maybe there are situations in computer security where operating costs are low enough that we could just block access temporarily in response to an immediate threat, and then open it again, instead of trying to build a permanent firewall or fortress.
So another environmental challenge that all systems have to deal with is resources, finding and collecting them.
And to do this, ants solve the problem of collective search, and this is a problem that's of great interest right now in robotics, because we've understood that, rather than sending a single, sophisticated, expensive robot out to explore another planet or to search a burning building, that instead, it may be more effective to get a group of cheaper robots exchanging only minimal information, and that's the way that ants do it.
So the invasive Argentine ant makes expandable search networks.
They're good at dealing with the main problem of collective search, which is the trade-off between searching very thoroughly and covering a lot of ground.
And what they do is, when there are many ants in a small space, then each one can search very thoroughly because there will be another ant nearby searching over there, but when there are a few ants in a large space, then they need to stretch out their paths to cover more ground.
I think they use interactions to assess density, so when they're really crowded, they meet more often, and they search more thoroughly.
Different ant species must use different algorithms, because they've evolved to deal with different resources, and it could be really useful to know about this, and so we recently asked ants to solve the collective search problem in the extreme environment of microgravity in the International Space Station.
When I first saw this picture, I thought, Oh no, they've mounted the habitat vertically, but then I realized that, of course, it doesn't matter.
So the idea here is that the ants are working so hard to hang on to the wall or the floor or whatever you call it that they're less likely to interact, and so the relationship between how crowded they are and how often they meet would be messed up.
We're still analyzing the data.
I don't have the results yet.
But it would be interesting to know how other species solve this problem in different environments on Earth, and so we're setting up a program to encourage kids around the world to try this experiment with different species.
It's very simple.
It can be done with cheap materials.
And that way, we could make a global map of ant collective search algorithms.
And I think it's pretty likely that the invasive species, the ones that come into our buildings, are going to be really good at this, because they're in your kitchen because they're really good at finding food and water.
So the most familiar resource for ants is a picnic, and this is a clustered resource.
When there's one piece of fruit, there's likely to be another piece of fruit nearby, and the ants that specialize on clustered resources use interactions for recruitment.
So when one ant meets another, or when it meets a chemical deposited on the ground by another, then it changes direction to follow in the direction of the interaction, and that's how you get the trail of ants sharing your picnic.
Now this is a place where I think we might be able to learn something from ants about cancer.
I mean, first, it's obvious that we could do a lot to prevent cancer by not allowing people to spread around or sell the toxins that promote the evolution of cancer in our bodies, but I don't think the ants can help us much with this because ants never poison their own colonies.
But we might be able to learn something from ants about treating cancer.
There are many different kinds of cancer.
Each one originates in a particular part of the body, and then some kinds of cancer will spread or metastasize to particular other tissues where they must be getting resources that they need.
So if you think from the perspective of early metastatic cancer cells as they're out searching around for the resources that they need, if those resources are clustered, they're likely to use interactions for recruitment, and if we can figure out how cancer cells are recruiting, then maybe we could set traps to catch them before they become established.
So ants are using interactions in different ways in a huge variety of environments, and we could learn from this about other systems that operate without central control.
Using only simple interactions, ant colonies have been performing amazing feats for more than 130 million years.
We have a lot to learn from them.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So today's top chef class is in how to rob a bank, and it's clear that the general public needs guidance, because the average bank robbery nets only 7,500 dollars.
Rank amateurs who know nothing about how to cook the books.
The folks who know, of course, run our largest banks, and in the last go-around, they cost us over 11 trillion dollars.
That's what 11 trillion looks like.
That's how many zeros?
And cost us over 10 million jobs as well.
So our task is to educate ourselves so that we can understand why we have these recurrent, intensifying financial crises, and how we can prevent them in the future.
And the answer to that is that we have to stop epidemics of control fraud.
Control fraud is what happens when the people who control, typically a CEO, a seemingly legitimate entity, use it as a weapon to defraud.
And these are the weapons of mass destruction in the financial world.
They also follow in finance a particular strategy, because the weapon of choice in finance is accounting, and there is a recipe for accounting control fraud, and how it occurs.
And we discovered this recipe in quite an odd way that I'll come back to in a moment.
First ingredient in the recipe: grow like crazy; second, by making or buying really crappy loans, but loans that are made at a very high interest rate or yield; three, while employing extreme leverage -- that just means a lot of debt -- compared to your equity; and four, while providing only trivial loss reserves against the inevitable losses.
If you follow those four simple steps, and any bank can follow them, then you are mathematically guaranteed to have three things occur.
The first thing is you will report record bank profits -- not just high, record.
Two, the CEO will immediately be made incredibly wealthy by modern executive compensation.
And three, farther down the road, the bank will suffer catastrophic losses and will fail unless it is bailed out.
And that's a hint as to how we discovered this recipe, because we discovered it through an autopsy process.
During the savings and loan debacle in 1984, we looked at every single failure, and we looked for common characteristics, and we discovered this recipe was common to each of these frauds.
In other words, a coroner could find these things because this is a fatal recipe that will destroy the banks as well as the economy.
And it also turns out to be precisely what could have stopped this crisis, the one that cost us 11 trillion dollars just in the household sector, that cost us 10 million jobs, was the easiest financial crisis by far to have avoided completely if we had simply learned the lessons of epidemics of control fraud, particularly using this recipe.
So let's go to this crisis, and the two huge epidemics of loan origination fraud that drove the crisis -- appraisal fraud and liar's loans -- and what we're going to see in looking at both of these is we got warnings that were incredibly early about these frauds.
We got warnings that we could have taken advantage of easily, because back in the savings and loan debacle, we had figured out how to respond and prevent these crises.
And three, the warnings were unambiguous.
They were obvious that what was going on was an epidemic of accounting control fraud building up.
Let's take appraisal fraud first.
This is simply where you inflate the value of the home that is being pledged as security for the loan.
In 2000, the year 2000, that is over a year before Enron fails, by the way, the honest appraisers got together a formal petition begging the federal government to act, and the industry to act, to stop this epidemic of appraisal fraud.
And the appraisers explained how it was occurring, that banks were demanding that appraisers inflate the appraisal, and that if the appraisers refused to do so, they, the banks, would blacklist honest appraisers and refuse to use them.
Now, we've seen this before in the savings and loan debacle, and we know that this kind of fraud can only originate from the lenders, and that no honest lender would ever inflate the appraisal, because it's the great protection against loss.
So this was an incredibly early warning, 2000.
It was something we'd seen before, and it was completely unambiguous.
This was an epidemic of accounting control fraud led by the banks.
What about liar's loans?
Well, that warning actually comes earlier.
The savings and loan debacle is basically the early 1980s through 1993, and in the midst of fighting that wave of accounting control fraud, in 1990, we found that a second front of fraud was being started.
And like all good financial frauds in America, it began in Orange County, California.
And we happened to be the regional regulators for it.
And our examiners said, they are making loans without even checking what the borrower's income is.
This is insane, it has to lead to massive losses, and it only makes sense for entities engaged in these accounting control frauds.
And we said, yeah, you're absolutely right, and we drove those liar's loans out of the industry in 1990 and 1991, but we could only deal with the industry we had jurisdiction over, which was savings and loans, and so the biggest and the baddest of the frauds, Long Beach Savings, voluntarily gave up its federal savings and loan charter, gave up federal deposit insurance, converted to become a mortgage bank for the sole purpose of escaping our jurisdiction, and changed its name to Ameriquest, and became the most notorious of the liar's loans frauds early on, and to add to that, they deliberately predated upon minorities.
So we knew again about this crisis.
We'd seen it before. We'd stopped it before.
We had incredibly early warnings of it, and it was absolutely unambiguous that no honest lender would make loans in this fashion.
So let's take a look at the reaction of the industry and the regulators and the prosecutors to these clear early warnings that could have prevented the crisis.
Start with the industry.
The industry responded between 2003 and 2006 by increasing liar's loans by over 500 percent.
These were the loans that hyperinflated the bubble and produced the economic crisis.
By 2006, half of all the loans called subprime were also liar's loans.
They're not mutually exclusive, it's just that together, they're the most toxic combination you can possibly imagine.
By 2006, 40 percent of all the loans made that year, all the home loans made that year, were liar's loans, 40 percent.
And this is despite a warning from the industry's own antifraud experts that said that these loans were an open invitation to fraudsters, and that they had a fraud incidence of 90 percent, nine zero.
In response to that, the industry first started calling these loans liar's loans, which lacks a certain subtlety, and second, massively increased them, and no government regulator ever required or encouraged any lender to make a liar's loan or anyone to purchase a liar's loan, and that explicitly includes Fannie and Freddie.
This came from the lenders because of the fraud recipe.
What happened to appraisal fraud?
It expanded remarkably as well.
By 2007, when a survey of appraisers was done, 90 percent of appraisers reported that they had been subject to coercion from the lenders trying to get them to inflate an appraisal.
In other words, both forms of fraud became absolutely endemic and normal, and this is what drove the bubble.
What happened in the governmental sector?
Well, the government, as I told you, when we were the savings and loan regulators, we could only deal with our industry, and if people gave up their federal deposit insurance, we couldn't do anything to them.
Congress, it may strike you as impossible, but actually did something intelligent in 1994, and passed the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act that gave the Fed, and only the Federal Reserve, the explicit, statutory authority to ban liar's loans by every lender, whether or not they had federal deposit insurance.
So what did Ben Bernanke and Alan Greenspan, as chairs of the Fed, do when they got these warnings that these were massively fraudulent loans and that they were being sold to the secondary market?
Remember, there's no fraud exorcist.
Once it starts out a fraudulent loan, it can only be sold to the secondary market through more frauds, lying about the reps and warrantees, and then those people are going to produce mortgage-backed securities and exotic derivatives which are also going to be supposedly backed by those fraudulent loans.
So the fraud is going to progress through the entire system, hyperinflate the bubble, produce a disaster.
And remember, we had experience with this.
We had seen significant losses, and we had experience of competent regulators in stopping it.
Greenspan and Bernanke refused to use the authority under the statute to stop liar's loans.
And this was a matter first of dogma.
They're just horrifically opposed to anything regulatory.
But it is also the international competition in laxity, the race to the bottom between the United States and the United Kingdom, the city of London, in particular, and the city of London won that race to the bottom, but it meant that all regulation in the West was completely degraded in this stupid competition to be who could have the weakest regulation.
So that was the regulatory response.
What about the response of the prosecutors after the crisis, after 11 trillion dollars in losses, after 10 million jobs lost, a crisis in which the losses and the frauds were more than 70 times larger than the savings and loan debacle?
Well, in the savings and loan debacle, our agency that regulated savings and loans, OTS, made over 30,000 criminal referrals, produced over 1,000 felony convictions just in cases designated as major, and that understates the degree of prioritization, because we worked with the FBI to create the list of the top 100 fraud schemes, the absolute worst of the worst, nationwide.
Roughly 300 savings and loans involved, roughly 600 senior officials.
Virtually all of them were prosecuted.
We had a 90 percent conviction rate.
It's the greatest success against elite white collar criminals ever, and it was because of this understanding of control fraud and the accounting control fraud mechanism.
Flash forward to the current crisis.
The same agency, Office of Thrift Supervision, which was supposed to regulate many of the largest makers of liar's loans in the country, has made, even today -- it no longer exists, but as of a year ago, it had made zero criminal referrals.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is supposed to regulate the largest national banks, has made zero criminal referrals.
The Fed appears to have made zero criminal referrals.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is smart enough to refuse to answer the question.
Without any guidance from the regulators, there's no expertise in the FBI to investigate complex frauds.
It isn't simply that they've had to reinvent the wheel of how to do these prosecutions; they've forgotten that the wheel exists, and therefore, we have zero prosecutions, and of course, zero convictions, of any of the elite bank frauds, the Wall Street types, that drove this crisis.
With no expertise coming from the regulators, the FBI formed what it calls a partnership with the Mortgage Bankers Association in 2007.
The Mortgage Bankers Association is the trade association of the perps.
And the Mortgage Bankers Association set out, it had the audacity and the success to con the FBI.
It had created a supposed definition of mortgage fraud, in which, guess what, its members are always the victim and never the perpetrators.
And the FBI has bought this hook, line, sinker, rod, reel and the boat they rode out in.
And so the FBI, under the leadership of an attorney general who is African-American and a president of the United States who is African-American, have adopted the Tea Party definition of the crisis, in which it is the first virgin crisis in history, conceived without sin in the executive ranks.
And it's those oh-so-clever hairdressers who were able to defraud the poor, pitiful banks, who lack any financial sophistication.
It is the silliest story you can conceive of, and so they go and they prosecute the hairdressers, and they leave the banksters alone entirely.
And so, while lions are roaming the campsite, the FBI is chasing mice.
What do we need to do?
What can we do in all of this?
We need to change the perverse incentive structures that produce these recurrent epidemics of accounting control fraud that are driving our crises.
So we have to first get rid of the systemically dangerous institutions.
These are the so-called too-big-to-fail institutions.
We need to shrink them to the point, within the next five years, that they no longer pose a systemic risk.
Right now, they are ticking time bombs that will cause a global crisis as soon as the next one fails -- not if, when.
Second thing we need to do is completely reform modern executive and professional compensation, which is what they use to suborn the appraisers.
Remember, they were pressuring the appraisers through the compensation system, trying to produce what we call a Gresham's dynamic, in which bad ethics drives good ethics out of the marketplace.
And they largely succeeded, which is how the fraud became endemic.
And the third thing that we need to do is deal with what we call the three D's: deregulation, desupervision, and the de facto decriminalization.
Because we can make all three of these changes, and if we do so, we can dramatically reduce how often we have a crisis and how severe those crises are.
That is not simply critical to our economy.
You can see what these crises do to inequality and what they do to our democracy.
They have produced crony capitalism, American-style, in which the largest financial institutions are the leading financial donors of both parties, and that's the reason why even after this crisis, 70 times larger than the savings and loan crisis, we have no meaningful reforms in any of the three areas that I've talked about, other than banning liar's loans, which is good, but that's just one form of ammunition for this fraud weapon.
There are many forms of ammunition they can use.
That's why we need to learn what the bankers have learned: the recipe for the best way to rob a bank, so that we can stop that recipe, because our legislators, who are dependent on political contributions, will not do it on their own.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I recently retired from the California Highway Patrol after 23 years of service.
The majority of those 23 years was spent patrolling the southern end of Marin County, which includes the Golden Gate Bridge.
The bridge is an iconic structure, known worldwide for its beautiful views of San Francisco, the Pacific Ocean, and its inspiring architecture.
Unfortunately, it is also a magnet for suicide, being one of the most utilized sites in the world.
The Golden Gate Bridge opened in 1937.
Joseph Strauss, chief engineer in charge of building the bridge, was quoted as saying, "The bridge is practically suicide-proof.
Suicide from the bridge is neither practical nor probable."
But since its opening, over 1,600 people have leapt to their death from that bridge.
Some believe that traveling between the two towers will lead you to another dimension -- this bridge has been romanticized as such — that the fall from that frees you from all your worries and grief, and the waters below will cleanse your soul.
But let me tell you what actually occurs when the bridge is used as a means of suicide.
After a free fall of four to five seconds, the body strikes the water at about 75 miles an hour.
That impact shatters bones, some of which then puncture vital organs.
Most die on impact.
Those that don't generally flail in the water helplessly, and then drown.
I don't think that those who contemplate this method of suicide realize how grisly a death that they will face.
This is the cord.
Except for around the two towers, there is 32 inches of steel paralleling the bridge.
This is where most folks stand before taking their lives.
I can tell you from experience that once the person is on that cord, and at their darkest time, it is very difficult to bring them back.
I took this photo last year as this young woman spoke to an officer contemplating her life.
I want to tell you very happily that we were successful that day in getting her back over the rail.
When I first began working on the bridge, we had no formal training.
You struggled to funnel your way through these calls.
This was not only a disservice to those contemplating suicide, but to the officers as well.
We've come a long, long way since then.
Now, veteran officers and psychologists train new officers.
This is Jason Garber.
I met Jason on July 22 of last year when I get received a call of a possible suicidal subject sitting on the cord near midspan.
I responded, and when I arrived, I observed Jason speaking to a Golden Gate Bridge officer.
Jason was just 32 years old and had flown out here from New Jersey.
As a matter of fact, he had flown out here on two other occasions from New Jersey to attempt suicide on this bridge.
After about an hour of speaking with Jason, he asked us if we knew the story of Pandora's box.
Recalling your Greek mythology, Zeus created Pandora, and sent her down to Earth with a box, and told her, "Never, ever open that box."
Well one day, curiosity got the better of Pandora, and she did open the box.
Out flew plagues, sorrows, and all sorts of evils against man.
The only good thing in the box was hope.
Jason then asked us, "What happens when you open the box and hope isn't there?"
He paused a few moments, leaned to his right, and was gone.
This kind, intelligent young man from New Jersey had just committed suicide.
I spoke with Jason's parents that evening, and I suppose that, when I was speaking with them, that I didn't sound as if I was doing very well, because that very next day, their family rabbi called to check on me.
Jason's parents had asked him to do so.
The collateral damage of suicide affects so many people.
I pose these questions to you: What would you do if your family member, friend or loved one was suicidal?
What would you say?
Would you know what to say?
In my experience, it's not just the talking that you do, but the listening.
Listen to understand.
Don't argue, blame, or tell the person you know how they feel, because you probably don't.
By just being there, you may just be the turning point that they need.
If you think someone is suicidal, don't be afraid to confront them and ask the question.
One way of asking them the question is like this: "Others in similar circumstances have thought about ending their life; have you had these thoughts?"
Confronting the person head-on may just save their life and be the turning point for them.
Some other signs to look for: hopelessness, believing that things are terrible and never going to get better; helplessness, believing that there is nothing that you can do about it; recent social withdrawal; and a loss of interest in life.
I came up with this talk just a couple of days ago, and I received an email from a lady that I'd like to read you her letter.
She lost her son on January 19 of this year, and she wrote this me this email just a couple of days ago, and it's with her permission and blessing that I read this to you.
"Hi, Kevin. I imagine you're at the TED Conference.
That must be quite the experience to be there.
I'm thinking I should go walk the bridge this weekend.
Just wanted to drop you a note.
Hope you get the word out to many people and they go home talking about it to their friends who tell their friends, etc.
I'm still pretty numb, but noticing more moments of really realizing Mike isn't coming home.
Mike was driving from Petaluma to San Francisco to watch the 49ers game with his father on January 19.
He never made it there.
I called Petaluma police and reported him missing that evening.
The next morning, two officers came to my home and reported that Mike's car was down at the bridge.
A witness had observed him jumping off the bridge at 1:58 p.m. the previous day.
Thanks so much for standing up for those who may be only temporarily too weak to stand for themselves.
Who hasn't been low before without suffering from a true mental illness?
It shouldn't be so easy to end it.
My prayers are with you for your fight.
The GGB, Golden Gate Bridge, is supposed to be a passage across our beautiful bay, not a graveyard.
Good luck this week. Vicky."
I can't imagine the courage it takes for her to go down to that bridge and walk the path that her son took that day, and also the courage just to carry on.
I'd like to introduce you to a man I refer to as hope and courage.
On March 11 of 2005, I responded to a radio call of a possible suicidal subject on the bridge sidewalk near the north tower.
I rode my motorcycle down the sidewalk and observed this man, Kevin Berthia, standing on the sidewalk.
When he saw me, he immediately traversed that pedestrian rail, and stood on that small pipe which goes around the tower.
For the next hour and a half, I listened as Kevin spoke about his depression and hopelessness.
Kevin decided on his own that day to come back over that rail and give life another chance.
When Kevin came back over, I congratulated him.
"This is a new beginning, a new life."
But I asked him, "What was it that made you come back and give hope and life another chance?"
And you know what he told me?
He said, "You listened.
You let me speak, and you just listened."
Shortly after this incident, I received a letter from Kevin's mother, and I have that letter with me, and I'd like to read it to you.
"Dear Mr. Briggs, Nothing will erase the events of March 11, but you are one of the reasons Kevin is still with us.
I truly believe Kevin was crying out for help.
He has been diagnosed with a mental illness for which he has been properly medicated.
I adopted Kevin when he was only six months old, completely unaware of any hereditary traits, but, thank God, now we know.
Kevin is straight, as he says.
We truly thank God for you.
Sincerely indebted to you, Narvella Berthia."
And on the bottom she writes, "P.S. When I visited San Francisco General Hospital that evening, you were listed as the patient.
Boy, did I have to straighten that one out."
Today, Kevin is a loving father and contributing member of society.
He speaks openly about the events that day and his depression in the hopes that his story will inspire others.
Suicide is not just something I've encountered on the job.
It's personal.
My grandfather committed suicide by poisoning.
That act, although ending his own pain, robbed me from ever getting to know him.
This is what suicide does.
For most suicidal folks, or those contemplating suicide, they wouldn't think of hurting another person.
They just want their own pain to end.
Typically, this is accomplished in just three ways: sleep, drugs or alcohol, or death.
In my career, I've responded to and been involved in hundreds of mental illness and suicide calls around the bridge.
Of those incidents I've been directly involved with, I've only lost two, but that's two too many.
One was Jason.
The other was a man I spoke to for about an hour.
During that time, he shook my hand on three occasions.
On that final handshake, he looked at me, and he said, "Kevin, I'm sorry, but I have to go."
And he leapt.
Horrible, absolutely horrible.
I do want to tell you, though, the vast majority of folks that we do get to contact on that bridge do not commit suicide.
Additionally, that very few who have jumped off the bridge and lived and can talk about it, that one to two percent, most of those folks have said that the second that they let go of that rail, they knew that they had made a mistake and they wanted to live.
I tell people, the bridge not only connects Marin to San Francisco, but people together also.
That connection, or bridge that we make, is something that each and every one of us should strive to do.
Suicide is preventable.
There is help. There is hope.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
There's a man by the name of Captain William Swenson who recently was awarded the congressional Medal of Honor for his actions on September 8, 2009.
On that day, a column of American and Afghan troops were making their way through a part of Afghanistan to help protect a group of government officials, a group of Afghan government officials, who would be meeting with some local village elders.
The column came under ambush, and was surrounded on three sides, and amongst many other things, Captain Swenson was recognized for running into live fire to rescue the wounded and pull out the dead.
One of the people he rescued was a sergeant, and he and a comrade were making their way to a medevac helicopter.
And what was remarkable about this day is, by sheer coincidence, one of the medevac medics happened to have a GoPro camera on his helmet and captured the whole scene on camera.
It shows Captain Swenson and his comrade bringing this wounded soldier who had received a gunshot to the neck.
They put him in the helicopter, and then you see Captain Swenson bend over and give him a kiss before he turns around to rescue more.
I saw this, and I thought to myself, where do people like that come from?
What is that? That is some deep, deep emotion, when you would want to do that.
There's a love there, and I wanted to know why is it that I don't have people that I work with like that?
You know, in the military, they give medals to people who are willing to sacrifice themselves so that others may gain.
In business, we give bonuses to people who are willing to sacrifice others so that we may gain.
We have it backwards. Right?
So I asked myself, where do people like this come from?
And my initial conclusion was that they're just better people.
That's why they're attracted to the military.
These better people are attracted to this concept of service.
But that's completely wrong.
What I learned was that it's the environment, and if you get the environment right, every single one of us has the capacity to do these remarkable things, and more importantly, others have that capacity too.
I've had the great honor of getting to meet some of these, who we would call heroes, who have put themselves and put their lives at risk to save others, and I asked them, "Why would you do it?
Why did you do it?"
And they all say the same thing: "Because they would have done it for me."
It's this deep sense of trust and cooperation.
So trust and cooperation are really important here.
The problem with concepts of trust and cooperation is that they are feelings, they are not instructions.
I can't simply say to you, "Trust me," and you will.
I can't simply instruct two people to cooperate, and they will.
It's not how it works. It's a feeling.
So where does that feeling come from?
If you go back 50,000 years to the Paleolithic era, to the early days of Homo sapiens, what we find is that the world was filled with danger, all of these forces working very, very hard to kill us.
Nothing personal.
Whether it was the weather, lack of resources, maybe a saber-toothed tiger, all of these things working to reduce our lifespan.
And so we evolved into social animals, where we lived together and worked together in what I call a circle of safety, inside the tribe, where we felt like we belonged.
And when we felt safe amongst our own, the natural reaction was trust and cooperation.
There are inherent benefits to this.
It means I can fall asleep at night and trust that someone from within my tribe will watch for danger.
If we don't trust each other, if I don't trust you, that means you won't watch for danger.
Bad system of survival.
The modern day is exactly the same thing.
The world is filled with danger, things that are trying to frustrate our lives or reduce our success, reduce our opportunity for success.
It could be the ups and downs in the economy, the uncertainty of the stock market.
It could be a new technology that renders your business model obsolete overnight.
Or it could be your competition that is sometimes trying to kill you.
It's sometimes trying to put you out of business, but at the very minimum is working hard to frustrate your growth and steal your business from you.
We have no control over these forces.
These are a constant, and they're not going away.
The only variable are the conditions inside the organization, and that's where leadership matters, because it's the leader that sets the tone.
When a leader makes the choice to put the safety and lives of the people inside the organization first, to sacrifice their comforts and sacrifice the tangible results, so that the people remain and feel safe and feel like they belong, remarkable things happen.
I was flying on a trip, and I was witness to an incident where a passenger attempted to board before their number was called, and I watched the gate agent treat this man like he had broken the law, like a criminal.
He was yelled at for attempting to board one group too soon.
So I said something.
I said, "Why do you have treat us like cattle?
Why can't you treat us like human beings?"
And this is exactly what she said to me.
She said, "Sir, if I don't follow the rules, I could get in trouble or lose my job."
All she was telling me is that she doesn't feel safe.
All she was telling me is that she doesn't trust her leaders.
The reason we like flying Southwest Airlines is not because they necessarily hire better people.
It's because they don't fear their leaders.
You see, if the conditions are wrong, we are forced to expend our own time and energy to protect ourselves from each other, and that inherently weakens the organization.
When we feel safe inside the organization, we will naturally combine our talents and our strengths and work tirelessly to face the dangers outside and seize the opportunities.
The closest analogy I can give to what a great leader is, is like being a parent.
If you think about what being a great parent is, what do you want? What makes a great parent?
We want to give our child opportunities, education, discipline them when necessary, all so that they can grow up and achieve more than we could for ourselves.
Great leaders want exactly the same thing.
They want to provide their people opportunity, education, discipline when necessary, build their self-confidence, give them the opportunity to try and fail, all so that they could achieve more than we could ever imagine for ourselves.
Charlie Kim, who's the CEO of a company called Next Jump in New York City, a tech company, he makes the point that if you had hard times in your family, would you ever consider laying off one of your children?
We would never do it.
Then why do we consider laying off people inside our organization?
Charlie implemented a policy of lifetime employment.
If you get a job at Next Jump, you cannot get fired for performance issues.
In fact, if you have issues, they will coach you and they will give you support, just like we would with one of our children who happens to come home with a C from school.
It's the complete opposite.
This is the reason so many people have such a visceral hatred, anger, at some of these banking CEOs with their disproportionate salaries and bonus structures.
It's not the numbers.
It's that they have violated the very definition of leadership.
They have violated this deep-seated social contract.
We know that they allowed their people to be sacrificed so they could protect their own interests, or worse, they sacrificed their people to protect their own interests.
This is what so offends us, not the numbers.
Would anybody be offended if we gave a $150 million bonus to Gandhi?
How about a $250 million bonus to Mother Teresa?
Do we have an issue with that? None at all.
None at all.
Great leaders would never sacrifice the people to save the numbers.
They would sooner sacrifice the numbers to save the people.
Bob Chapman, who runs a large manufacturing company in the Midwest called Barry-Wehmiller, in 2008 was hit very hard by the recession, and they lost 30 percent of their orders overnight.
Now in a large manufacturing company, this is a big deal, and they could no longer afford their labor pool.
They needed to save 10 million dollars, so, like so many companies today, the board got together and discussed layoffs.
And Bob refused.
You see, Bob doesn't believe in head counts.
Bob believes in heart counts, and it's much more difficult to simply reduce the heart count.
And so they came up with a furlough program.
Every employee, from secretary to CEO, was required to take four weeks of unpaid vacation.
They could take it any time they wanted, and they did not have to take it consecutively.
But it was how Bob announced the program that mattered so much.
He said, it's better that we should all suffer a little than any of us should have to suffer a lot, and morale went up.
They saved 20 million dollars, and most importantly, as would be expected, when the people feel safe and protected by the leadership in the organization, the natural reaction is to trust and cooperate.
And quite spontaneously, nobody expected, people started trading with each other.
Those who could afford it more would trade with those who could afford it less.
People would take five weeks so that somebody else only had to take three.
Leadership is a choice. It is not a rank.
I know many people at the seniormost levels of organizations who are absolutely not leaders.
They are authorities, and we do what they say because they have authority over us, but we would not follow them.
And I know many people who are at the bottoms of organizations who have no authority and they are absolutely leaders, and this is because they have chosen to look after the person to the left of them, and they have chosen to look after the person to the right of them.
This is what a leader is.
I heard a story of some Marines who were out in theater, and as is the Marine custom, the officer ate last, and he let his men eat first, and when they were done, there was no food left for him.
And when they went back out in the field, his men brought him some of their food so that he may eat, because that's what happens.
We call them leaders because they go first.
We call them leaders because they take the risk before anybody else does.
We call them leaders because they will choose to sacrifice so that their people may be safe and protected and so their people may gain, and when we do, the natural response is that our people will sacrifice for us.
They will give us their blood and sweat and tears to see that their leader's vision comes to life, and when we ask them, "Why would you do that?
Why would you give your blood and sweat and tears for that person?" they all say the same thing: "Because they would have done it for me."
And isn't that the organization we would all like to work in?
Thank you very much.
Thank you. (Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
I'm going to ask and try to answer, in some ways, kind of an uncomfortable question.
Both civilians, obviously, and soldiers suffer in war; I don't think any civilian has ever missed the war that they were subjected to.
I've been covering wars for almost 20 years, and one of the remarkable things for me is how many soldiers find themselves missing it.
How is it someone can go through the worst experience imaginable, and come home, back to their home, and their family, their country, and miss the war?
How does that work? What does it mean?
We have to answer that question, because if we don't, it'll be impossible to bring soldiers back to a place in society where they belong, and I think it'll also be impossible to stop war, if we don't understand how that mechanism works.
The problem is that war does not have a simple, neat truth, one simple, neat truth.
Any sane person hates war, hates the idea of war, wouldn't want to have anything to do with it, doesn't want to be near it, doesn't want to know about it.
That's a sane response to war.
But if I asked all of you in this room, who here has paid money to go to a cinema and be entertained by a Hollywood war movie, most of you would probably raise your hands.
That's what's so complicated about war.
And trust me, if a room full of peace-loving people finds something compelling about war, so do 20-year-old soldiers who have been trained in it, I promise you.
That's the thing that has to be understood.
I've covered war for about 20 years, as I said, but my most intense experiences in combat were with American soldiers in Afghanistan.
I've been in Africa, the Middle East, Afghanistan in the '90s, but it was with American soldiers in 2007, 2008, that I was confronted with very intense combat.
I was in a small valley called the Korengal Valley in eastern Afghanistan.
It was six miles long.
There were 150 men of Battle Company in that valley, and for a while, while I was there, almost 20 percent of all the combat in all of Afghanistan was happening in those six miles.
A hundred and fifty men were absorbing almost a fifth of the combat for all of NATO forces in the country, for a couple months.
It was very intense.
I spent most of my time at a small outpost called Restrepo.
It was named after the platoon medic that had been killed about two months into the deployment.
It was a few plywood B-huts clinging to a side of a ridge, and sandbags, bunkers, gun positions, and there were 20 men up there of Second Platoon, Battle Company.
I spent most of my time up there.
There was no running water.
There was no way to bathe.
The guys were up there for a month at a time.
They never even got out of their clothes.
They fought. The worked.
They slept in the same clothes.
They never took them off, and at the end of the month, they went back down to the company headquarters, and by then, their clothes were unwearable.
They burned them and got a new set.
There was no Internet. There was no phone.
There was no communication with the outside world up there.
There was no cooked food.
There was nothing up there that young men typically like: no cars, no girls, no television, nothing except combat.
Combat they did learn to like.
I remember one day, it was a very hot day in the spring, and we hadn't been in a fight in a couple of weeks, maybe.
Usually, the outpost was attacked, and we hadn't seen any combat in a couple of weeks, and everyone was just stunned with boredom and heat.
And I remember the lieutenant walking past me sort of stripped to the waist.
It was incredibly hot.
Stripped to the waist, walked past me muttering, "Oh God, please someone attack us today."
That's how bored they were.
That's war too, is a lieutenant saying, "Please make something happen because we're going crazy."
To understand that, you have to, for a moment, think about combat not morally -- that's an important job to do — but for a moment, don't think about it morally, think about it neurologically.
Let's think about what happens in your brain when you're in combat.
First of all, the experience is very bizarre, it's a very bizarre one.
It's not what I had expected.
Usually, you're not scared.
I've been very scared in combat, but most of the time when I was out there, I wasn't scared.
I was very scared beforehand and incredibly scared afterwards, and that fear that comes afterwards can last years.
I haven't been shot at in six years, and I was woken up very abruptly this morning by a nightmare that I was being strafed by aircraft, six years later.
I've never even been strafed by aircraft, and I was having nightmares about it.
Time slows down.
You get this weird tunnel vision.
You notice some details very, very, very accurately and other things drop out.
It's almost a slightly altered state of mind.
What's happening in your brain is you're getting an enormous amount of adrenaline pumped through your system.
Young men will go to great lengths to have that experience.
It's wired into us.
It's hormonally supported.
The mortality rate for young men in society is six times what it is for young women from violence and from accidents, just the stupid stuff that young men do: jumping off of things they shouldn't jump off of, lighting things on fire they shouldn't light on fire, I mean, you know what I'm talking about.
They die at six times the rate that young women do.
Statistically, you are safer as a teenage boy, you would be safer in the fire department or the police department in most American cities than just walking around the streets of your hometown looking for something to do, statistically.
You can imagine how that plays out in combat.
At Restrepo, every guy up there was almost killed, including me, including my good friend Tim Hetherington, who was later killed in Libya.
There were guys walking around with bullet holes in their uniforms, rounds that had cut through the fabric and didn't touch their bodies.
I was leaning against some sandbags one morning, not much going on, sort of spacing out, and some sand was kicked into the side of, sort of hit the side of my face.
Something hit the side of my face, and I didn't know what it was.
You have to understand about bullets that they go a lot faster than sound, so if someone shoots at you from a few hundred meters, the bullet goes by you, or hits you obviously, half a second or so before the sound catches up to it.
So I had some sand sprayed in the side of my face.
Half a second later, I heard dut-dut-dut-dut-duh.
It was machine gun fire.
It was the first round, the first burst of an hour-long firefight.
What had happened was the bullet hit, a bullet hit three or four inches from the side of my head.
Imagine, just think about it, because I certainly did, think about the angle of deviation that saved my life.
Just think about the math on that.
Every guy up there had some experience like that, at least once, if not many times.
The boys are up there for a year.
They got back.
Some of them got out of the Army and had tremendous psychological problems when they got home.
Some of them stayed in the Army and were more or less okay, psychologically.
I was particularly close to a guy named Brendan O'Byrne.
I'm still very good friends with him.
He came back to the States. He got out of the Army.
I had a dinner party one night.
I invited him, and he started talking with a woman, one of my friends, and she knew how bad it had been out there, and she said, "Brendan, is there anything at all that you miss about being out in Afghanistan, about the war?"
And he thought about it quite a long time, and finally he said, "Ma'am, I miss almost all of it."
And he's one of the most traumatized people I've seen from that war.
"Ma'am, I miss almost all of it."
What is he talking about?
He's not a psychopath.
He doesn't miss killing people.
He's not crazy. He doesn't miss getting shot at and seeing his friends get killed.
If we're going to stop war, we have to answer that question.
I think what he missed is brotherhood.
He missed, in some ways, the opposite of killing.
What he missed was connection to the other men he was with.
Now, brotherhood is different from friendship.
Friendship happens in society, obviously.
The more you like someone, the more you'd be willing to do for them.
Brotherhood has nothing to do with how you feel about the other person.
It's a mutual agreement in a group that you will put the welfare of the group, you will put the safety of everyone in the group above your own.
In effect, you're saying, "I love these other people more than I love myself."
Brendan was a team leader in command of three men, and the worst day in Afghanistan — He was almost killed so many times.
It didn't bother him.
The worst thing that happened to him in Afghanistan was one of his men was hit in the head with a bullet in the helmet, knocked him over.
They thought he was dead.
It was in the middle of a huge firefight.
No one could deal with it, and a minute later, Kyle Steiner sat back up from the dead, as it were, because he'd come back to consciousness.
The bullet had just knocked him out.
It glanced off the helmet.
He remembers people saying, as he was sort of half-conscious, he remembers people saying, "Steiner's been hit in the head. Steiner's dead."
And he was thinking, "I'm not dead."
And he sat up.
And Brendan realized after that that he could not protect his men, and that was the only time he cried in Afghanistan, was realizing that.
That's brotherhood.
This wasn't invented recently.
Many of you have probably read "The Iliad."
Achilles surely would have risked his life or given his life to save his friend Patroclus.
In World War II, there were many stories of soldiers who were wounded, were brought to a rear base hospital, who went AWOL, crawled out of windows, slipped out doors, went AWOL, wounded, to make their way back to the front lines to rejoin their brothers out there.
So you think about Brendan, you think about all these soldiers having an experience like that, a bond like that, in a small group, where they loved 20 other people in some ways more than they loved themselves, you think about how good that would feel, imagine it, and they are blessed with that experience for a year, and then they come home, and they are just back in society like the rest of us are, not knowing who they can count on, not knowing who loves them, who they can love, not knowing exactly what anyone they know would do for them if it came down to it.
That is terrifying.
Compared to that, war, psychologically, in some ways, is easy, compared to that kind of alienation.
That's why they miss it, and that's what we have to understand and in some ways fix in our society.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
What is history?
It is something written by the winners.
There is a stereotype that history should be focused on the rulers, like Lenin or Trotsky.
As a result, people in many countries, like mine, Russia, look at history as something that was predetermined or determined by the leaders, and common people could not influence it in any way.
Many Russians today do not believe that Russia could ever have been or ever will be a truly democratic nation, and this is due to the way history has been framed to the citizens of Russia.
And this is not true.
To prove it, I spent two years of my life trying to go 100 years back, to the year 1917, the year of the Russian Revolution.
I asked myself, what if the internet and Facebook existed 100 years ago?
So last year, we built a social network for dead people, named Project1917.com.
My team and I created our software, digitized and uploaded all possible real diaries and letters written by more than 3,000 people 100 years ago.
So any user of our website or application can follow a news feed for each day of 1917 and read what people like Stravinsky or Trotsky, Lenin or Pavlova and others thought and felt.
We watch all those personalities being ordinary people like you and me, not demigods, and we see that history consists of their mistakes, fears, weaknesses, not only their "genius ideas."
Our project was a shock for many Russians, who used to think that our country has always been an autocratic empire and the ideas of freedom and democracy could never have prevailed, just because democracy was not our destiny.
But if we take a broader look, it's not that black and white.
Yes, 1917 led to 70 years of communist dictatorship.
But with this project, we see that Russia could have had a different history and a democratic future, as any other country could or still can.
Reading the posts from 1917, you learn that Russia was the first country in the world to abolish the death penalty, or one of the first ones to grant women voting rights.
Knowing history and understanding how ordinary people influenced history can help us create a better future, because history is just a rehearsal of what's happening right now.
We do need new ways of telling history, and this year, for example, we started a new online project that is called 1968Digital.com, and that is an online documentary series that gives you an impression of that year, 1968, a year marked by global social change that, in many ways, created the world as we know it now.
But we are making that history alive by imagining what if all the main characters could use mobile phones ...
just like that?
And we see that a lot of individuals were facing the same challenges and were fighting for the same values, no matter if they lived in the US or in USSR or in France or in China or in Czechoslovakia.
By exposing history in such a democratic way, through social media, we show that people in power are not the only ones making choices.
That gives any user a possibility of reclaiming history.
Ordinary people matter.
They have an impact.
Ideas matter.
Journalists, scientists, philosophers matter.
We shape society.
We all make history.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In terms of invention, I'd like to tell you the tale of one of my favorite projects.
I think it's one of the most exciting that I'm working on, but I think it's also the simplest.
It's a project that has the potential to make a huge impact around the world.
It addresses one of the biggest health issues on the planet, the number one cause of death in children under five.
Which is ...?
Water-borne diseases? Diarrhea? Malnutrition?
No.
It's breathing the smoke from indoor cooking fires -- acute respiratory infections caused by this.
Can you believe that?
Can't we make cleaner burning cooking fuels?
Can't we make better stoves?
How is it that this can lead to over two million deaths every year?
I know Bill Joy was talking to you about the wonders of carbon nanotubes, so I'm going to talk to you about the wonders of carbon macro-tubes, which is charcoal.
(Laughter) So this is a picture of rural Haiti.
You'll see scenes like this all over the island.
It leads to all sorts of environmental problems and problems that affect people throughout the nation.
A couple years ago there was severe flooding that led to thousands of deaths -- that's directly attributable to the fact that there are no trees on the hills to stabilize the soil.
So the rains come -- they go down the rivers and the flooding happens.
Now one of the reasons why there are so few trees is this: people need to cook, and they harvest wood and they make charcoal in order to do it.
It's not that people are ignorant to the environmental damage.
They know perfectly well, but they have no other choice.
Fossil fuels are not available, and solar energy doesn't cook the way that they like their food prepared.
And so this is what they do.
You'll find families like this who go out into the forest to find a tree, cut it down and make charcoal out of it.
So not surprisingly, there's a lot of effort that's been done to look at alternative cooking fuels.
About four years ago, I took a team of students down to Haiti and we worked with Peace Corps volunteers there.
This is one such volunteer and this is a device that he had built in the village where he worked.
And the idea was that you could take waste paper; you could compress it and make briquettes that could be used for fuel.
But this device was very slow.
So our engineering students went to work on it and with some very simple changes, they were able to triple the throughput of this device.
So you could imagine they were very excited about it.
And they took the briquettes back to MIT so that they could test them.
And one of the things that they found was they didn't burn.
So it was a little discouraging to the students.
(Laughter) And in fact, if you look closely, right here you can see it says, "US Peace Corps."
As it turns out, there actually wasn't any waste paper in this village.
And while it was a good use of government paperwork for this volunteer to bring it back with him to his village, it was 800 kilometers away.
And so we thought perhaps there might be a better way to come up with an alternative cooking fuel.
What we wanted to do is we wanted to make a fuel that used something that was readily available on the local level.
You see these all over Haiti as well.
And the waste product from them after you extract the juice from the sugarcane is called "bagasse."
It has no other use.
It has no nutritional value, so they don't feed it to the animals.
It just sits in a pile near the sugar mill until eventually they burn it.
What we wanted to do was we wanted to find a way to harness this waste resource and turn it into a fuel that would be something that people could easily cook with, something like charcoal.
So over the next couple of years, students and I worked to develop a process.
So you start with the bagasse, and then you take a very simple kiln that you can make out of a waste fifty five-gallon oil drum.
After some time, after setting it on fire, you seal it to restrict the oxygen that goes into the kiln, and then you end up with this carbonized material here.
However, you can't burn this.
It's too fine and it burns too quickly to be useful for cooking.
So we had to try to find a way to form it into useful briquettes.
And conveniently, one of my students was from Ghana, and he remembered a dish his mom used to make for him called "kokonte," which is a very sticky porridge made out of the cassava root.
And so what we did was we looked, and we found that cassava is indeed grown in Haiti, under the name of "manioc."
In fact, it's grown all over the world -- yucca, tapioca, manioc, cassava, it's all the same thing -- a very starchy root vegetable.
And you can make a very thick, sticky porridge out of it, which you can use to bind together the charcoal briquettes.
So we did this. We went down to Haiti.
These are the graduates of the first Ecole de Charbon, or Charcoal Institute.
And these -- (Laughter) That's right. So I'm actually an instructor at MIT as well as CIT.
And these are the briquettes that we made.
Now I'm going to take you to a different continent.
This is India and this is the most commonly used cooking fuel in India.
And more than in Haiti, this produces really smoky fires, and this is where you see the health impacts of cooking with cow dung and biomass as a fuel.
Kids and women are especially affected by it, because they're the ones who are around the cooking fires.
So we wanted to see if we could introduce this charcoal-making technology there.
Well, unfortunately, they didn't have sugarcane and they didn't have cassava, but that didn't stop us.
What we did was we found what were the locally available sources of biomass.
And there was wheat straw and there was rice straw in this area.
And what we could use as a binder was actually small amounts of cow manure, which they used ordinarily for their fuel.
And we did side-by-side tests, and here you can see the charcoal briquettes and here the cow dung.
And you can see that it's a lot cleaner burning of a cooking fuel.
And in fact, it heats the water a lot more quickly.
And so we were very happy, thus far.
But one of the things that we found was when we did side-by-side comparisons with wood charcoal, it didn't burn as long.
And the briquettes crumbled a little bit and we lost energy as they fell apart as they were cooking.
So we wanted to try to find a way to make a stronger briquette so that we could compete with wood charcoal in the markets in Haiti.
So we went back to MIT, we took out the Instron machine and we figured out what sort of forces you needed in order to compress a briquette to the level that you actually are getting improved performance out of it?
And at the same time that we had students in the lab looking at this, we also had community partners in Haiti working to develop the process, to improve it and make it more accessible to people in the villages there.
And after some time, we developed a low-cost press that allows you to produce charcoal, which actually now burns not only -- actually, it burns longer, cleaner than wood charcoal.
So now we're in a situation where we have a product, which is actually better than what you can buy in Haiti in the marketplace, which is a very wonderful place to be.
In Haiti alone, about 30 million trees are cut down every year.
There's a possibility of this being implemented and saving a good portion of those.
In addition, the revenue generated from that charcoal is 260 million dollars.
That's an awful lot for a country like Haiti -- with a population of eight million and an average income of less than 400 dollars.
So this is where we're also moving ahead with our charcoal project.
And one of the things that I think is also interesting, is I have a friend up at UC Berkeley who's been doing risk analysis.
And he's looked at the problem of the health impacts of burning wood versus charcoal.
And he's found that worldwide, you could prevent a million deaths switching from wood to charcoal as a cooking fuel.
That's remarkable, but up until now, there weren't ways to do it without cutting down trees.
But now we have a way that's using an agricultural waste material to create a cooking fuel.
One of the really exciting things, though, is something that came out of the trip that I took to Ghana just last month.
And I think it's the coolest thing, and it's even lower tech than what you just saw, if you can imagine such a thing.
Here it is.
And the beauty of this is that you don't need to form briquettes -- it comes ready made.
And actually, like Nick, I brought samples.
(Laughter) So we can pass these around.
They're fully functional, field-tested, ready to roll out.
(Laughter) And I think one of the things which is also remarkable about this technology, is that the technology transfer is so easy.
Compared to the sugarcane charcoal, where we have to teach people how to form it into briquettes and you have the extra step of cooking the binder, this comes pre-briquetted.
And this is about the most exciting thing in my life right now, which is perhaps a sad commentary on my life.
(Laughter) But once you see it, like you guys in the front row -- All right, yeah, OK.
So anyway -- (Laughter) Here it is.
And this is, I think, a perfect example of what Robert Wright was talking about in those non-zero-sum things.
So not only do you have health benefits, you have environmental benefits.
But this is one of the incredibly rare situations where you also have economic benefits.
People can make their own cooking fuel from waste products.
They can generate income from this.
They can save the money that they were going to spend on charcoal and they can produce excess and sell it in the market to people who aren't making their own.
It's really rare that you don't have trade-offs between health and economics, or environment and economics.
So this is a project that I just find extremely exciting and I'm really looking forward to see where it takes us.
So when we talk about, now, the future we will create, one of the things that I think is necessary is to have a very clear vision of the world that we live in.
And now, I don't actually mean the world that we live in.
I mean the world where women spend two to three hours everyday grinding grain for their families to eat.
I mean the world where advanced building materials means cement roofing tiles that are made by hand, and where, when you work 10 hours a day, you're still only earning 60 dollars in a month.
I mean the world where women and children spend 40 billion hours a year fetching water.
That's as if the entire workforce of the state of California worked full time for a year doing nothing but fetching water.
It's a place where, for example, if this were India, in this room, only three of us would have a car.
If this were Afghanistan, only one person in this room would know how the use the Internet.
If this were Zambia -- 300 of you would be farmers, 100 of you would have AIDS or HIV.
And more than half of you would be living on less than a dollar a day.
These are the issues that we need to come up with solutions for.
These are the issues that we need to be training our engineers, our designers, our business people, our entrepreneurs to be facing.
These are the solutions that we need to find.
I have a few areas that I believe are especially important that we address.
One of them is creating technologies to promote micro-finance and micro-enterprise, so that people who are living below the poverty line can find a way to move out -- and that they're not doing it using the same traditional basket making, poultry rearing, etc.
But there are new technologies and new products that they can make on a small scale.
The next thing I believe is that we need to create technologies for poor farmers to add value to their own crops.
And we need to rethink our development strategies, so that we're not promoting educational campaigns to get them to stop being farmers, but rather to stop being poor farmers.
And we need to think about how we can do that effectively.
We need to work with the people in these communities and give them the resources and the tools that they need to solve their own problems.
We shouldn't be doing it from outside.
So we need to create this future, and we need to start doing it now.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you, incredible.
Tell us -- just while we see if someone has a question -- just tell us about one of the other things that you've worked on.
Amy Smith: Some of the other things we're working on are ways to do low-cost water quality testing, so that communities can maintain their own water systems, know when they're working, know when they treat them, etc.
We're also looking at low-cost water-treatment systems.
One of the really exciting things is looking at solar water disinfection and improving the ability to be able to do that.
CA: What's the bottleneck preventing this stuff getting from scale?
Do you need to find entrepreneurs, or venture capitalists, or what do you need to take what you've got and get it to scale?
AS: I think it's large numbers of people moving it forward.
It's a difficult thing -- it's a marketplace which is very fragmented and a consumer population with no income.
So you can't use the same models that you use in the United States for making things move forward.
And we're a pretty small staff, which is me.
(Laughter) So, you know, I do what I can with the students.
We have 30 students a year go out into the field and try to implement this and move it forward.
The other thing is you have to do things with a long time frame, as, you know, you can't expect to get something done in a year or two years; you have to be looking five or 10 years ahead.
But I think with the vision to do that, we can move forward.
I think I was supposed to talk about my new book, which is called "Blink," and it's about snap judgments and first impressions.
And it comes out in January, and I hope you all buy it in triplicate.
(Laughter) But I was thinking about this, and I realized that although my new book makes me happy, and I think would make my mother happy, it's not really about happiness.
So I decided instead, I would talk about someone who I think has done as much to make Americans happy as perhaps anyone over the last 20 years, a man who is a great personal hero of mine: someone by the name of Howard Moskowitz, who is most famous for reinventing spaghetti sauce.
Howard's about this high, and he's round, and he's in his 60s, and he has big huge glasses and thinning gray hair, and he has a kind of wonderful exuberance and vitality, and he has a parrot, and he loves the opera, and he's a great aficionado of medieval history.
And by profession, he's a psychophysicist.
Now, I should tell you that I have no idea what psychophysics is, although at some point in my life, I dated a girl for two years who was getting her doctorate in psychophysics.
Which should tell you something about that relationship.
(Laughter) As far as I know, psychophysics is about measuring things.
And Howard is very interested in measuring things.
And he graduated with his doctorate from Harvard, and he set up a little consulting shop in White Plains, New York.
And one of his first clients was Pepsi.
This is many years ago, back in the early 70s.
And Pepsi came to Howard and they said, "You know, there's this new thing called aspartame, and we would like to make Diet Pepsi.
We'd like you to figure out how much aspartame we should put in each can of Diet Pepsi in order to have the perfect drink."
Now that sounds like an incredibly straightforward question to answer, and that's what Howard thought.
Because Pepsi told him, "We're working with a band between eight and 12 percent.
Anything below eight percent sweetness is not sweet enough; anything above 12 percent sweetness is too sweet.
We want to know: what's the sweet spot between 8 and 12?"
Now, if I gave you this problem to do, you would all say, it's very simple.
What we do is you make up a big experimental batch of Pepsi, at every degree of sweetness -- eight percent, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, all the way up to 12 -- and we try this out with thousands of people, and we plot the results on a curve, and we take the most popular concentration, right?
Howard does the experiment, and he gets the data back, and he plots it on a curve, and all of a sudden he realizes it's not a nice bell curve.
In fact, the data doesn't make any sense.
It's a mess. It's all over the place.
Now, most people in that business, in the world of testing food and such, are not dismayed when the data comes back a mess.
They think, "Well, you know, figuring out what people think about cola's not that easy."
"You know, maybe we made an error somewhere along the way."
"You know, let's just make an educated guess," and they simply point and they go for 10 percent, right in the middle.
Howard is not so easily placated.
Howard is a man of a certain degree of intellectual standards.
And this was not good enough for him, and this question bedeviled him for years.
And he would think it through and say, "What was wrong?
Why could we not make sense of this experiment with Diet Pepsi?"
And one day, he was sitting in a diner in White Plains, about to go trying to dream up some work for Nescafé.
And suddenly, like a bolt of lightning, the answer came to him.
And that is, that when they analyzed the Diet Pepsi data, they were asking the wrong question.
They were looking for the perfect Pepsi, and they should have been looking for the perfect Pepsis.
This was an enormous revelation.
This was one of the most brilliant breakthroughs in all of food science.
Howard immediately went on the road, and he would go to conferences around the country, and he would stand up and say, "You had been looking for the perfect Pepsi.
You should be looking for the perfect Pepsis."
And people would look at him blankly and say, "What are you talking about? Craziness."
And they would say, "Move! Next!"
Tried to get business, nobody would hire him -- he was obsessed, though, and he talked about it and talked about it.
Howard loves the Yiddish expression "To a worm in horseradish, the world is horseradish."
This was his horseradish.
And finally, he had a breakthrough.
Vlasic Pickles came to him, and they said, "Doctor Moskowitz, we want to make the perfect pickle."
And he said, "There is no perfect pickle; there are only perfect pickles."
And he came back to them and he said, "You don't just need to improve your regular; you need to create zesty."
And that's where we got zesty pickles.
Then the next person came to him: Campbell's Soup.
And this was even more important.
In fact, Campbell's Soup is where Howard made his reputation.
Campbell's made Prego, and Prego, in the early 80s, was struggling next to Ragù, which was the dominant spaghetti sauce of the 70s and 80s.
In the industry -- I don't know whether you care about this, or how much time I have to go into this.
But it was, technically speaking -- this is an aside -- Prego is a better tomato sauce than Ragù.
The quality of the tomato paste is much better; the spice mix is far superior; it adheres to the pasta in a much more pleasing way.
In fact, they would do the famous bowl test back in the 70s with Ragù and Prego.
You'd have a plate of spaghetti, and you would pour it on, right?
And the Ragù would all go to the bottom, and the Prego would sit on top.
That's called "adherence."
And, anyway, despite the fact that they were far superior in adherence, and the quality of their tomato paste, Prego was struggling.
So they came to Howard, and they said, fix us.
And Howard looked at their product line, and he said, what you have is a dead tomato society.
So he said, this is what I want to do.
And he got together with the Campbell's soup kitchen, and he made 45 varieties of spaghetti sauce.
And he varied them according to every conceivable way that you can vary tomato sauce: by sweetness, by level of garlic, by tomatoey-ness, by tartness, by sourness, by visible solids -- my favorite term in the spaghetti sauce business.
(Laughter) Every conceivable way you can vary spaghetti sauce, he varied spaghetti sauce.
And then he took this whole raft of 45 spaghetti sauces, and he went on the road.
He went to New York, to Chicago, he went to Jacksonville, to Los Angeles.
And he sat them down for two hours, and over the course of that two hours, he gave them ten bowls.
Ten small bowls of pasta, with a different spaghetti sauce on each one.
And after they ate each bowl, they had to rate, from 0 to 100, how good they thought the spaghetti sauce was.
At the end of that process, after doing it for months and months, he had a mountain of data about how the American people feel about spaghetti sauce.
And then he analyzed the data.
Did he look for the most popular variety of spaghetti sauce?
No! Howard doesn't believe that there is such a thing.
Instead, he looked at the data, and he said, let's see if we can group all these different data points into clusters.
Let's see if they congregate around certain ideas.
And sure enough, if you sit down, and you analyze all this data on spaghetti sauce, you realize that all Americans fall into one of three groups.
There are people who like their spaghetti sauce plain; there are people who like their spaghetti sauce spicy; and there are people who like it extra chunky.
And of those three facts, the third one was the most significant, because at the time, in the early 1980s, if you went to a supermarket, you would not find extra-chunky spaghetti sauce.
And Prego turned to Howard, and they said, "You're telling me that one third of Americans crave extra-chunky spaghetti sauce and yet no one is servicing their needs?"
(Laughter) And Prego then went back, and completely reformulated their spaghetti sauce, and came out with a line of extra chunky that immediately and completely took over the spaghetti sauce business in this country.
And over the next 10 years, they made 600 million dollars off their line of extra-chunky sauces.
Everyone else in the industry looked at what Howard had done, and they said, "Oh my god! We've been thinking all wrong!"
And that's when you started to get seven different kinds of vinegar, and 14 different kinds of mustard, and 71 different kinds of olive oil.
And then eventually even Ragù hired Howard, and Howard did the exact same thing for Ragù that he did for Prego.
And today, if you go to a really good supermarket, do you know how many Ragùs there are?
36!
In six varieties: Cheese, Light, Robusto, Rich &amp; Hearty, Old World Traditional -- Extra-Chunky Garden.
(Laughter) That's Howard's doing.
Now why is that important?
(Laughter) It is, in fact, enormously important.
What Howard did is he fundamentally changed the way the food industry thinks about making you happy.
Assumption number one in the food industry used to be that the way to find out what people want to eat, what will make people happy, is to ask them.
And for years and years and years, Ragù and Prego would have focus groups, and they would sit you down, and they would say, "What do you want in a spaghetti sauce?
And for all those years -- 20, 30 years -- through all those focus group sessions, no one ever said they wanted extra-chunky.
Even though at least a third of them, deep in their hearts, actually did.
(Laughter) People don't know what they want!
As Howard loves to say, "The mind knows not what the tongue wants."
It's a mystery!
(Laughter) And a critically important step in understanding our own desires and tastes is to realize that we cannot always explain what we want, deep down.
If I asked all of you, for example, in this room, what you want in a coffee, you know what you'd say?
It's what people always say when you ask them.
"What do you like?" "Dark, rich, hearty roast!"
What percentage of you actually like a dark, rich, hearty roast?
According to Howard, somewhere between 25 and 27 percent of you.
Most of you like milky, weak coffee.
(Laughter) But you will never, ever say to someone who asks you what you want that "I want a milky, weak coffee."
So that's number one thing that Howard did.
Number two thing that Howard did is he made us realize -- it's another very critical point -- he made us realize the importance of what he likes to call "horizontal segmentation."
Why is this critical?
Because this is the way the food industry thought before Howard.
What were they obsessed with in the early 80s?
In particular, they were obsessed with the story of Grey Poupon.
Used to be, there were two mustards: French's and Gulden's.
What were they? Yellow mustard.
What's in it?
Grey Poupon came along, with a Dijon.
Right?
Much more volatile brown mustard seed, some white wine, a nose hit, much more delicate aromatics.
They put it in a little tiny glass jar, with a wonderful enameled label on it, made it look French, even though it's made in Oxnard, California.
(Laughter) And instead of charging a dollar fifty for the eight-ounce bottle, the way that French's and Gulden's did, they decided to charge four dollars.
With the guy in the Rolls Royce, eating the Grey Poupon.
Another pulls up, and says, "Do you have any Grey Poupon?"
And the whole thing, after they did that, Grey Poupon takes off!
Takes over the mustard business!
And everyone's take-home lesson from that was that the way to make people happy is to give them something that is more expensive, something to aspire to.
It's to make them turn their back on what they think they like now, and reach out for something higher up the mustard hierarchy.
(Laughter) A better mustard! A more expensive mustard!
A mustard of more sophistication and culture and meaning.
And Howard looked to that and said, "That's wrong!"
Mustard does not exist on a hierarchy.
Mustard exists, just like tomato sauce, on a horizontal plane.
There is no good mustard or bad mustard.
There is no perfect mustard or imperfect mustard.
There are only different kinds of mustards that suit different kinds of people.
He fundamentally democratized the way we think about taste.
And for that, as well, we owe Howard Moskowitz a huge vote of thanks.
Third thing that Howard did, and perhaps the most important, is Howard confronted the notion of the Platonic dish.
(Laughter) What do I mean by that?
(Laughter) For the longest time in the food industry, there was a sense that there was one way, a perfect way, to make a dish.
You go to Chez Panisse, they give you the red-tail sashimi with roasted pumpkin seeds in a something something reduction.
They don't give you five options on the reduction.
They don't say, "Do you want the extra-chunky reduction, or ...?"
No!
Because the chef at Chez Panisse has a Platonic notion about red-tail sashimi.
"This is the way it ought to be."
And she serves it that way time and time again, and if you quarrel with her, she will say, "You know what? You're wrong!
Now that same idea fueled the commercial food industry as well.
They had a Platonic notion of what tomato sauce was.
And where did that come from? It came from Italy.
Italian tomato sauce is what?
The culture of tomato sauce was thin.
When we talked about "authentic tomato sauce" in the 1970s, we talked about Italian tomato sauce, we talked about the earliest Ragùs, which had no visible solids, right?
Which were thin, you just put a little bit and it sunk down to the bottom of the pasta.
That's what it was.
And why were we attached to that?
Because we thought that what it took to make people happy was to provide them with the most culturally authentic tomato sauce, A.
And B, we thought that if we gave them the culturally authentic tomato sauce, then they would embrace it.
And that's what would please the maximum number of people.
In other words, people in the cooking world were looking for cooking universals.
They were looking for one way to treat all of us.
And it's good reason for them to be obsessed with the idea of universals, because all of science, through the 19th century and much of the 20th, was obsessed with universals.
Psychologists, medical scientists, economists were all interested in finding out the rules that govern the way all of us behave.
But that changed, right?
What is the great revolution in science of the last 10, 15 years?
It is the movement from the search for universals to the understanding of variability.
Now in medical science, we don't want to know, necessarily, just how cancer works, we want to know how your cancer is different from my cancer.
I guess my cancer different from your cancer.
Genetics has opened the door to the study of human variability.
What Howard Moskowitz was doing was saying, "This same revolution needs to happen in the world of tomato sauce."
And for that, we owe him a great vote of thanks.
I'll give you one last illustration of variability, and that is -- oh, I'm sorry.
Howard not only believed that, but he took it a second step, which was to say that when we pursue universal principles in food, we aren't just making an error; we are actually doing ourselves a massive disservice.
And the example he used was coffee.
And coffee is something he did a lot of work with, with Nescafé.
If I were to ask all of you to try and come up with a brand of coffee -- a type of coffee, a brew -- that made all of you happy, and then I asked you to rate that coffee, the average score in this room for coffee would be about 60 on a scale of 0 to 100.
If, however, you allowed me to break you into coffee clusters, maybe three or four coffee clusters, and I could make coffee just for each of those individual clusters, your scores would go from 60 to 75 or 78.
The difference between coffee at 60 and coffee at 78 is a difference between coffee that makes you wince, and coffee that makes you deliriously happy.
That is the final, and I think most beautiful lesson, of Howard Moskowitz: that in embracing the diversity of human beings, we will find a surer way to true happiness.
Thank you.
You know, I'm struck by how one of the implicit themes of TED is compassion, these very moving demonstrations we've just seen: HIV in Africa, President Clinton last night.
And I'd like to do a little collateral thinking, if you will, about compassion and bring it from the global level to the personal.
I'm a psychologist, but rest assured, I will not bring it to the scrotal.
(Laughter) There was a very important study done a while ago at Princeton Theological Seminary that speaks to why it is that when all of us have so many opportunities to help, we do sometimes, and we don't other times.
A group of divinity students at the Princeton Theological Seminary were told that they were going to give a practice sermon and they were each given a sermon topic.
Half of those students were given, as a topic, the parable of the Good Samaritan: the man who stopped the stranger in -- to help the stranger in need by the side of the road.
Half were given random Bible topics.
Then one by one, they were told they had to go to another building and give their sermon.
As they went from the first building to the second, each of them passed a man who was bent over and moaning, clearly in need. The question is: Did they stop to help?
The more interesting question is: Did it matter they were contemplating the parable of the Good Samaritan? Answer: No, not at all.
What turned out to determine whether someone would stop and help a stranger in need was how much of a hurry they thought they were in -- were they feeling they were late, or were they absorbed in what they were going to talk about.
And this is, I think, the predicament of our lives: that we don't take every opportunity to help because our focus is in the wrong direction.
There's a new field in brain science, social neuroscience.
This studies the circuitry in two people's brains that activates while they interact.
And the new thinking about compassion from social neuroscience is that our default wiring is to help.
That is to say, if we attend to the other person, we automatically empathize, we automatically feel with them.
There are these newly identified neurons, mirror neurons, that act like a neuro Wi-Fi, activating in our brain exactly the areas activated in theirs. We feel "with" automatically.
And if that person is in need, if that person is suffering, we're automatically prepared to help. At least that's the argument.
But then the question is: Why don't we?
And I think this speaks to a spectrum that goes from complete self-absorption, to noticing, to empathy and to compassion.
And the simple fact is, if we are focused on ourselves, if we're preoccupied, as we so often are throughout the day, we don't really fully notice the other.
And this difference between the self and the other focus can be very subtle.
I was doing my taxes the other day, and I got to the point where I was listing all of the donations I gave, and I had an epiphany, it was -- I came to my check to the Seva Foundation and I noticed that I thought, boy, my friend Larry Brilliant would really be happy that I gave money to Seva.
Then I realized that what I was getting from giving was a narcissistic hit -- that I felt good about myself.
Then I started to think about the people in the Himalayas whose cataracts would be helped, and I realized that I went from this kind of narcissistic self-focus to altruistic joy, to feeling good for the people that were being helped. I think that's a motivator.
But this distinction between focusing on ourselves and focusing on others is one that I encourage us all to pay attention to.
You can see it at a gross level in the world of dating.
I was at a sushi restaurant a while back and I overheard two women talking about the brother of one woman, who was in the singles scene. And this woman says, "My brother is having trouble getting dates, so he's trying speed dating." I don't know if you know speed dating?
Women sit at tables and men go from table to table, and there's a clock and a bell, and at five minutes, bingo, the conversation ends and the woman can decide whether to give her card or her email address to the man for follow up. And this woman says, "My brother's never gotten a card, and I know exactly why.
The moment he sits down, he starts talking non-stop about himself; he never asks about the woman."
And I was doing some research in the Sunday Styles section of The New York Times, looking at the back stories of marriages -- because they're very interesting -- and I came to the marriage of Alice Charney Epstein. And she said that when she was in the dating scene, she had a simple test she put people to.
The test was: from the moment they got together, how long it would take the guy to ask her a question with the word "you" in it.
And apparently Epstein aced the test, therefore the article.
(Laughter) Now this is a -- it's a little test I encourage you to try out at a party.
Here at TED there are great opportunities.
The Harvard Business Review recently had an article called "The Human Moment," about how to make real contact with a person at work. And they said, well, the fundamental thing you have to do is turn off your BlackBerry, close your laptop, end your daydream and pay full attention to the person.
There is a newly coined word in the English language for the moment when the person we're with whips out their BlackBerry or answers that cell phone, and all of a sudden we don't exist.
The word is "pizzled": it's a combination of puzzled and pissed off.
(Laughter) I think it's quite apt. It's our empathy, it's our tuning in which separates us from Machiavellians or sociopaths.
I have a brother-in-law who's an expert on horror and terror -- he wrote the Annotated Dracula, the Essential Frankenstein -- he was trained as a Chaucer scholar, but he was born in Transylvania and I think it affected him a little bit.
At any rate, at one point my brother-in-law, Leonard, decided to write a book about a serial killer.
This is a man who terrorized the very vicinity we're in many years ago. He was known as the Santa Cruz strangler.
And before he was arrested, he had murdered his grandparents, his mother and five co-eds at UC Santa Cruz.
So my brother-in-law goes to interview this killer and he realizes when he meets him that this guy is absolutely terrifying.
For one thing, he's almost seven feet tall.
But that's not the most terrifying thing about him.
The scariest thing is that his IQ is 160: a certified genius.
But there is zero correlation between IQ and emotional empathy, feeling with the other person.
They're controlled by different parts of the brain.
So at one point, my brother-in-law gets up the courage to ask the one question he really wants to know the answer to, and that is: how could you have done it?
Didn't you feel any pity for your victims?
These were very intimate murders -- he strangled his victims.
And the strangler says very matter-of-factly, "Oh no. If I'd felt the distress, I could not have done it.
I had to turn that part of me off. I had to turn that part of me off."
And I think that that is very troubling, and in a sense, I've been reflecting on turning that part of us off.
When we focus on ourselves in any activity, we do turn that part of ourselves off if there's another person.
Think about going shopping and think about the possibilities of a compassionate consumerism.
Right now, as Bill McDonough has pointed out, the objects that we buy and use have hidden consequences.
We're all unwitting victims of a collective blind spot.
We don't notice and don't notice that we don't notice the toxic molecules emitted by a carpet or by the fabric on the seats.
Or we don't know if that fabric is a technological or manufacturing nutrient; it can be reused or does it just end up at landfill? In other words, we're oblivious to the ecological and public health and social and economic justice consequences of the things we buy and use.
In a sense, the room itself is the elephant in the room, but we don't see it. And we've become victims of a system that points us elsewhere. Consider this.
There's a wonderful book called Stuff: The Hidden Life of Everyday Objects.
And it talks about the back story of something like a t-shirt.
And it talks about where the cotton was grown and the fertilizers that were used and the consequences for soil of that fertilizer. And it mentions, for instance, that cotton is very resistant to textile dye; about 60 percent washes off into wastewater.
And it's well known by epidemiologists that kids who live near textile works tend to have high rates of leukemia.
There's a company, Bennett and Company, that supplies Polo.com, Victoria's Secret -- they, because of their CEO, who's aware of this, in China formed a joint venture with their dye works to make sure that the wastewater would be properly taken care of before it returned to the groundwater.
Right now, we don't have the option to choose the virtuous t-shirt over the non-virtuous one. So what would it take to do that?
Well, I've been thinking. For one thing, there's a new electronic tagging technology that allows any store to know the entire history of any item on the shelves in that store.
You can track it back to the factory. Once you can track it back to the factory, you can look at the manufacturing processes that were used to make it, and if it's virtuous, you can label it that way. Or if it's not so virtuous, you can go into -- today, go into any store, put your scanner on a palm onto a barcode, which will take you to a website.
They have it for people with allergies to peanuts.
That website could tell you things about that object.
In other words, at point of purchase, we might be able to make a compassionate choice.
There's a saying in the world of information science: ultimately everybody will know everything.
And the question is: will it make a difference?
Some time ago when I was working for The New York Times, it was in the '80s, I did an article on what was then a new problem in New York -- it was homeless people on the streets.
And I spent a couple of weeks going around with a social work agency that ministered to the homeless. And I realized seeing the homeless through their eyes that almost all of them were psychiatric patients that had nowhere to go. They had a diagnosis. It made me -- what it did was to shake me out of the urban trance where, when we see, when we're passing someone who's homeless in the periphery of our vision, it stays on the periphery.
We don't notice and therefore we don't act.
One day soon after that -- it was a Friday -- at the end of the day, I went down -- I was going down to the subway. It was rush hour and thousands of people were streaming down the stairs.
And all of a sudden as I was going down the stairs I noticed that there was a man slumped to the side, shirtless, not moving, and people were just stepping over him -- hundreds and hundreds of people.
And because my urban trance had been somehow weakened, I found myself stopping to find out what was wrong.
The moment I stopped, half a dozen other people immediately ringed the same guy.
And we found out that he was Hispanic, he didn't speak any English, he had no money, he'd been wandering the streets for days, starving, and he'd fainted from hunger.
Immediately someone went to get orange juice, someone brought a hotdog, someone brought a subway cop.
This guy was back on his feet immediately.
But all it took was that simple act of noticing, and so I'm optimistic.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The most romantic thing to ever happen to me online started out the way most things do: without me, and not online.
On December 10, 1896, the man on the medal, Alfred Nobel, died.
One hundred years later, exactly, actually, December 10, 1996, this charming lady, Wislawa Szymborska, won the Nobel Prize for literature.
She's a Polish poet.
She's a big deal, obviously, but back in '96, I thought I had never heard of her, and when I checked out her work, I found this sweet little poem, "Four in the Morning."
"The hour from night to day.
The hour from side to side.
The hour for those past thirty..."
And it goes on, but as soon as I read this poem, I fell for it hard, so hard, I suspected we must have met somewhere before.
Had I shared an elevator ride with this poem?
Did I flirt with this poem in a coffee shop somewhere?
I could not place it, and it bugged me, and then in the coming week or two, I would just be watching an old movie, and this would happen.
(Video) Groucho Marx: Charlie, you should have come to the first party.
We didn't get home till around four in the morning.
Rives: My roommates would have the TV on, and this would happen.
(Music: Seinfeld theme) (Video) George Costanza: Oh boy, I was up til four in the morning watching that Omen trilogy.
Rives: I would be listening to music, and this would happen.
(Video) Elton John: ♪ It's four o'clock in the morning, damn it. ♪ Rives: So you can see what was going on, right?
Obviously, the demigods of coincidence were just messing with me.
Some people get a number stuck in their head, you may recognize a certain name or a tune, some people get nothing, but four in the morning was in me now, but mildly, like a groin injury.
I always assumed it would just go away on its own eventually, and I never talked about it with anybody, but it did not, and I totally did.
In 2007, I was invited to speak at TED for the second time, and since I was still an authority on nothing, I thought, what if I made a multimedia presentation on a topic so niche it is actually inconsequential or actually cockamamie.
So my talk had some of my four in the morning examples, but it also had examples from my fellow TED speakers that year.
I found four in the morning in a novel by Isabel Allende.
I found a really great one in the autobiography of Bill Clinton.
I found a couple in the work of Matt Groening, although Matt Groening told me later that he could not make my talk because it was a morning session and I gather that he is not an early riser.
However, had Matt been there, he would have seen this mock conspiracy theory that was un-freaking-canny for me to assemble.
It was totally contrived just for that room, just for that moment.
That's how we did it in the pre-TED.com days.
It was fun. That was pretty much it.
When I got home, though, the emails started coming in from people who had seen the talk live, beginning with, and this is still my favorite, "Here's another one for your collection: 'It's the friends you can call up at 4 a.m. that matter.'" The sentiment is Marlene Dietrich.
The email itself was from another very sexy European type, TED Curator Chris Anderson.
(Laughter) Chris found this quote on a coffee cup or something, and I'm thinking, this man is the Typhoid Mary of ideas worth spreading, and I have infected him.
I am contagious, which was confirmed less than a week later when a Hallmark employee scanned and sent an actual greeting card with that same quotation.
As a bonus, she hooked me up with a second one they make.
It says, "Just knowing I can call you at four in the morning if I need to makes me not really need to," which I love, because together these are like, "Hallmark: When you care enough to send the very best twice, phrased slightly differently."
I was not surprised at the TEDster and New Yorker magazine overlap.
A bunch of people sent me this when it came out.
"It's 4 a.m.—maybe you'd sleep better if you bought some crap."
I was surprised at the TEDster/"Rugrats" overlap.
More than one person sent me this.
(Video) Didi Pickles: It's four o'clock in the morning.
Why on Earth are you making chocolate pudding?
Stu Pickles: Because I've lost control of my life.
(Laughter) Rives: And then there was the lone TEDster who was disgruntled I had overlooked what he considers to be a classic.
(Video) Roy Neary: Get up, get up! I'm not kidding. Ronnie Neary: Is there an accident?
Roy: No, it's not an accident. You wanted to get out of the house anyway, right?
Ronnie: Not at four o'clock in the morning.
Rives: So that's "Close Encounters," and the main character is all worked up because aliens, momentously, have chosen to show themselves to earthlings at four in the morning, which does make that a very solid example.
Those were all really solid examples.
They did not get me any closer to understanding why I thought I recognized this one particular poem.
But they followed the pattern. They played along.
Right? Four in the morning as this scapegoat hour when all these dramatic occurrences allegedly occur.
Maybe this was some kind of cliche that had never been taxonomized before.
Maybe I was on the trail of a new meme or something.
Just when things were getting pretty interesting, things got really interesting.
TED.com launched, later that year, with a bunch of videos from past talks, including mine, and I started receiving "four in the morning" citations from what seemed like every time zone on the planet.
Much of it was content I never would have found on my own if I was looking for it, and I was not.
I don't know anybody with juvenile diabetes.
I probably would have missed the booklet, "Grilled Cheese at Four O'Clock in the Morning."
(Laughter) I do not subscribe to Crochet Today! magazine, although it looks delightful. (Laughter) Take note of those clock ends.
This is a college student's suggestion for what a "four in the morning" gang sign should look like.
People sent me magazine ads.
They took photographs in grocery stores.
I got a ton of graphic novels and comics.
A lot of good quality work, too: "The Sandman," "Watchmen."
There's a very cute example here from "Calvin and Hobbes."
In fact, the oldest citation anybody sent in was from a cartoon from the Stone Age.
Take a look.
(Video) Wilma Flintstone: Like how early?
Fred Flintstone: Like at 4 a.m., that's how early.
Rives: And the flip side of the timeline, this is from the 31st century.
A thousand years from now, people are still doing this.
(Video): Announcer: The time is 4 a.m.
(Laughter) Rives: It shows the spectrum.
I received so many songs, TV shows, movies, like from dismal to famous, I could give you a four-hour playlist.
If I just stick to modern male movie stars, I keep it to the length of about a commercial.
Here's your sampler.
(Movie montage of "It's 4 a.m.") (Laughter) Rives: So somewhere along the line, I realized I have a hobby I didn't know I wanted, and it is crowdsourced.
But I was also thinking what you might be thinking, which is really, couldn't you do this with any hour of the day?
First of all, you are not getting clips like that about four in the afternoon.
Secondly, I did a little research.
You know, I was kind of interested.
If this is confirmation bias, there is so much confirmation, I am biased.
Literature probably shows it best.
There are a couple three in the mornings in Shakespeare.
There's a five in the morning.
There are seven four in the mornings, and they're all very dire.
In "Measure for Measure," it's the call time for the executioner.
Tolstoy gives Napoleon insomnia at four in the morning right before battle in "War and Peace."
Charlotte Brontë's "Jane Eyre" has got kind of a pivotal four in the morning, as does Emily Brontë's "Wuthering Heights."
"Lolita" has as a creepy four in the morning.
"Huckleberry Finn" has one in dialect.
Someone sent in H.G. Wells' "The Invisible Man."
Someone else sent in Ralph Ellison's "Invisible Man."
"The Great Gatsby" spends the last four in the morning of his life waiting for a lover who never shows, and the most famous wake-up in literature, perhaps, "The Metamorphosis."
First paragraph, the main character wakes up transformed into a giant cockroach, but we already know, cockroach notwithstanding, something is up with this guy.
Why? His alarm is set for four o'clock in the morning.
What kind of person would do that?
This kind of person would do that.
(Music) (4 a.m. alarm clock montage) (Video) Newcaster: Top of the hour. Time for the morning news.
But of course, there is no news yet.
Everyone's still asleep in their comfy, comfy beds.
Rives: Exactly.
So that's Lucy from the Peanuts, "Mommie Dearest", Rocky, first day of training, Nelson Mandela, first day in office, and Bart Simpson, which combined with a cockroach would give you one hell of a dinner party and gives me yet another category, people waking up, in my big old database.
Just imagine that your friends and your family have heard that you collect, say, stuffed polar bears, and they send them to you.
Even if you don't really, at a certain point, you totally collect stuffed polar bears, and your collection is probably pretty kick-ass.
And when I got to that point, I embraced it.
I got my curator on. I started fact checking, downloading, illegally screen-grabbing.
I started archiving.
My hobby had become a habit, and my habit gave me possibly the world's most eclectic Netflix queue.
At one point, it went, "Guys and Dolls: The Musical," "Last Tango in Paris," "Diary of a Wimpy Kid," "Porn Star: Legend of Ron Jeremy."
Why "Porn Star: Legend of Ron Jeremy"?
Because someone told me I would find this clip in there.
(Video) Ron Jeremy: I was born in Flushing, Queens on March, 12, 1953, at four o'clock in the morning.
Rives: Of course he was. (Laughter) (Applause) Yeah. Not only does it seem to make sense, it also answers the question, "What do Ron Jeremy and Simone de Beauvoir have in common?"
Simone de Beauvoir begins her entire autobiography with the sentence, "I was born at four o'clock in the morning," which I had because someone else had emailed it to me, and when they did, I had another bump up in my entry for this, because porn star Ron Jeremy and feminist Simone de Beauvoir are not just different people.
They are different people that have this thing connecting them, and I did not know if that is trivia or knowledge or inadvertent expertise, but I did wonder, is there maybe a cooler way to do this?
So last October, in gentleman scholar tradition, I put the entire collection online as "Museum of Four in the Morning."
You can click on that red "refresh" button.
It will take you at random to one of hundreds of snippets that are in the collection.
Here is a knockout poem by Billy Collins called "Forgetfulness."
(Video) Billy Collins: No wonder you rise in the middle of the night to look up the date of a famous battle in a book on war.
No wonder the moon in the window seems to have drifted out of a love poem that you used to know by heart.
Rives: So the first hour of this project was satisfying.
A Bollywood actor sang a line on a DVD in a cafe.
Half a globe away, a teenager made an Instagram video of it and sent it to me, a stranger.
Less than a week later, though, I received a little bit of grace.
I received a poignant tweet.
It was brief.
It just said, "Reminds me of an ancient mix tape."
The name was a pseudonym, actually, or a pseudo-pseudonym.
As soon as I saw the initials, and the profile pic, I knew immediately, my whole body knew immediately who this was, and I knew immediately what mix tape she was talking about.
(Music) L.D. was my college romance.
This is in the early '90s. I was an undegrad.
She was a grad student in the library sciences department.
Not the kind of librarian that takes her glasses off, lets her hair down, suddenly she's smoking hot.
She was already smoking hot, she was super dorky, and we had a December-May romance, meaning we started dating in December, and by May, she had graduated and became my one that got away.
But her mix tape did not get away.
I have kept this mix tape in a box with notes and postcards, not just from L.D., from my life, but for decades.
It's the kind of box where, if I have a girlfriend, I tend to hide it from her, and if I had a wife, I'm sure I would share it with her, but the story — (Laughter) — with this mix tape is there are seven songs per side, but no song titles.
Instead, L.D. has used the U.S. Library of Congress classification system, including page numbers, to leave me clues.
When I got this mix tape, I put it in my cassette player, I took it to the campus library, her library, I found 14 books on the shelves.
I remember bringing them all to my favorite corner table, and I read poems paired to songs like food to wine, paired, I can tell you, like saddle shoes to a cobalt blue vintage cotton dress.
I did this again last October.
I'm sitting there, I got new earbuds, old Walkman, I realize this is just the kind of extravagance I used to take for granted even when I was extravagant.
And then I thought, "Good for him."
"PG" is Slavic literature.
"7000" series Polish literature.
Z9A24 is a collection of 70 poems.
Page 31 is Wislawa Szymborska's poem paired with Paul Simon's "Peace Like a River."
(Music: Paul Simon, "Peace Like a River") (Video) Paul Simon: ♪ Oh, four in the morning ♪ ♪ I woke up from out of my dream ♪ Rives: Thank you. Appreciate it. (Applause)
Computer algorithms today are performing incredible tasks with high accuracies, at a massive scale, using human-like intelligence.
And this intelligence of computers is often referred to as AI or artificial intelligence.
AI is poised to make an incredible impact on our lives in the future.
Today, however, we still face massive challenges in detecting and diagnosing several life-threatening illnesses, such as infectious diseases and cancer.
Thousands of patients every year lose their lives due to liver and oral cancer.
Our best way to help these patients is to perform early detection and diagnoses of these diseases.
So how do we detect these diseases today, and can artificial intelligence help?
In patients who, unfortunately, are suspected of these diseases, an expert physician first orders very expensive medical imaging technologies such as fluorescent imaging, CTs, MRIs, to be performed.
Once those images are collected, another expert physician then diagnoses those images and talks to the patient.
As you can see, this is a very resource-intensive process, requiring both expert physicians, expensive medical imaging technologies, and is not considered practical for the developing world.
And in fact, in many industrialized nations, as well.
So, can we solve this problem using artificial intelligence?
Today, if I were to use traditional artificial intelligence architectures to solve this problem, I would require 10,000 -- I repeat, on an order of 10,000 of these very expensive medical images first to be generated.
After that, I would then go to an expert physician, who would then analyze those images for me.
And using those two pieces of information, I can train a standard deep neural network or a deep learning network to provide patient's diagnosis.
Similar to the first approach, traditional artificial intelligence approaches suffer from the same problem.
Large amounts of data, expert physicians and expert medical imaging technologies.
So, can we invent more scalable, effective and more valuable artificial intelligence architectures to solve these very important problems facing us today?
And this is exactly what my group at MIT Media Lab does.
We have invented a variety of unorthodox AI architectures to solve some of the most important challenges facing us today in medical imaging and clinical trials.
In the example I shared with you today, we had two goals.
Our first goal was to reduce the number of images required to train artificial intelligence algorithms.
Our second goal -- we were more ambitious, we wanted to reduce the use of expensive medical imaging technologies to screen patients.
So how did we do it?
For our first goal, instead of starting with tens and thousands of these very expensive medical images, like traditional AI, we started with a single medical image.
From this image, my team and I figured out a very clever way to extract billions of information packets.
These information packets included colors, pixels, geometry and rendering of the disease on the medical image.
In a sense, we converted one image into billions of training data points, massively reducing the amount of data needed for training.
For our second goal, to reduce the use of expensive medical imaging technologies to screen patients, we started with a standard, white light photograph, acquired either from a DSLR camera or a mobile phone, for the patient.
Then remember those billions of information packets?
We overlaid those from the medical image onto this image, creating something that we call a composite image.
Much to our surprise, we only required 50 -- I repeat, only 50 -- of these composite images to train our algorithms to high efficiencies.
To summarize our approach, instead of using 10,000 very expensive medical images, we can now train the AI algorithms in an unorthodox way, using only 50 of these high-resolution, but standard photographs, acquired from DSLR cameras and mobile phones, and provide diagnosis.
More importantly, our algorithms can accept, in the future and even right now, some very simple, white light photographs from the patient, instead of expensive medical imaging technologies.
I believe that we are poised to enter an era where artificial intelligence is going to make an incredible impact on our future.
And I think that thinking about traditional AI, which is data-rich but application-poor, we should also continue thinking about unorthodox artificial intelligence architectures, which can accept small amounts of data and solve some of the most important problems facing us today, especially in health care.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
As a scientist, and also as a human being, I've been trying to make myself susceptible to wonder.
I think Jason Webley last night called it "conspiring to be part of the magic."
So it's fortunate that my career as a biologist lets me dive deeply into the lives of some truly wondrous creatures that share our planet: fireflies.
Now, for many of you, I know that fireflies might conjure up some really great memories: childhood, summertime, even other TED Talks.
Maybe something like this.
My seduction into the world of fireflies began when I was back in graduate school.
One evening, I was sitting out in my backyard in North Carolina, and suddenly, these silent sparks rose up all around me, and I began to wonder: How do these creatures make light, and what's with all this flashing?
Are they talking to one another?
And what happens after the lights go out?
I've been lucky enough to answer some of these questions as I've explored this nocturnal world.
Now if you've ever seen or even heard about fireflies, then you'll know how magically they can transform our everyday landscape into something ethereal and otherworldly, and this happens around the globe, like this hillside in the Smoky Mountains that I saw transformed into a living cascade of light by the eerie glows of these blue ghost fireflies, or a roadside river that I visited in Japan as it was giving birth to the slow, floating flashes of these Genji fireflies, or in Malaysia, the mangrove trees that I watched blossom nightly not with flowers but with the lights of a thousand — (Bleep! Bleep!) — fireflies, all blinking together in stunning synchrony.
These luminous landscapes still fill me with wonder, and they keep me connected to the magic of the natural world.
And I find it amazing that they're created by these tiny insects.
In person, fireflies are charming.
They're charismatic.
They've been celebrated in art and in poetry for centuries.
As I've traveled around the world, I've met many thoughtful people who have told me that God put fireflies on Earth for humans to enjoy.
Other creatures can enjoy them too.
I think these graceful insects are truly miraculous because they so beautifully illuminate the creative improvisation of evolution.
They've been shaped by two powerful evolutionary forces: natural selection, the struggle for survival, and sexual selection, the struggle for reproductive opportunity.
As a firefly junkie, the past 20 years have been quite an exciting ride.
Together with my students at Tufts University and other colleagues, we've made lots of new discoveries about fireflies: their courtship and sex lives, their treachery and murder.
So today I'd like to share with you just a couple of tales that we've brought back from our collective adventures into this hidden world.
Fireflies belong to a very beautiful and diverse group of insects, the beetles.
Worldwide, there are more than 2,000 firefly species, and these have evolved remarkably diverse courtship signals, that is, different ways to find and attract mates.
Around 150 million years ago, the very first fireflies probably looked like this.
They flew during the daytime and they didn't light up.
Instead, males used their fantastic antennae to sniff out perfumes given off by their females.
In other fireflies, it's only the females who light up.
They are attractively plump and wingless, so every night, they climb up onto perches and they glow brightly for hours to attract their flying but unlit males.
In still other fireflies, both sexes use quick, bright flashes to find their mates.
Here in North America, we have more than 100 different kinds of firefly that have the remarkable ability to shine energy out from their bodies in the form of light.
How do they do that?
It seems totally magical, but these bioluminescent signals arise from carefully orchestrated chemical reactions that happen inside the firefly lantern.
The main star is an enzyme called luciferase, which in the course of evolution has figured out a way to wrap its tiny arms around an even smaller molecule called luciferin, in the process getting it so excited that it actually gives off light.
Incredible.
But how could these bright lights have benefited some proto-firefly?
To answer this question, we need to flip back in the family album to some baby pictures.
Fireflies completely reinvent their bodies as they grow.
They spend the vast majority of their lifetime, up to two years, in this larval form.
Their main goal here, like my teenagers, is to eat and grow.
And firefly light first originated in these juveniles.
Every single firefly larva can light up, even when their adults can't.
But what's the point to being so conspicuous?
Well, we know that these juveniles make nasty-tasting chemicals that help them survive their extended childhood, so we think these lights first evolved as a warning, a neon sign that says, "Toxic! Stay away!"
to any would-be predators.
It took many millions of years before these bright lights evolved into a smart communication tool that could be used not just to ward off potential predators but to bring in potential mates.
Driven now by sexual selection, some adult fireflies like this proud male evolved a shiny new glow-in-the-dark lantern that would let them take courtship to a whole new level.
These adults only live a few weeks, and now they're single-mindedly focused on sex, that is, on propelling their genes into the next firefly generation.
So we can follow this male out into the field as he joins hundreds of other males who are all showing off their new courtship signals.
It's amazing to think that the luminous displays we admire here and in fact everywhere around the world are actually the silent love songs of male fireflies.
They're flying and flashing their hearts out.
I still find it very romantic.
But meanwhile, where are all the females?
Well, they're lounging down below surveying their options.
They have plenty of males to choose from, and these females turn out to be very picky.
When a female sees a flash from an especially attractive male, she'll aim her lantern in his direction, and give him a flash back.
It's her "come hither" sign.
So he flies closer and he flashes again.
If she still likes him, they'll strike up a conversation.
These creatures speak their love in the language of light.
So what exactly do these females consider sexy?
We decided to conduct some firefly opinion polls to find out.
When we tested females using blinking LED lights, we discovered they prefer males who give longer-lasting flashes.
(Laughter) (Applause) I know you're wondering, what gives these males their sex appeal?
Now we get to see what happens when the lights go out.
The first thing we discovered is that once a male and female hook up like this, they stay together all night long, and when we looked inside to see what might be happening, we discovered a surprising new twist to firefly sex.
While they're mating, the male is busy giving the female not just his sperm but also a nutrient-filled package called a nuptial gift.
We can zoom in to look more closely inside this mating pair.
We can actually see the gift — it's shown here in red — as it's being passed from the male to the female.
What makes this gift so valuable is that it's packed with protein that the female will use to provision her eggs.
So females are keeping their eyes on this prize as they size up potential mates.
We discovered that females use male flash signals to try to predict which males have the biggest gifts to offer, because this bling helps the female lay more eggs and ultimately launch more of her own offspring into the next generation.
So it's not all sweetness and light.
Firefly romance is risky.
For the most part, these adult fireflies don't get eaten because like their juveniles they can manufacture toxins that are repellent to birds and other insectivores, but somewhere along the line, one particular group of fireflies somehow lost the metabolic machinery needed to make their own protective toxins.
This evolutionary flaw, which was discovered by my colleague Tom Eisner, has driven these fireflies to take their bright lights out into the night with treacherous intent.
Dubbed "femme fatales" by Jim Lloyd, another colleague, these females have figured out how to target the males of other firefly species.
So the hunt begins with the predator — she's shown here in the lower left — where she's sitting quietly and eavesdropping on the courtship conversation of her intended prey, and here's how it might go.
First the prey male flashes, "Do you love me?"
His own female responds, "Maybe."
So then he flashes again.
But this time, the predator sneaks in a reply that cleverly mimics exactly what the other female just said.
She's not looking for love: she's looking for toxins.
If she's good, she can lure this male close enough to reach out and grab him, and he's not just a light snack.
Over the next hour, she slowly exsanguinates this male leaving behind just some gory remains.
Unable to make their own toxins, these females resort to drinking the blood of other fireflies to get these protective chemicals.
So a firefly vampire, brought to you by natural selection.
We still have a lot to learn about fireflies, but it looks like many stories will remain untold, because around the world, firefly populations are blinking out.
The main culprit: habitat loss.
Pretty much everywhere, the fields and forests, the mangroves and meadows that fireflies need to survive, are giving way to development and to sprawl.
Here's another problem: we've conquered darkness, but in the process, we spill so much extra light out into the night that it disrupts the lives of other creatures, and fireflies are especially sensitive to light pollution because it obscures the signals that they use to find their mates.
Do we really need fireflies?
After all, they're just one tiny bit of Earth's biodiversity.
Yet every time a species is lost, it's like extinguishing a room full of candles one by one.
You might not notice when the first few flames flicker out, but in the end, you're left sitting in darkness.
As we work together to craft a planetary future, I hope we can find a way to keep these bright lights shining.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"Pheromone" is a very powerful word.
It conjures up sex, abandon, loss of control, and you can see, it's very important as a word.
But it's only 50 years old. It was invented in 1959.
Now, if you put that word into the web, as you may have done, you'll come up with millions of hits, and almost all of those sites are trying to sell you something to make you irresistible for 10 dollars or more.
Now, this is a very attractive idea, and the molecules they mention sound really science-y.
They've got lots of syllables.
It's things like androstenol, androstenone or androstadienone.
It gets better and better, and when you combine that with white lab coats, you must imagine that there is fantastic science behind this.
But sadly, these are fraudulent claims supported by dodgy science.
The problem is that, although there are many good scientists working on what they think are human pheromones, and they're publishing in respectable journals, at the basis of this, despite very sophisticated experiments, there really is no good science behind it, because it's based on a problem, which is nobody has systematically gone through all the odors that humans produce -- and there are thousands of molecules that we give off.
We're mammals. We produce a lot of smell.
Nobody has gone through systematically to work out which molecules really are pheromones.
They've just plucked a few, and all these experiments are based on those, but there's no good evidence at all.
Now, that's not to say that smell is not important to people.
It is, and some people are real enthusiasts, and one of these was Napoleon.
And famously, you may remember that out on the campaign trail for war, he wrote to his lover, Empress Josephine, saying, "Don't wash. I'm coming home."
(Laughter) So he didn't want to lose any of her richness in the days before he'd get home, and it is still, you'll find websites that offer this as a major quirk.
At the same time, though, we spend about as much money taking the smells off us as putting them back on in perfumes, and perfumes are a multi-billion-dollar business.
So what I want to do in the rest of this talk is tell you about what pheromones really are, tell you why I think we would expect humans to have pheromones, tell you about some of the confusions in pheromones, and then finally, I want to end with a promising avenue which shows us the way we ought to be going.
So the ancient Greeks knew that dogs sent invisible signals between each other.
A female dog in heat sent an invisible signal to male dogs for miles around, and it wasn't a sound, it was a smell.
You could take the smell from the female dog, and the dogs would chase the cloth.
But the problem for everybody who could see this effect was that you couldn't identify the molecules.
You couldn't demonstrate it was chemical.
The reason for that, of course, is that each of these animals produces tiny quantities, and in the case of the dog, males dogs can smell it, but we can't smell it.
And it was only in 1959 that a German team, after spending 20 years in search of these molecules, discovered, identified, the first pheromone, and this was the sex pheromone of a silk moth.
Now, this was an inspired choice by Adolf Butenandt and his team, because he needed half a million moths to get enough material to do the chemical analysis.
But he created the model for how you should go about pheromone analysis.
He basically went through systematically, showing that only the molecule in question was the one that stimulated the males, not all the others.
He analyzed it very carefully.
He synthesized the molecule, and then tried the synthesized molecule on the males and got them to respond and showed it was, indeed, that molecule.
That's closing the circle.
That's the thing which has never been done with humans: nothing systematic, no real demonstration.
With that new concept, we needed a new word, and that was the word "pheromone," and it's basically transferred excitement, transferred between individuals, and since 1959, pheromones have been found right the way across the animal kingdom, in male animals, in female animals.
It works just as well underwater for goldfish and lobsters.
And almost every mammal you can think of has had a pheromone identified, and of course, an enormous number of insects.
So we know that pheromones exist right the way across the animal kingdom.
What about humans?
Well, the first thing, of course, is that we're mammals, and mammals are smelly.
As any dog owner can tell you, we smell, they smell.
But the real reason we might think that humans have pheromones is the change that occurs as we grow up.
The smell of a room of teenagers is quite different from the smell of a room of small children.
What's changed? And of course, it's puberty.
Along with the pubic hair and the hair in the armpits, new glands start to secrete in those places, and that's what's making the change in smell.
If we were any other kind of mammal, or any other kind of animal, we would say, "That must be something to do with pheromones," and we'd start looking properly.
But there are some problems, and this is why, I think, people have not looked for pheromones so effectively in humans.
There are, indeed, problems.
And the first of these is perhaps surprising.
It's all about culture.
Now moths don't learn a lot about what is good to smell, but humans do, and up to the age of about four, any smell, no matter how rancid, is simply interesting.
And I understand that the major role of parents is to stop kids putting their fingers in poo, because it's always something nice to smell.
But gradually we learn what's not good, and one of the things we learn at the same time as what is not good is what is good.
Now, the cheese behind me is a British, if not an English, delicacy.
It's ripe blue Stilton.
Liking it is incomprehensible to people from other countries.
Every culture has its own special food and national delicacy.
If you were to come from Iceland, your national dish is deep rotted shark.
Now, all of these things are acquired tastes, but they form almost a badge of identity.
You're part of the in-group.
The second thing is the sense of smell.
Each of us has a unique odor world, in the sense that what we smell, we each smell a completely different world.
Now, smell was the hardest of the senses to crack, and the Nobel Prize awarded to Richard Axel and Linda Buck was only awarded in 2004 for their discovery of how smell works.
It's really hard, but in essence, nerves from the brain go up into the nose and on these nerves exposed in the nose to the outside air are receptors, and odor molecules coming in on a sniff interact with these receptors, and if they bond, they send the nerve a signal which goes back into the brain.
We don't just have one kind of receptor.
If you're a human, you have about 400 different kinds of receptors, and the brain knows what you're smelling because of the combination of receptors and nerve cells that they trigger, sending messages up to the brain in a combinatorial fashion.
But it's a bit more complicated, because each of those 400 comes in various variants, and depending which variant you have, you might smell coriander, or cilantro, that herb, either as something delicious and savory or something like soap.
So we each have an individual world of smell, and that complicates anything when we're studying smell.
Well, we really ought to talk about armpits, and I have to say that I do have particularly good ones.
Now, I'm not going to share them with you, but this is the place that most people have looked for pheromones.
There is one good reason, which is, the great apes have armpits as their unique characteristic.
The other primates have scent glands in other parts of the body.
The great apes have these armpits full of secretory glands producing smells all the time, enormous numbers of molecules.
When they're secreted from the glands, the molecules are odorless.
They have no smell at all, and it's only the wonderful bacteria growing on the rainforest of hair that actually produces the smells that we know and love.
And so incidentally, if you want to reduce the amount of smell, clear-cutting your armpits is a very effective way of reducing the habitat for bacteria, and you'll find they remain less smelly for much longer.
But although we've focused on armpits, I think it's partly because they're the least embarrassing place to go and ask people for samples.
There is actually another reason why we might not be looking for a universal sex pheromone there, and that's because 20 percent of the world's population doesn't have smelly armpits like me.
And these are people from China, Japan, Korea, and other parts of northeast Asia.
They simply don't secrete those odorless precursors that the bacteria love to use to produce the smells that in an ethnocentric way we always thought of as characteristic of armpits.
So it doesn't apply to 20 percent of the world.
So what should we be doing in our search for human pheromones?
I'm fairly convinced that we do have them.
We're mammals, like everybody else who's a mammal, and we probably do have them.
But what I think we should do is go right back to the beginning, and basically look all over the body.
No matter how embarrassing, we need to search and go for the first time where no one else has dared tread.
It's going to be difficult, it's going to be embarrassing, but we need to look.
We also need to go back to the ideas that Butenandt used when he was studying the silk moth.
We need to go back and look systematically at all the molecules that are being produced, and work out which ones are really involved.
It isn't good enough simply to pluck a couple and say, "They'll do."
We have to actually demonstrate that they really have the effects we claim.
There is one team that I'm actually very impressed by.
They're in France, and their previous success was identifying the rabbit mammary pheromone.
They've turned their attention now to human babies and mothers.
So this is a baby having a drink of milk from its mother's breast.
Her nipple is completely hidden by the baby's head, but what you'll notice is a white droplet with an arrow pointing to it, and that's the secretion from the areolar glands.
Now, we all have them, men and women, and these are the little bumps around the nipple, and if you're a lactating woman, these start to secrete.
It's a very interesting secretion.
What Benoist Schaal and his team developed was a simple test to investigate what the effect of this secretion might be, in effect, a simple bioassay.
So this is a sleeping baby, and under its nose, we've put a clean glass rod.
The baby remains sleeping, showing no interest at all.
But if we go to any mother who is secreting from the areolar glands, so it's not about recognition, it can be from any mother, if we take the secretion and now put it under the baby's nose, we get a very different reaction.
It's a connoisseur's reaction of delight, and it opens its mouth and sticks out its tongue and starts to suck.
Now, since this is from any mother, it could really be a pheromone.
It's not about individual recognition.
Any mother will do.
Now, why is this important, apart from being simply very interesting?
It's because women vary in the number of areolar glands that they have, and there is a correlation between the ease with which babies start to suckle and the number of areolar glands she has.
It appears that the more secretions she's got, the more likely the baby is to suckle quickly.
If you're a mammal, the most dangerous time in life is the first few hours after birth.
You have to get that first drink of milk, and if you don't get it, you won't survive.
You'll be dead.
Since many babies actually find it difficult to take that first meal, because they're not getting the right stimulus, if we could identify what that molecule was, and the French team are being very cautious, but if we could identify the molecule, synthesize it, it would then mean premature babies would be more likely to suckle, and every baby would have a better chance of survival.
So what I want to argue is this is one example of where a systematic, really scientific approach can actually bring you a real understanding of pheromones.
There could be all sorts of medical interventions.
There could be all sorts of things that humans are doing with pheromones that we simply don't know at the moment.
What we need to remember is pheromones are not just about sex.
They're about all sorts of things to do with a mammal's life.
So do go forward and do search for more.
There's lots to find.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
You may be wondering why a marine biologist from Oceana would come here today to talk to you about world hunger.
I'm here today because saving the oceans is more than an ecological desire.
It's more than a thing we're doing because we want to create jobs for fishermen or preserve fishermen's jobs.
It's more than an economic pursuit.
Saving the oceans can feed the world.
Let me show you how.
As you know, there are already more than a billion hungry people on this planet.
We're expecting that problem to get worse as world population grows to nine billion or 10 billion by midcentury, and we can expect to have greater pressure on our food resources.
And this is a big concern, especially considering where we are now.
Now we know that our arable land per capita is already on the decline in both developed and developing countries.
We know that we're headed for climate change, which is going to change rainfall patterns, making some areas drier, as you can see in orange, and others wetter, in blue, causing droughts in our breadbaskets, in places like the Midwest and Central Europe, and floods in others.
It's going to make it harder for the land to help us solve the hunger problem.
And that's why the oceans need to be their most abundant, so that the oceans can provide us as much food as possible.
And that's something the oceans have been doing for us for a long time.
As far back as we can go, we've seen an increase in the amount of food we've been able to harvest from our oceans.
It just seemed like it was continuing to increase, until about 1980, when we started to see a decline.
You've heard of peak oil.
Maybe this is peak fish.
I hope not. I'm going to come back to that.
But you can see about an 18-percent decline in the amount of fish we've gotten in our world catch since 1980.
And this is a big problem. It's continuing.
This red line is continuing to go down.
But we know how to turn it around, and that's what I'm going to talk about today.
We know how to turn that curve back upwards.
This doesn't have to be peak fish.
If we do a few simple things in targeted places, we can bring our fisheries back and use them to feed people.
First we want to know where the fish are, so let's look where the fish are.
It turns out the fish, conveniently, are located for the most part in our coastal areas of the countries, in coastal zones, and these are areas that national jurisdictions have control over, and they can manage their fisheries in these coastal areas.
Coastal countries tend to have jurisdictions that go out about 200 nautical miles, in areas that are called exclusive economic zones, and this is a good thing that they can control their fisheries in these areas, because the high seas, which are the darker areas on this map, the high seas, it's a lot harder to control things, because it has to be done internationally.
You get into international agreements, and if any of you are tracking the climate change agreement, you know this can be a very slow, frustrating, tedious process.
And so controlling things nationally is a great thing to be able to do.
How many fish are actually in these coastal areas compared to the high seas?
Well, you can see here about seven times as many fish in the coastal areas than there are in the high seas, so this is a perfect place for us to be focusing, because we can actually get a lot done.
We can restore a lot of our fisheries if we focus in these coastal areas.
But how many of these countries do we have to work in?
There's something like 80 coastal countries.
Do we have to fix fisheries management in all of those countries?
So we asked ourselves, how many countries do we need to focus on, keeping in mind that the European Union conveniently manages its fisheries through a common fisheries policy?
So if we got good fisheries management in the European Union and, say, nine other countries, how much of our fisheries would we be covering?
Turns out, European Union plus nine countries covers about two thirds of the world's fish catch.
If we took it up to 24 countries plus the European Union, we would up to 90 percent, almost all of the world's fish catch.
So we think we can work in a limited number of places to make the fisheries come back.
But what do we have to do in these places?
Well, based on our work in the United States and elsewhere, we know that there are three key things we have to do to bring fisheries back, and they are: We need to set quotas or limits on how much we take; we need to reduce bycatch, which is the accidental catching and killing of fish that we're not targeting, and it's very wasteful; and three, we need to protect habitats, the nursery areas, the spawning areas that these fish need to grow and reproduce successfully so that they can rebuild their populations.
If we do those three things, we know the fisheries will come back.
How do we know?
We know because we've seen it happening in a lot of different places.
This is a slide that shows the herring population in Norway that was crashing since the 1950s.
It was coming down, and when Norway set limits, or quotas, on its fishery, what happens?
The fishery comes back.
This is another example, also happens to be from Norway, of the Norwegian Arctic cod.
Same deal. The fishery is crashing.
They set limits on discards.
Discards are these fish they weren't targeting and they get thrown overboard wastefully.
When they set the discard limit, the fishery came back.
And it's not just in Norway.
We've seen this happening in countries all around the world, time and time again.
When these countries step in and they put in sustainable fisheries management policies, the fisheries, which are always crashing, it seems, are starting to come back.
So there's a lot of promise here.
What does this mean for the world fish catch?
This means that if we take that fishery catch that's on the decline and we could turn it upwards, we could increase it up to 100 million metric tons per year.
So we didn't have peak fish yet.
We still have an opportunity to not only bring the fish back but to actually get more fish that can feed more people than we currently are now.
How many more? Right about now, we can feed about 450 million people a fish meal a day based on the current world fish catch, which, of course, you know is going down, so that number will go down over time if we don't fix it, but if we put fishery management practices like the ones I've described in place in 10 to 25 countries, we could bring that number up and feed as many as 700 million people a year a healthy fish meal.
We should obviously do this just because it's a good thing to deal with the hunger problem, but it's also cost-effective.
It turns out fish is the most cost-effective protein on the planet.
If you look at how much fish protein you get per dollar invested compared to all of the other animal proteins, obviously, fish is a good business decision.
It also doesn't need a lot of land, something that's in short supply, compared to other protein sources.
And it doesn't need a lot of fresh water.
It uses a lot less fresh water than, for example, cattle, where you have to irrigate a field so that you can grow the food to graze the cattle.
It also has a very low carbon footprint.
It has a little bit of a carbon footprint because we do have to get out and catch the fish.
It takes a little bit of fuel, but as you know, agriculture can have a carbon footprint, and fish has a much smaller one, so it's less polluting.
It's already a big part of our diet, but it can be a bigger part of our diet, which is a good thing, because we know that it's healthy for us.
It can reduce our risks of cancer, heart disease and obesity.
In fact, our CEO Andy Sharpless, who is the originator of this concept, actually, he likes to say fish is the perfect protein.
Andy also talks about the fact that our ocean conservation movement really grew out of the land conservation movement, and in land conservation, we have this problem where biodiversity is at war with food production.
You have to cut down the biodiverse forest if you want to get the field to grow the corn to feed people with, and so there's a constant push-pull there.
There's a constant tough decision that has to be made between two very important things: maintaining biodiversity and feeding people.
But in the oceans, we don't have that war.
In the oceans, biodiversity is not at war with abundance.
In fact, they're aligned.
When we do things that produce biodiversity, we actually get more abundance, and that's important so that we can feed people.
Now, there's a catch.
Didn't anyone get that? (Laughter) Illegal fishing.
Illegal fishing undermines the type of sustainable fisheries management I'm talking about.
It can be when you catch fish using gears that have been prohibited, when you fish in places where you're not supposed to fish, you catch fish that are the wrong size or the wrong species.
Illegal fishing cheats the consumer and it also cheats honest fishermen, and it needs to stop.
The way illegal fish get into our market is through seafood fraud.
You might have heard about this.
It's when fish are labeled as something they're not.
Think about the last time you had fish.
What were you eating?
Are you sure that's what it was?
Because we tested 1,300 different fish samples and about a third of them were not what they were labeled to be.
Snappers, nine out of 10 snappers were not snapper.
Fifty-nine percent of the tuna we tested was mislabeled.
And red snapper, we tested 120 samples, and only seven of them were really red snapper, so good luck finding a red snapper.
Seafood has a really complex supply chain, and at every step in this supply chain, there's an opportunity for seafood fraud, unless we have traceability.
Traceability is a way where the seafood industry can track the seafood from the boat to the plate to make sure that the consumer can then find out where their seafood came from.
This is a really important thing.
It's being done by some in the industry, but not enough, so we're pushing a law in Congress called the SAFE Seafood Act, and I'm very excited today to announce the release of a chef's petition, where 450 chefs have signed a petition calling on Congress to support the SAFE Seafood Act.
It has a lot of celebrity chefs you may know -- Anthony Bourdain, Mario Batali, Barton Seaver and others — and they've signed it because they believe that people have a right to know about what they're eating.
(Applause) Fishermen like it too, so there's a good chance we can get the kind of support we need to get this bill through, and it comes at a critical time, because this is the way we stop seafood fraud, this is the way we curb illegal fishing, and this is the way we make sure that quotas, habitat protection, and bycatch reductions can do the jobs they can do.
We know that we can manage our fisheries sustainably.
We know that we can produce healthy meals for hundreds of millions of people that don't use the land, that don't use much water, have a low carbon footprint, and are cost-effective.
We know that saving the oceans can feed the world, and we need to start now.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
Approximately 30 years ago, when I was in oncology at the Children's Hospital in Philadelphia, a father and a son walked into my office and they both had their right eye missing, and as I took the history, it became apparent that the father and the son had a rare form of inherited eye tumor, retinoblastoma, and the father knew that he had passed that fate on to his son.
That moment changed my life.
It propelled me to go on and to co-lead a team that discovered the first cancer susceptibility gene, and in the intervening decades since then, there has been literally a seismic shift in our understanding of what goes on, what genetic variations are sitting behind various diseases.
In fact, for thousands of human traits, a molecular basis that's known for that, and for thousands of people, every day, there's information that they gain about the risk of going on to get this disease or that disease.
At the same time, if you ask, "Has that impacted the efficiency, how we've been able to develop drugs?"
the answer is not really.
If you look at the cost of developing drugs, how that's done, it basically hasn't budged that.
And so it's as if we have the power to diagnose yet not the power to fully treat.
And there are two commonly given reasons for why that happens.
One of them is it's early days.
We're just learning the words, the fragments, the letters in the genetic code.
We don't know how to read the sentences.
We don't know how to follow the narrative.
The other reason given is that most of those changes are a loss of function, and it's actually really hard to develop drugs that restore function.
But today, I want us to step back and ask a more fundamental question, and ask, "What happens if we're thinking about this maybe in the wrong context?"
We do a lot of studying of those who are sick and building up long lists of altered components.
But maybe, if what we're trying to do is to develop therapies for prevention, maybe what we should be doing is studying those who don't get sick.
Maybe we should be studying those that are well.
A vast majority of those people are not necessarily carrying a particular genetic load or risk factor.
They're not going to help us.
There are going to be those individuals who are carrying a potential future risk, they're going to go on to get some symptom.
That's not what we're looking for.
What we're asking and looking for is, are there a very few set of individuals who are actually walking around with the risk that normally would cause a disease, but something in them, something hidden in them is actually protective and keeping them from exhibiting those symptoms?
If you're going to do a study like that, you can imagine you'd like to look at lots and lots of people.
We'd have to go and have a pretty wide study, and we realized that actually one way to think of this is, let us look at adults who are over 40 years of age, and let's make sure that we look at those who were healthy as kids.
They might have had individuals in their families who had had a childhood disease, but not necessarily.
And let's go and then screen those to find those who are carrying genes for childhood diseases.
Now, some of you, I can see you putting your hands up going, "Uh, a little odd.
What's your evidence that this could be feasible?"
I want to give you two examples.
The first comes from San Francisco.
It comes from the 1980s and the 1990s, and you may know the story where there were individuals who had very high levels of the virus HIV.
They went on to get AIDS.
But there was a very small set of individuals who also had very high levels of HIV.
They didn't get AIDS.
And astute clinicians tracked that down, and what they found was they were carrying mutations.
Notice, they were carrying mutations from birth that were protective, that were protecting them from going on to get AIDS.
You may also know that actually a line of therapy has been coming along based on that fact.
Second example, more recent, is elegant work done by Helen Hobbs, who said, "I'm going to look at individuals who have very high lipid levels, and I'm going to try to find those people with high lipid levels who don't go on to get heart disease."
And again, what she found was some of those individuals had mutations that were protective from birth that kept them, even though they had high lipid levels, and you can see this is an interesting way of thinking about how you could develop preventive therapies.
The project that we're working on is called "The Resilience Project: A Search for Unexpected Heroes," because what we are interested in doing is saying, can we find those rare individuals who might have these hidden protective factors?
And in some ways, think of it as a decoder ring, a sort of resilience decoder ring that we're going to try to build.
We've realized that we should do this in a systematic way, so we've said, let's take every single childhood inherited disease.
Let's take them all, and let's pull them back a little bit by those that are known to have severe symptoms, where the parents, the child, those around them would know that they'd gotten sick, and let's go ahead and then frame them again by those parts of the genes where we know that there is a particular alteration that is known to be highly penetrant to cause that disease.
Where are we going to look?
Well, we could look locally. That makes sense.
But we began to think, maybe we should look all over the world.
Maybe we should look not just here but in remote places where their might be a distinct genetic context, there might be environmental factors that protect people.
And let's look at a million individuals.
Now the reason why we think it's a good time to do that now is, in the last couple of years, there's been a remarkable plummeting in the cost to do this type of analysis, this type of data generation, to where it actually costs less to do the data generation and analysis than it does to do the sample processing and the collection.
The other reason is that in the last five years, there have been awesome tools, things about network biology, systems biology, that have come up that allow us to think that maybe we could decipher those positive outliers.
And as we went around talking to researchers and institutions and telling them about our story, something happened.
They started saying, "This is interesting.
I would be glad to join your effort.
I would be willing to participate."
And they didn't say, "Where's the MTA?"
They didn't say, "Where is my authorship?"
They didn't say, "Is this data going to be mine? Am I going to own it?"
They basically said, "Let's work on this in an open, crowd-sourced, team way to do this decoding."
Six months ago, we locked down the screening key for this decoder.
My co-lead, a brilliant scientist, Eric Schadt at the Icahn Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, and his team, locked in that decoder key ring, and we began looking for samples, because what we realized is, maybe we could just go and look at some existing samples to get some sense of feasibility.
Maybe we could take two, three percent of the project on, and see if it was there.
And so we started asking people such as Hakon at the Children's Hospital in Philadelphia.
We asked Leif up in Finland.
We talked to Anne Wojcicki at 23andMe, and Wang Jun at BGI, and again, something remarkable happened.
They said, "Huh, not only do we have samples, but often we've analyzed them, and we would be glad to go into our anonymized samples and see if we could find those that you're looking for."
And instead of being 20,000 or 30,000, last month we passed one half million samples that we've already analyzed.
So you must be going, "Huh, did you find any unexpected heroes?"
And the answer is, we didn't find one or two.
We found dozens of these strong candidate unexpected heroes.
So we think that the time is now to launch the beta phase of this project and actually start getting prospective individuals.
Basically all we need is information.
We need a swab of DNA and a willingness to say, "What's inside me?
I'm willing to be re-contacted."
Most of us spend our lives, when it comes to health and disease, acting as if we're voyeurs.
We delegate the responsibility for the understanding of our disease, for the treatment of our disease, to anointed experts.
In order for us to get this project to work, we need individuals to step up in a different role and to be engaged, to realize this dream, this open crowd-sourced project, to find those unexpected heroes, to evolve from the current concepts of resources and constraints, to design those preventive therapies, and to extend it beyond childhood diseases, to go all the way up to ways that we could look at Alzheimer's or Parkinson's, we're going to need us to be looking inside ourselves and asking, "What are our roles?
What are our genes?"
and looking within ourselves for information we used to say we should go to the outside, to experts, and to be willing to share that with others.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In the mid-16th century, Italians were captivated by a type of male singer whose incredible range contained notes previously thought impossible for adult men.
However, this gift came at a high price.
To prevent their voices from breaking, these singers had been castrated before puberty, halting the hormonal processes that would deepen their voices.
Known as castrati, their light, angelic voices were renowned throughout Europe, until the cruel procedure that created them was outlawed in the 1800s.
Though stunting vocal growth can produce an extraordinary musical range, naturally developing voices are already capable of incredible variety.
And as we age, our bodies undergo two major changes which explore that range.
So how exactly does our voice box work, and what causes these shifts in speech?
The specific sound of a speaking voice is the result of many anatomical variables, but it’s mostly determined by the age and health of our vocal cords and the size of our larynxes.
The larynx is a complex system of muscle and cartilage that supports and moves the vocal cords, or, as they’re more accurately known, the vocal folds.
Strung between the thyroid and arytenoid cartilages, these two muscles form an elastic curtain that opens and shuts across the trachea, the tube that carries air through the throat.
The folds are apart when we’re breathing, but when we speak, they slam shut.
Our lungs push air against the closed folds, blowing them open and vibrating the tissue to produce sound.
Unlike the deliberate focus required for playing an external instrument, we effortlessly change notes as we speak.
By pushing air faster or slower, we change the frequency and amplitude of these vibrations, which respectively translate to the pitch and volume of our voices.
Rapid and small vibrations create high-pitched, quiet tones, while slow, large vibrations produce deep, bellowing rumbles.
Finally, by moving the laryngeal muscles between the cartilages, we can stretch and contract those folds to intuitively play our internal instruments.
This process is the same from your first words to your last, but as you age, your larynx ages too.
During puberty, the first major shift starts, as your voice begins to deepen.
This happens when your larynx grows in size, elongating the vocal folds and opening up more room for them to vibrate.
These longer folds have slower, larger vibrations, which result in a lower baseline pitch.
This growth is especially dramatic in many males, whose high testosterone levels lead first to voice cracks, and then to deeper, more booming voices, and laryngeal protrusions called Adam’s apples.
Another vocal development during puberty occurs when the homogenous tissue covering the folds specializes into three distinct functional layers: a central muscle, a layer of stiff collagen wrapped in stretchy elastin fibers, and an outer layer of mucus membrane.
These layers add nuance and depth to the voice, giving it a distinct timbre that sets it apart from its pre-pubescent tones.
After puberty, most people’s voices remain more or less the same for about 50 years.
But we all use our voices differently, and eventually we experience the symptoms associated with aging larynxes, known as presbyphonia.
First, the collagen in our folds stiffens and the surrounding elastin fibers atrophy and decay.
This decreased flexibility increases the pitch of older voices.
But for people who have experienced the hormonal effects of menopause, the higher pitch is countered and outweighed by swollen vocal folds.
The folds' increased mass slows their vibrations, resulting in deeper voices.
All these symptoms are further complicated by having fewer healthy laryngeal nerve endings, which reduces precise muscle control and causes breathy or rough voices.
Ultimately, these anatomical changes are just a few of the factors that can affect your voice.
But when kept in good condition, your voice box is a finely tuned instrument, capable of operatic arias, moody monologues, and stirring speeches.
As a student of adversity, I've been struck over the years by how some people with major challenges seem to draw strength from them.
And I've heard the popular wisdom that that has to do with finding meaning.
And for a long time, I thought the meaning was out there, some great truth waiting to be found.
But over time, I've come to feel that the truth is irrelevant.
We call it "finding meaning," but we might better call it "forging meaning."
My last book was about how families manage to deal with various kinds of challenging or unusual offspring.
And one of the mothers I interviewed, who had two children with multiple severe disabilities, said to me, "People always give us these little sayings like, 'God doesn't give you any more than you can handle.' But children like ours are not preordained as a gift.
They're a gift because that's what we have chosen."
We make those choices all our lives.
When I was in second grade, Bobby Finkel had a birthday party and invited everyone in our class but me.
My mother assumed there had been some sort of error, and she called Mrs. Finkel, who said that Bobby didn't like me and didn't want me at his party.
And that day, my mom took me to the zoo and out for a hot fudge sundae.
When I was in seventh grade, one of the kids on my school bus nicknamed me "Percy," as a shorthand for my demeanor.
And sometimes, he and his cohort would chant that provocation the entire school bus ride, 45 minutes up, 45 minutes back: "Percy! Percy! Percy! Percy!"
When I was in eighth grade, our science teacher told us that all male homosexuals develop fecal incontinence because of the trauma to their anal sphincter.
And I graduated high school without ever going to the cafeteria, where I would have sat with the girls and been laughed at for doing so, or sat with the boys, and been laughed at for being a boy who should be sitting with the girls.
I survived that childhood through a mix of avoidance and endurance.
What I didn't know then and do know now, is that avoidance and endurance can be the entryway to forging meaning.
After you've forged meaning, you need to incorporate that meaning into a new identity.
You need to take the traumas and make them part of who you've come to be, and you need to fold the worst events of your life into a narrative of triumph, evincing a better self in response to things that hurt.
One of the other mothers I interviewed when I was working on my book had been raped as an adolescent, and had a child following that rape, which had thrown away her career plans and damaged all of her emotional relationships.
But when I met her, she was 50, and I said to her, "Do you often think about the man who raped you?"
And she said, "I used to think about him with anger, but now only with pity."
And I thought she meant pity because he was so unevolved as to have done this terrible thing.
And I said, "Pity?"
And she said, "Yes, because he has a beautiful daughter and two beautiful grandchildren, and he doesn't know that, and I do.
So as it turns out, I'm the lucky one."
Some of our struggles are things we're born to: our gender, our sexuality, our race, our disability.
And some are things that happen to us: being a political prisoner, being a rape victim, being a Katrina survivor.
Identity involves entering a community to draw strength from that community, and to give strength there, too.
It involves substituting "and" for "but" -- not "I am here but I have cancer," but rather, "I have cancer and I am here."
When we're ashamed, we can't tell our stories, and stories are the foundation of identity.
Forge meaning, build identity.
Forge meaning and build identity.
That became my mantra.
Forging meaning is about changing yourself.
Building identity is about changing the world.
All of us with stigmatized identities face this question daily: How much to accommodate society by constraining ourselves, and how much to break the limits of what constitutes a valid life?
Forging meaning and building identity does not make what was wrong right.
It only makes what was wrong precious.
In January of this year, I went to Myanmar to interview political prisoners, and I was surprised to find them less bitter than I'd anticipated.
Most of them had knowingly committed the offenses that landed them in prison, and they had walked in with their heads held high, and they walked out with their heads still held high, many years later.
Dr. Ma Thida, a leading human rights activist who had nearly died in prison and had spent many years in solitary confinement, told me she was grateful to her jailers for the time she had had to think, for the wisdom she had gained, for the chance to hone her meditation skills.
She had sought meaning and made her travail into a crucial identity.
But if the people I met were less bitter than I'd anticipated about being in prison, they were also less thrilled than I'd expected about the reform process going on in their country.
Ma Thida said, "We Burmese are noted for our tremendous grace under pressure, but we also have grievance under glamour."
She said, "And the fact that there have been these shifts and changes doesn't erase the continuing problems in our society that we learned to see so well while we were in prison."
I understood her to be saying that concessions confer only a little humanity where full humanity is due; that crumbs are not the same as a place at the table.
Which is to say, you can forge meaning and build identity and still be mad as hell.
I've never been raped, and I've never been in anything remotely approaching a Burmese prison.
But as a gay American, I've experienced prejudice and even hatred, and I've forged meaning and I've built identity, which is a move I learned from people who had experienced far worse privation than I've ever known.
In my own adolescence, I went to extreme lengths to try to be straight.
I enrolled myself in something called "sexual surrogacy therapy," in which people I was encouraged to call doctors prescribed what I was encouraged to call exercises with women I was encouraged to call surrogates, who were not exactly prostitutes but who were also not exactly anything else.
(Laughter) My particular favorite was a blonde woman from the Deep South who eventually admitted to me that she was really a necrophiliac, and had taken this job after she got in trouble down at the morgue.
(Laughter) These experiences eventually allowed me to have some happy physical relationships with women, for which I'm grateful.
But I was at war with myself, and I dug terrible wounds into my own psyche.
We don't seek the painful experiences that hew our identities, but we seek our identities in the wake of painful experiences.
We cannot bear a pointless torment, but we can endure great pain if we believe that it's purposeful.
Ease makes less of an impression on us than struggle.
We could have been ourselves without our delights, but not without the misfortunes that drive our search for meaning.
"Therefore, I take pleasure in infirmities," St. Paul wrote in Second Corinthians, "for when I am weak, then I am strong."
In 1988, I went to Moscow to interview artists of the Soviet underground.
I expected their work to be dissident and political.
But the radicalism in their work actually lay in reinserting humanity into a society that was annihilating humanity itself, as, in some senses, Russian society is now doing again.
One of the artists I met said to me, "We were in training to be not artists but angels."
In 1991, I went back to see the artists I'd been writing about, and I was with them during the putsch that ended the Soviet Union.
And they were among the chief organizers of the resistance to that putsch.
And on the third day of the putsch, one of them suggested we walk up to Smolenskaya.
And we went there, and we arranged ourselves in front of one of the barricades, and a little while later, a column of tanks rolled up.
And the soldier on the front tank said, "We have unconditional orders to destroy this barricade.
If you get out of the way, we don't need to hurt you.
But if you won't move, we'll have no choice but to run you down."
The artist I was with said, "Give us just a minute.
Give us just a minute to tell you why we're here."
And the soldier folded his arms, and the artist launched into a Jeffersonian panegyric to democracy such as those of us who live in a Jeffersonian democracy would be hard-pressed to present.
And they went on and on, and the soldier watched.
And then he sat there for a full minute after they were finished and looked at us, so bedraggled in the rain, and said, "What you have said is true, and we must bow to the will of the people.
If you'll clear enough space for us to turn around, we'll go back the way we came."
And that's what they did.
Sometimes, forging meaning can give you the vocabulary you need to fight for your ultimate freedom.
Russia awakened me to the lemonade notion that oppression breeds the power to oppose it.
And I gradually understood that as the cornerstone of identity.
It took identity to rescue me from sadness.
The gay rights movement posits a world in which my aberrances are a victory.
Identity politics always works on two fronts: to give pride to people who have a given condition or characteristic, and to cause the outside world to treat such people more gently and more kindly.
Those are two totally separate enterprises, but progress in each sphere reverberates in the other.
Identity politics can be narcissistic.
People extol a difference only because it's theirs.
People narrow the world and function in discrete groups without empathy for one another.
But properly understood and wisely practiced, identity politics should expand our idea of what it is to be human.
Identity itself should be not a smug label or a gold medal, but a revolution.
I would have had an easier life if I were straight, but I would not be me.
And I now like being myself better than the idea of being someone else, someone who, to be honest, I have neither the option of being nor the ability fully to imagine.
But if you banish the dragons, you banish the heroes, and we become attached to the heroic strain in our own lives.
I've sometimes wondered whether I could have ceased to hate that part of myself without gay pride's technicolor fiesta, of which this speech is one manifestation.
(Laughter) I used to think I would know myself to be mature when I could simply be gay without emphasis.
But the self-loathing of that period left a void, and celebration needs to fill and overflow it, and even if I repay my private debt of melancholy, there's still an outer world of homophobia that it will take decades to address.
Someday, being gay will be a simple fact, free of party hats and blame.
But not yet.
A friend of mine who thought gay pride was getting very carried away with itself, once suggested that we organize Gay Humility Week.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's a great idea.
(Laughter) But its time has not yet come.
(Laughter) And neutrality, which seems to lie halfway between despair and celebration, is actually the endgame.
In 29 states in the US, I could legally be fired or denied housing for being gay.
In Russia, the anti-propaganda law has led to people being beaten in the streets.
Twenty-seven African countries have passed laws against sodomy.
And in Nigeria, gay people can legally be stoned to death, and lynchings have become common.
In Saudi Arabia recently, two men who had been caught in carnal acts were sentenced to 7,000 lashes each, and are now permanently disabled as a result.
So who can forge meaning and build identity?
Gay rights are not primarily marriage rights, and for the millions who live in unaccepting places with no resources, dignity remains elusive.
I am lucky to have forged meaning and built identity, but that's still a rare privilege.
And gay people deserve more, collectively, than the crumbs of justice.
And yet, every step forward is so sweet.
In 2007, six years after we met, my partner and I decided to get married.
Meeting John had been the discovery of great happiness and also the elimination of great unhappiness.
And sometimes, I was so occupied with the disappearance of all that pain, that I forgot about the joy, which was at first the less remarkable part of it to me.
Marrying was a way to declare our love as more a presence than an absence.
Marriage soon led us to children, and that meant new meanings and new identities -- ours and theirs.
I want my children to be happy, and I love them most achingly when they are sad.
As a gay father, I can teach them to own what is wrong in their lives, but I believe that if I succeed in sheltering them from adversity, I will have failed as a parent.
A Buddhist scholar I know once explained to me that Westerners mistakenly think that nirvana is what arrives when all your woe is behind you, and you have only bliss to look forward to.
But he said that would not be nirvana, because your bliss in the present would always be shadowed by the joy from the past.
Nirvana, he said, is what you arrive at when you have only bliss to look forward to and find in what looked like sorrows the seedlings of your joy.
And I sometimes wonder whether I could have found such fulfillment in marriage and children if they'd come more readily, if I'd been straight in my youth or were young now, in either of which cases this might be easier.
Perhaps I could.
Perhaps all the complex imagining I've done could have been applied to other topics.
But if seeking meaning matters more than finding meaning, the question is not whether I'd be happier for having been bullied, but whether assigning meaning to those experiences has made me a better father.
I tend to find the ecstasy hidden in ordinary joys, because I did not expect those joys to be ordinary to me.
I know many heterosexuals who have equally happy marriages and families, but gay marriage is so breathtakingly fresh, and gay families so exhilaratingly new, and I found meaning in that surprise.
In October, it was my 50th birthday, and my family organized a party for me.
And in the middle of it, my son said to my husband that he wanted to make a speech.
And John said, "George, you can't make a speech. You're four."
(Laughter) "Only Grandpa and Uncle David and I are going to make speeches tonight."
But George insisted and insisted, and finally, John took him up to the microphone, and George said very loudly, "Ladies and gentlemen!
May I have your attention, please?"
And everyone turned around, startled.
And George said, "I'm glad it's daddy's birthday.
I'm glad we all get cake.
And Daddy, if you were little, I'd be your friend."
(Gasp) And I thought -- (Applause) Thank you.
I thought that I was indebted even to Bobby Finkel, because all those earlier experiences were what had propelled me to this moment, and I was finally unconditionally grateful for a life I'd once have done anything to change.
The gay activist Harvey Milk was once asked by a younger gay man what he could do to help the movement, and Harvey Milk said, "Go out and tell someone."
There's always somebody who wants to confiscate our humanity.
And there are always stories that restore it.
If we live out loud, we can trounce the hatred, and expand everyone's lives.
Forge meaning.
Forge meaning.
Build identity.
And then invite the world to share your joy.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
So it was the fall of 1902, and President Theodore Roosevelt needed a little break from the White House, so he took a train to Mississippi to do a little black bear hunting outside of a town called Smedes.
The first day of the hunt, they didn't see a single bear, so it was a big bummer for everyone, but the second day, the dogs cornered one after a really long chase, but by that point, the president had given up and gone back to camp for lunch, so his hunting guide cracked the animal on the top of the head with the butt of his rifle, and then tied it up to a tree and started tooting away on his bugle to call Roosevelt back so he could have the honor of shooting it.
The bear was a female.
It was dazed, injured, severely underweight, a little mangy-looking, and when Roosevelt saw this animal tied up to the tree, he just couldn't bring himself to fire at it.
He felt like that would go against his code as a sportsman.
A few days later, the scene was memorialized in a political cartoon back in Washington.
It was called "Drawing a Line in Mississippi," and it showed Roosevelt with his gun down and his arm out, sparing the bear's life, and the bear was sitting on its hind legs with these two big, frightened, wide eyes and little ears pricked up at the top of its head.
It looked really helpless, like you just wanted to sweep it up into your arms and reassure it.
It wouldn't have looked familiar at the time, but if you go looking for the cartoon now, you recognize the animal right away: It's a teddy bear.
And this is how the teddy bear was born.
Essentially, toymakers took the bear from the cartoon, turned it into a plush toy, and then named it after President Roosevelt -- Teddy's bear.
And I do feel a little ridiculous that I'm up here on this stage and I'm choosing to use my time to tell you about a 100-year-old story about the invention of a squishy kid's toy, but I'd argue that the invention of the teddy bear, inside that story is a more important story, a story about how dramatically our ideas about nature can change, and also about how, on the planet right now, the stories that we tell are dramatically changing nature.
Because think about the teddy bear.
For us, in retrospect, it feels like an obvious fit, because bears are so cute and cuddly, and who wouldn't want to give one to their kids to play with, but the truth is that in 1902, bears weren't cute and cuddly.
I mean, they looked the same, but no one thought of them that way.
In 1902, bears were monsters.
Bears were something that frickin' terrified kids.
For generations at that point, the bear had been a shorthand for all the danger that people were encountering on the frontier, and the federal government was actually systematically exterminating bears and lots of other predators too, like coyotes and wolves.
These animals, they were being demonized.
They were called murderers because they killed people's livestock.
One government biologist, he explained this war on animals like the bear by saying that they no longer had a place in our advancing civilization, and so we were just clearing them out of the way.
In one 10-year period, close to half a million wolves had been slaughtered.
The grizzly would soon be wiped out from 95 percent of its original territory, and whereas once there had been 30 million bison moving across the plains, and you would have these stories of trains having to stop for four or five hours so that these thick, living rivers of the animals could pour over the tracks, now, by 1902, there were maybe less than 100 left in the wild.
And so what I'm saying is, the teddy bear was born into the middle of this great spasm of extermination, and you can see it as a sign that maybe some people deep down were starting to feel conflicted about all that killing.
America still hated the bear and feared it, but all of a sudden, America also wanted to give the bear a great big hug.
So this is something that I've been really curious about in the last few years.
How do we imagine animals, how do we think and feel about them, and how do their reputations get written and then rewritten in our minds?
We're here living in the eye of a great storm of extinction where half the species on the planet could be gone by the end of the century, and so why is it that we come to care about some of those species and not others?
Well, there's a new field, a relatively new field of social science that started looking at these questions and trying to unpack the powerful and sometimes pretty schizophrenic relationships that we have to animals, and I spent a lot of time looking through their academic journals, and all I can really say is that their findings are astonishingly wide-ranging.
So some of my favorites include that the more television a person watches in Upstate New York, the more he or she is afraid of being attacked by a black bear.
If you show a tiger to an American, they're much more likely to assume that it's female and not male.
In a study where a fake snake and a fake turtle were put on the side of the road, drivers hit the snake much more often than the turtle, and about three percent of drivers who hit the fake animals seemed to do it on purpose.
Women are more likely than men to get a "magical feeling" when they see dolphins in the surf.
Sixty-eight percent of mothers with "high feelings of entitlement and self-esteem" identified with the dancing cats in a commercial for Purina. (Laughter) Americans consider lobsters more important than pigeons but also much, much stupider.
Wild turkeys are seen as only slightly more dangerous than sea otters, and pandas are twice as lovable as ladybugs.
So some of this is physical, right?
We tend to sympathize more with animals that look like us, and especially that resemble human babies, so with big, forward-facing eyes and circular faces, kind of a roly-poly posture.
This is why, if you get a Christmas card from, like, your great aunt in Minnesota, there's usually a fuzzy penguin chick on it, and not something like a Glacier Bay wolf spider.
But it's not all physical, right?
There's a cultural dimension to how we think about animals, and we're telling stories about these animals, and like all stories, they are shaped by the times and the places in which we're telling them.
So think about that moment back in 1902 again where a ferocious bear became a teddy bear.
What was the context? Well, America was urbanizing.
For the first time, nearly a majority of people lived in cities, so there was a growing distance between us and nature.
There was a safe space where we could reconsider the bear and romanticize it.
Nature could only start to seem this pure and adorable because we didn't have to be afraid of it anymore.
And you can see that cycle playing out again and again with all kinds of animals.
It seems like we're always stuck between demonizing a species and wanting to wipe it out, and then when we get very close to doing that, empathizing with it as an underdog and wanting to show it compassion.
So we exert our power, but then we're unsettled by how powerful we are.
So for example, this is one of probably thousands of letters and drawings that kids sent to the Bush administration, begging it to protect the polar bear under the Endangered Species Act, and these were sent back in the mid-2000s, when awareness of climate change was suddenly surging.
We kept seeing that image of a polar bear stranded on a little ice floe looking really morose.
I spent days looking through these files.
I really love them. This one's my favorite.
If you can see, it's a polar bear that's drowning and then it's also being eaten simultaneously by a lobster and a shark.
This one came from a kid named Fritz, and he's actually got a solution to climate change.
He's got it all worked out to an ethanol-based solution.
He says, "I feel bad about the polar bears.
I like polar bears.
Everyone can use corn juice for cars. From Fritz."
So 200 years ago, you would have Arctic explorers writing about polar bears leaping into their boats and trying to devour them, even if they lit the bear on fire, but these kids don't see the polar bear that way, and actually they don't even see the polar bear the way that I did back in the '80s.
I mean, we thought of these animals as mysterious and terrifying lords of the Arctic.
But look now how quickly that climate change has flipped the image of the animal in our minds.
It's gone from that bloodthirsty man-killer to this delicate, drowning victim, and when you think about it, that's kind of the conclusion to the story that the teddy bear started telling back in 1902, because back then, America had more or less conquered its share of the continent.
We were just getting around to polishing off these last wild predators.
Now, society's reach has expanded all the way to the top of the world, and it's made even these, the most remote, the most powerful bears on the planet, seem like adorable and blameless victims.
But you know, there's also a postscript to the teddy bear story that not a lot of people talk about.
We're going to talk about it, because even though it didn't really take long after Roosevelt's hunt in 1902 for the toy to become a full-blown craze, most people figured it was a fad, it was a sort of silly political novelty item and it would go away once the president left office, and so by 1909, when Roosevelt's successor, William Howard Taft, was getting ready to be inaugurated, the toy industry was on the hunt for the next big thing.
They didn't do too well.
That January, Taft was the guest of honor at a banquet in Atlanta, and for days in advance, the big news was the menu.
They were going to be serving him a Southern specialty, a delicacy, really, called possum and taters.
So you would have a whole opossum roasted on a bed of sweet potatoes, and then sometimes they'd leave the big tail on it like a big, meaty noodle.
The one brought to Taft's table weighed 18 pounds.
So after dinner, the orchestra started to play, and the guests burst into song, and all of a sudden, Taft was surprised with the presentation of a gift from a group of local supporters, and this was a stuffed opossum toy, all beady-eyed and bald-eared, and it was a new product they were putting forward to be the William Taft presidency's answer to Teddy Roosevelt's teddy bear.
They were calling it the "billy possum."
Within 24 hours, the Georgia Billy Possum Company was up and running, brokering deals for these things nationwide, and the Los Angeles Times announced, very confidently, "The teddy bear has been relegated to a seat in the rear, and for four years, possibly eight, the children of the United States will play with billy possum."
So from that point, there was a fit of opossum fever.
There were billy possum postcards, billy possum pins, billy possum pitchers for your cream at coffee time.
There were smaller billy possums on a stick that kids could wave around like flags.
But even with all this marketing, the life of the billy possum turned out to be just pathetically brief.
The toy was an absolute flop, and it was almost completely forgotten by the end of the year, and what that means is that the billy possum didn't even make it to Christmastime, which when you think about it is a special sort of tragedy for a toy.
So we can explain that failure two ways.
The first, well, it's pretty obvious.
I'm going to go ahead and say it out loud anyway: Opossums are hideous. (Laughter) But maybe more importantly is that the story of the billy possum was all wrong, especially compared to the backstory of the teddy bear.
Think about it: for most of human's evolutionary history, what's made bears impressive to us has been their complete independence from us.
It's that they live these parallel lives as menaces and competitors.
By the time Roosevelt went hunting in Mississippi, that stature was being crushed, and the animal that he had roped to a tree really was a symbol for all bears.
Whether those animals lived or died now was entirely up to the compassion or the indifference of people.
That said something really ominous about the future of bears, but it also said something very unsettling about who we'd become, if the survival of even an animal like that was up to us now.
So now, a century later, if you're at all paying attention to what's happening in the environment, you feel that discomfort so much more intensely.
We're living now in an age of what scientists have started to call "conservation reliance," and what that term means is that we've disrupted so much that nature can't possibly stand on its own anymore, and most endangered species are only going to survive if we stay out there in the landscape riggging the world around them in their favor.
So we've gone hands-on and we can't ever take our hands off, and that's a hell of a lot of work.
Right now, we're training condors not to perch on power lines.
We teach whooping cranes to migrate south for the winter behind little ultra-light airplanes.
We're out there feeding plague vaccine to ferrets.
We monitor pygmy rabbits with drones.
So we've gone from annihilating species to micromanaging the survival of a lot of species indefinitely, and which ones?
Well, the ones that we've told compelling stories about, the ones we've decided ought to stick around.
The line between conservation and domestication is blurred.
So what I've been saying is that the stories that we tell about wild animals are so subjective they can be irrational or romanticized or sensationalized.
Sometimes they just have nothing to do with the facts.
But in a world of conservation reliance, those stories have very real consequences, because now, how we feel about an animal affects its survival more than anything that you read about in ecology textbooks.
Storytelling matters now.
Emotion matters.
Our imagination has become an ecological force.
And so maybe the teddy bear worked in part because the legend of Roosevelt and that bear in Mississippi was kind of like an allegory of this great responsibility that society was just beginning to face up to back then.
It would be another 71 years before the Endangered Species Act was passed, but really, here's its whole ethos boiled down into something like a scene you'd see in a stained glass window.
The bear is a helpless victim tied to a tree, and the president of the United States decided to show it some mercy.
Thank you.
(Applause) [Illustrations by Wendy MacNaughton]
What do augmented reality and professional football have to do with empathy?
And what is the air speed velocity of an unladen swallow?
Now unfortunately, I'm only going to answer one of those questions today, so please, try and contain your disappointment.
When most people think about augmented reality, they think about "Minority Report" and Tom Cruise waving his hands in the air, but augmented reality is not science fiction.
Augmented reality is something that will happen in our lifetime, and it will happen because we have the tools to make it happen, and people need to be aware of that, because augmented reality will change our lives just as much as the Internet and the cell phone.
Now how do we get to augmented reality?
Step one is the step I'm wearing right now, Google Glass.
I'm sure many of you are familiar with Google Glass.
What you may not be familiar with is that Google Glass is a device that will allow you to see what I see.
It will allow you to experience what it is like to be a professional athlete on the field.
Right now, the only way you can be on the field is for me to try and describe it to you.
I have to use words.
I have to create a framework that you then fill in with your imagination.
With Google Glass, we can put that underneath a helmet, and we can get a sense of what it's like to be running down the field at 100 miles an hour, your blood pounding in your ears.
You can get a sense of what it's like to have a 250-pound man sprinting at you trying to decapitate you with every ounce of his being.
And I've been on the receiving end of that, and it doesn't feel very good.
Now, I have some footage to show you of what it's like to wear Google Glass underneath the helmet to give you a taste of that.
Unfortunately, it's not NFL practice footage because the NFL thinks emergent technology is what happens when a submarine surfaces, but — (Laughter) — we do what we can.
So let's pull up some video.
(Video) Chris Kluwe: Go.
Ugh, getting tackled sucks.
Hold on, let's get a little closer.
All right, ready?
Go!
Chris Kluwe: So as you can see, small taste of what it's like to get tackled on the football field from the perspective of the tacklee.
Now, you may have noticed there are some people missing there: the rest of the team.
We have some video of that courtesy of the University of Washington.
(Video) Quarterback: Hey, Mice 54! Mice 54!
Blue 8! Blue 8! Go!
Oh!
CK: So again, this takes you a little bit closer to what it's like to be on that field, but this is nowhere what it's like to be on the NFL.
Fans want that experience.
Fans want to be on that field.
They want to be their favorite players, and they've already talked to me on YouTube, they've talked to me on Twitter, saying, "Hey, can you get this on a quarterback?
Can you get this on a running back?
We want that experience."
Well, once we have that experience with GoPro and Google Glass, how do we make it more immersive?
How do we take that next step?
Well, we take that step by going to something called the Oculus Rift, which I'm sure many of you are also familiar with.
The Oculus Rift has been described as one of the most realistic virtual reality devices ever created, and that is not empty hype.
I'm going to show you why that is not empty hype with this video.
(Video) Man: Oh! Oh!
No! No! No! I don't want to play anymore! No!
Oh my God! Aaaah!
CK: So that is the experience of a man on a roller coaster in fear of his life.
What do you think that fan's experience is going to be when we take the video footage of an Adrian Peterson bursting through the line, shedding a tackler with a stiff-arm before sprinting in for a touchdown?
What do you think that fan's experience is going to be when he's Messi sprinting down the pitch putting the ball in the back of the net, or Federer serving in Wimbledon?
What do you think his experience is going to be when he is going down the side of a mountain at over 70 miles an hour as an Olympic downhill skier?
I think adult diaper sales may surge.
(Laughter) But this is not yet augmented reality.
This is only virtual reality, V.R.
How do we get to augmented reality, A.R.?
We get to augmented reality when coaches and managers and owners look at this information streaming in that people want to see, and they say, "How do we use this to make our teams better?
How do we use this to win games?"
Because teams always use technology to win games.
They like winning. It makes them money.
So a brief history of technology in the NFL.
In 1965, the Baltimore Colts put a wristband on their quarterback to allow him to call plays quicker.
They ended up winning a Super Bowl that year.
Other teams followed suit.
More people watched the game because it was more exciting.
It was faster.
In 1994, the NFL put helmet radios into the helmets of the quarterbacks, and later the defense.
More people watched games because it was faster.
It was more entertaining.
In 2023, imagine you're a player walking back to the huddle, and you have your next play displayed right in front of your face on your clear plastic visor that you already wear right now.
No more having to worry about forgetting plays.
No more worrying about having to memorize your playbook.
You just go out and react.
And coaches really want this, because missed assignments lose you games, and coaches hate losing games.
Losing games gets you fired as a coach.
They don't want that.
But augmented reality is not just an enhanced playbook.
Augmented reality is also a way to take all that data and use it in real time to enhance how you play the game.
What would that be like?
Well, a very simple setup would be a camera on each corner of the stadium looking down, giving you a bird's-eye view of all the people down there.
You also have information from helmet sensors and accelerometers, technology that's being worked on right now.
You take all that information, and you stream it to your players.
The good teams stream it in a way that the players can use.
The bad ones have information overload.
That determines good teams from bad.
And now, your I.T. department is just as important as your scouting department, and data-mining is not for nerds anymore.
It's also for jocks. Who knew?
What would that look like on the field?
Well, imagine you're the quarterback.
You take the snap and you drop back.
You're scanning downfield for an open receiver.
All of a sudden, a bright flash on the left side of your visor lets you know, blind side linebacker is blitzing in.
Normally, you wouldn't be able to see him, but the augmented reality system lets you know.
You step up into the pocket.
Another flash alerts you to an open receiver.
You throw the ball, but you're hit right as you throw.
The ball comes off track.
You don't know where it's going to land.
However, on the receiver's visor, he sees a patch of grass light up, and he knows to readjust.
He goes, catches the ball, sprints in, touchdown.
Crowd goes wild, and the fans are with him every step of the way, watching from every perspective.
Now this is something that will create massive excitement in the game.
It will make tons of people watch, because people want this experience.
Fans want to be on the field.
They want to be their favorite player.
Augmented reality will be a part of sports, because it's too profitable not to.
But the question I ask you is, is that's all that we're content to use augmented reality for?
Are we going to use it solely for our panem, our circenses, our entertainment as normal?
Because I believe that we can use augmented reality for something more.
I believe we can use augmented reality as a way to foster more empathy within the human species itself, by literally showing someone what it looks like to walk a mile in another person's shoes.
We know what this technology is worth to sports leagues.
It's worth revenue, to the tune of billions of dollars a year.
But what is this technology worth to a teacher in a classroom trying to show a bully just how harmful his actions are from the perspective of the victim?
What is this technology worth to a gay Ugandan or Russian trying to show the world what it's like living under persecution?
What is this technology worth to a Commander Hadfield or a Neil deGrasse Tyson trying to inspire a generation of children to think more about space and science instead of quarterly reports and Kardashians?
Ladies and gentlemen, augmented reality is coming.
The questions we ask, the choices we make, and the challenges we face are, as always, up to us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm excited to be here to speak about vets, because I didn't join the Army because I wanted to go to war.
I didn't join the Army because I had a lust or a need to go overseas and fight.
Frankly, I joined the Army because college is really damn expensive, and they were going to help with that, and I joined the Army because it was what I knew, and it was what I knew that I thought I could do well.
I didn't come from a military family.
I'm not a military brat.
No one in my family ever had joined the military at all, and how I first got introduced to the military was when I was 13 years old and I got sent away to military school, because my mother had been threatening me with this idea of military school ever since I was eight years old.
I had some issues when I was coming up, and my mother would always tell me, she's like, "You know, if you don't get this together, I'm going to send you to military school."
And I'd look at her, and I'd say, "Mommy, I'll work harder."
And then when I was nine years old, she started giving me brochures to show me she wasn't playing around, so I'd look at the brochures, and I'm like, "Okay, Mommy, I can see you're serious, and I'll work harder."
And then when I was 10 and 11, my behavior just kept on getting worse.
I was on academic and disciplinary probation before I hit double digits, and I first felt handcuffs on my wrists when I was 11 years old.
And so when I was 13 years old, my mother came up to me, and she was like, "I'm not going to do this anymore.
I'm going to send you to military school."
And I looked at her, and I said, "Mommy, I can see you're upset, and I'm going to work harder."
And she was like, "No, you're going next week."
And that was how I first got introduced to this whole idea of the military, because she thought this was a good idea.
I had to disagree with her wholeheartedly when I first showed up there, because literally in the first four days, I had already run away five times from this school.
They had these big black gates that surrounded the school, and every time they would turn their backs, I would just simply run out of the black gates and take them up on their offer that if we don't want to be there, we can leave at any time.
So I just said, "Well, if that's the case, then I'd like to leave." (Laughter) And it never worked.
And I kept on getting lost.
But then eventually, after staying there for a little while, and after the end of that first year at this military school, I realized that I actually was growing up.
I realized the things that I enjoyed about this school and the thing that I enjoyed about the structure was something that I'd never found before: the fact that I finally felt like I was part of something bigger, part of a team, and it actually mattered to people that I was there, the fact that leadership wasn't just a punchline there, but that it was a real, actually core part of the entire experience.
And so when it was time for me to actually finish up high school, I started thinking about what I wanted to do, and just like probably most students, had no idea what that meant or what I wanted to do.
And I thought about the people who I respected and admired.
I thought about a lot of the people, in particular a lot of the men, in my life who I looked up to.
They all happened to wear the uniform of the United States of America, so for me, the question and the answer really became pretty easy.
The question of what I wanted to do was filled in very quickly with saying, I guess I'll be an Army officer.
So the Army then went through this process and they trained me up, and when I say I didn't join the Army because I wanted to go to war, the truth is, I joined in 1996.
There really wasn't a whole lot going on.
I didn't ever feel like I was in danger.
When I went to my mom, I first joined the Army when I was 17 years old, so I literally needed parental permission to join the Army, so I kind of gave the paperwork to my mom, and she just assumed it was kind of like military school.
She was like, "Well, it was good for him before, so I guess I'll just let him keep doing it," having no idea that the paperwork that she was signing was actually signing her son up to become an Army officer.
And I went through the process, and again the whole time still just thinking, this is great, maybe I'll serve on a weekend, or two weeks during the year, do drill, and then a couple years after I signed up, a couple years after my mother signed those papers, the whole world changed.
And after 9/11, there was an entirely new context about the occupation that I chose.
When I first joined, I never joined to fight, but now that I was in, this is exactly what was now going to happen.
And I thought about so much about the soldiers who I eventually had to end up leading.
I remember when we first, right after 9/11, three weeks after 9/11, I was on a plane heading overseas, but I wasn't heading overseas with the military, I was heading overseas because I got a scholarship to go overseas.
I received the scholarship to go overseas and to go study and live overseas, and I was living in England and that was interesting, but at the same time, the same people who I was training with, the same soldiers that I went through all my training with, and we prepared for war, they were now actually heading over to it.
They were now about to find themselves in the middle of places the fact is the vast majority of people, the vast majority of us as we were training, couldn't even point out on a map.
I spent a couple years finishing graduate school, and the whole entire time while I'm sitting there in buildings at Oxford that were literally built hundreds of years before the United States was even founded, and I'm sitting there talking to dons about the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand, and how that influenced the start of World War I, where the entire time my heart and my head were on my soldiers who were now throwing on Kevlars and grabbing their flak vests and figuring out how exactly do I change around or how exactly do I clean a machine gun in the darkness.
That was the new reality.
By the time I finished that up and I rejoined my military unit and we were getting ready to deploy to Afghanistan, there were soldiers in my unit who were now on their second and third deployments before I even had my first.
I remember walking out with my unit for the first time, and when you join the Army and you go through a combat tour, everyone looks at your shoulder, because on your shoulder is your combat patch.
And so immediately as you meet people, you shake their hand, and then your eyes go to their shoulder, because you want to see where did they serve, or what unit did they serve with?
And I was the only person walking around with a bare shoulder, and it burned every time someone stared at it.
But you get a chance to talk to your soldiers, and you ask them why did they sign up.
I signed up because college was expensive.
A lot of my soldiers signed up for completely different reasons.
They signed up because of a sense of obligation.
They signed up because they were angry and they wanted to do something about it.
They signed up because their family said this was important.
They signed up because they wanted some form of revenge.
They signed for a whole collection of different reasons.
And now we all found ourselves overseas fighting in these conflicts.
And what was amazing to me was that I very naively started hearing this statement that I never fully understood, because right after 9/11, you start hearing this idea where people come up to you and they say, "Well, thank you for your service."
And I just kind of followed in and started saying the same things to all my soldiers.
This is even before I deployed.
But I really had no idea what that even meant.
I just said it because it sounded right.
I said it because it sounded like the right thing to say to people who had served overseas.
"Thank you for your service."
But I had no idea what the context was or what that even, what it even meant to the people who heard it.
When I first came back from Afghanistan, I thought that if you make it back from conflict, then the dangers were all over.
I thought that if you made it back from a conflict zone that somehow you could kind of wipe the sweat off your brow and say, "Whew, I'm glad I dodged that one," without understanding that for so many people, as they come back home, the war keeps going.
It keeps playing out in all of our minds.
It plays out in all of our memories.
It plays out in all of our emotions.
Please forgive us if we don't like being in big crowds.
Please forgive us when we spend one week in a place that has 100 percent light discipline, because you're not allowed to walk around with white lights, because if anything has a white light, it can be seen from miles away, versus if you use little green or little blue lights, they cannot be seen from far away.
So please forgive us if out of nowhere, we go from having 100 percent light discipline to then a week later being back in the middle of Times Square, and we have a difficult time adjusting to that.
Please forgive us when you transition back to a family who has completely been maneuvering without you, and now when you come back, it's not that easy to fall back into a sense of normality, because the whole normal has changed.
I remember when I came back, I wanted to talk to people.
I wanted people to ask me about my experiences.
I wanted people to come up to me and tell me, "What did you do?"
I wanted people to come up to me and tell me, "What was it like? What was the food like?
What was the experience like? How are you doing?"
And the only questions I got from people was, "Did you shoot anybody?"
And those were the ones who were even curious enough to say anything.
Because sometimes there's this fear and there's this apprehension that if I say anything, I'm afraid I'll offend, or I'm afraid I'll trigger something, so the common default is just saying nothing.
The problem with that is then it feels like your service was not even acknowledged, like no one even cared.
"Thank you for your service," and we move on.
What I wanted to better understand was what's behind that, and why "thank you for your service" isn't enough.
The fact is, we have literally 2.6 million men and women who are veterans of Iraq or Afghanistan who are all amongst us.
Sometimes we know who they are, sometimes we don't, but there is that feeling, the shared experience, the shared bond where we know that that experience and that chapter of our life, while it might be closed, it's still not over.
We think about "thank you for your service," and people say, "So what does 'thank you for your service' mean to you?"
Well, "Thank you for your service" means to me, it means acknowledging our stories, asking us who we are, understanding the strength that so many people, so many people who we serve with, have, and why that service means so much.
"Thank you for your service" means acknowledging the fact that just because we've now come home and we've taken off the uniform does not mean our larger service to this country is somehow over.
The fact is, there's still a tremendous amount that can be offered and can be given.
When I look at people like our friend Taylor Urruela, who in Iraq loses his leg, had two big dreams in his life.
One was to be a soldier. The other was to be a baseball player.
He loses his leg in Iraq.
He comes back and instead of deciding that, well, now since I've lost my leg, that second dream is over, he decides that he still has that dream of playing baseball, and he starts this group called VETSports, which now works with veterans all over the country and uses sports as a way of healing.
People like Tammy Duckworth, who was a helicopter pilot and with the helicopter that she was flying, you need to use both your hands and also your legs to steer, and her helicopter gets hit, and she's trying to steer the chopper, but the chopper's not reacting to her instructions and to her commands.
She's trying to land the chopper safely, but the chopper doesn't land safely, and the reason it's not landing safely is because it's not responding to the commands that her legs are giving because her legs were blown off.
She barely survives.
Medics come and they save her life, but then as she's doing her recuperation back at home, she realizes that, "My job's still not done."
And now she uses her voice as a Congresswoman from Illinois to fight and advocate for a collection of issues to include veterans issues.
We signed up because we love this country we represent.
We signed up because we believe in the idea and we believe in the people to our left and to our right.
And the only thing we then ask is that "thank you for your service" needs to be more than just a quote break, that "thank you for your service" means honestly digging in to the people who have stepped up simply because they were asked to, and what that means for us not just now, not just during combat operations, but long after the last vehicle has left and after the last shot has been taken.
These are the people who I served with, and these are the people who I honor.
So thank you for your service.
(Applause)
How many of you have had your doctor ask you about sex?
Your mental health?
Alcohol use?
These questions are almost universal.
But how many of you have had your doctor ask you about money?
Most of us haven't.
But that is strange, because compared to most high-income countries, child poverty is an epidemic in the United States.
It creates conditions that may elevate stress hormone levels and impair brain development.
Poor children in the US are one and a half times more likely to die and twice as likely to be hospitalized as their middle-class counterparts.
So my colleague Dr. Michael Hole and I started asking moms about money.
We knew we needed to reimagine what a doctor's visit looks like, to get kids out of poverty and to give them a fair shot at a healthy life.
Our questions led to a surprising solution: tax credits.
It turns out, the earned income tax credit, or EITC, is the best poverty prescription we have in the US.
The average mom gets two to three thousand dollars a year from it.
When families get it, moms and babies are healthier: fewer depressed moms, babies weighing more at birth.
But one out of five families who could get it doesn't, and most who do lose of hundreds of dollars to the for-profit tax-preparation industry.
One day, a mom asked us why we couldn't do her taxes while she waited for the doctor.
(Laughter) We all know that purgatory. Why not make good use of that time?
So we started StreetCred, an organization prescribing tax preparation in clinics serving kids.
This is a brand-new approach and one that left some questioning our sanity.
After all, we're doctors, not accountants.
But we have something accountants don't: access to families.
Over 90 percent of kids in the US see a doctor at least once a year.
Their parents trust us and will do anything to give them a better life.
Doctors in every clinic around the country could be doing this work, too -- it's simple, really.
The hospital registers as a tax-preparation site, and everyone, from medical students to retirees, can volunteer as a tax preparer after passing an IRS exam.
It's not as hard as it sounds, I promise.
I certainly never thought I would be doing other people's taxes, but here I am.
We're nearing the end of our third year.
In the first two, we returned 1.6 million dollars to 750 families in Boston alone.
This year -- (Applause) This year, we've expanded to nine sites in four states.
Sixty-three percent of our families have never heard of the EITC.
How can you claim something you haven't heard of?
And half have never used free tax preparation.
That two to three thousand dollars a year goes a long way.
Take hunger.
An adequately nutritious, low-cost diet for a mom and two young kids costs 477 dollars a month.
With EITC money, that family can eat for five to six months.
Or think about medical care.
Twenty million children in the US lack access to care meeting modern pediatric standards.
And yet, the average cost of that care is only 400 dollars per kid per year.
EITC money can help fix this access problem.
Perhaps most powerfully of all, this money gives moms hope.
One mom used her refund for her son to study abroad in Spain.
She was struggling to pay her rent, but she saw EITC money as his shot at a better future.
We have an opportunity, as doctors and as citizens, to get to the root of this problem.
We can reimagine health care as a place addressing the causes of poor health, be it infections or finances.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I first tried online dating my freshman year of college, which was in 2001, in case you can't see my wrinkle.
Now, as you may have noticed, I'm six-feet tall, and when I arrived at my chosen university and realized our men's Division III basketball team averaged five-foot-eight, I abandoned the on-campus scene and went online.
Now, back then, online dating was pretty close to the plot of "You've Got Mail."
You'd write long emails back and forth for weeks, before you finally met up in real life.
Except, in my case, you'd realize you have no chemistry and so now, you're back to square one.
So, while online dating has changed a lot in the last 17 years, many of the frustrations remain the same.
Because here's what it does well.
It broadens your pool of potential dates beyond your existing social and professional circles.
And here's what it doesn't do well.
Literally everything else.
(Laughter) A few things you should know about me: I'm an action-oriented overachieving math and theater nerd, who ended up with an MBA.
So, when things aren't working out, I tend to take a step back, apply my business toolkit to figure out why, and to fix it.
My love life was no exception.
The summer before I turned 30, I took myself on a relationship off-site.
Which means I went camping solo in Maine for a week, to do a retro on my track record of mediocre relationships.
Because the thing was, I knew what I wanted in a partner.
Kindness, curiosity, empathy, a sense of purpose.
And yet, here's what I chose for online: Ivy League degree, six feet or taller, lives within 12 subway stops of me.
It's not that I intentionally prioritized those things, it's just the easiest to vet for online.
It kind of is like a résumé review, which is why these guys looked great on paper and never quite fit me.
So when I went back online in the spring of 2016, I decided to reengineer the process through some classic business tools.
First, I went to OkCupid, because I wanted to avoid the gamification of swipe-based apps.
And also, because I wanted a writing sample.
Next, I set up a sales funnel, throwing out any sense of my type, and instead defining the criteria that would qualify a lead.
An inbound message had to do three things: had to be written in complete sentences and with good grammar; it had to reference something in my profile, so I know it's not a copy-and-paste situation; and it had to avoid all sexual content.
I figured this was a pretty low bar, but it turns out, of my 210 inbound messages, only 14 percent cleared that hurdle.
(Laughter) Next, I wanted to meet in real life as quickly as possible, because the things I cared about, I couldn't see online.
But the research, and my experience, shows you only need about 30 seconds with someone to tell if you click.
So I invented the zero date.
The zero date is one drink, one hour.
With the goal of answering one question: Would I like to have dinner with this person?
Not "are they the one"?
Literally, "Would I like to spend three hours across the table from this person?"
You tell them you have a hard stop -- drinks with girlfriends, a conference call with China -- it doesn't matter, they don't know you.
The point is one hour.
If it's awesome, you schedule a first date.
And if it's not awesome, you downshift into entertainer mode and you workshop a few new stories for your next networking event.
Plus, because it's just an hour, you can squeeze up to three in one evening and then you only have to do your hair and pick out one great outfit a week.
The zero date also gave me a chance to see how they responded to me asking them out.
I figured not everyone would dig my moxie, and I was right.
Of my 29 qualified leads, only 15 replied to my message, and of those, six scheduled a zero date.
My first zero date was with a set designer.
And we were both into yoga and preferred our bagels with peanut butter, so it looked pretty promising.
But two minutes in, I could tell it wasn't going to be a thing and I was relieved not to be spending dinner with him.
After that, I was a little nervous about going to my next zero date.
But we had agreed to meet on the Brooklyn Heights Promenade with a flask of whiskey to watch the sunset, and honestly, it was two blocks from my apartment.
Plus, this guy had a podcast, I have a podcast, worst case scenario, we can talk about our podcasts.
Then, Chas set down next to me.
And this kind and empathetic man told great jokes and asked even better questions.
He was a lawyer and a writer, and his eyes twinkled when he laughed and they squeezed tight when I kissed him and at some point in the evening, our zero date became a first date.
And two years later, we have a washer, dryer and two house plants together.
Now, I can't promise you're going to end up with house plants.
But the point of this story is that online dating doesn't have to suck.
Don't treat it like a game, and don't treat it like a resume review.
Instead, use it to source and qualify leads and then get offline as quickly as possible with the zero date.
Because the point of this isn't swiping.
It's finding your person.
Good luck.
(Applause)
Look at these images.
Now, tell me which Obama here is real.
(Video) Barack Obama: To help families refinance their homes, to invest in things like high-tech manufacturing, clean energy and the infrastructure that creates good new jobs.
Supasorn Suwajanakorn: Anyone?
The answer is none of them.
(Laughter) None of these is actually real.
So let me tell you how we got here.
My inspiration for this work was a project meant to preserve our last chance for learning about the Holocaust from the survivors.
It's called New Dimensions in Testimony, and it allows you to have interactive conversations with a hologram of a real Holocaust survivor.
(Video) Man: How did you survive the Holocaust?
(Video) Hologram: How did I survive?
I survived, I believe, because providence watched over me.
SS: Turns out these answers were prerecorded in a studio.
Yet the effect is astounding.
You feel so connected to his story and to him as a person.
I think there's something special about human interaction that makes it much more profound and personal than what books or lectures or movies could ever teach us.
So I saw this and began to wonder, can we create a model like this for anyone?
A model that looks, talks and acts just like them?
So I set out to see if this could be done and eventually came up with a new solution that can build a model of a person using nothing but these: existing photos and videos of a person.
If you can leverage this kind of passive information, just photos and video that are out there, that's the key to scaling to anyone.
By the way, here's Richard Feynman, who in addition to being a Nobel Prize winner in physics was also known as a legendary teacher.
Wouldn't it be great if we could bring him back to give his lectures and inspire millions of kids, perhaps not just in English but in any language?
Or if you could ask our grandparents for advice and hear those comforting words even if they're no longer with us?
Or maybe using this tool, book authors, alive or not, could read aloud all of their books for anyone interested.
The creative possibilities here are endless, and to me, that's very exciting.
And here's how it's working so far.
First, we introduce a new technique that can reconstruct a high-detailed 3D face model from any image without ever 3D-scanning the person.
And here's the same output model from different views.
This also works on videos, by running the same algorithm on each video frame and generating a moving 3D model.
And here's the same output model from different angles.
It turns out this problem is very challenging, but the key trick is that we are going to analyze a large photo collection of the person beforehand.
For George W. Bush, we can just search on Google, and from that, we are able to build an average model, an iterative, refined model to recover the expression in fine details, like creases and wrinkles.
What's fascinating about this is that the photo collection can come from your typical photos.
It doesn't really matter what expression you're making or where you took those photos.
What matters is that there are a lot of them.
And we are still missing color here, so next, we develop a new blending technique that improves upon a single averaging method and produces sharp facial textures and colors.
And this can be done for any expression.
Now we have a control of a model of a person, and the way it's controlled now is by a sequence of static photos.
Notice how the wrinkles come and go, depending on the expression.
We can also use a video to drive the model.
(Video) Daniel Craig: Right, but somehow, we've managed to attract some more amazing people.
SS: And here's another fun demo.
So what you see here are controllable models of people I built from their internet photos.
Now, if you transfer the motion from the input video, we can actually drive the entire party.
George W. Bush: It's a difficult bill to pass, because there's a lot of moving parts, and the legislative processes can be ugly.
(Applause) SS: So coming back a little bit, our ultimate goal, rather, is to capture their mannerisms or the unique way each of these people talks and smiles.
So to do that, can we actually teach the computer to imitate the way someone talks by only showing it video footage of the person?
And what I did exactly was, I let a computer watch 14 hours of pure Barack Obama giving addresses.
And here's what we can produce given only his audio.
(Video) BO: The results are clear.
America's businesses have created 14.5 million new jobs over 75 straight months.
SS: So what's being synthesized here is only the mouth region, and here's how we do it.
Our pipeline uses a neural network to convert and input audio into these mouth points.
(Video) BO: We get it through our job or through Medicare or Medicaid.
SS: Then we synthesize the texture, enhance details and teeth, and blend it into the head and background from a source video.
(Video) BO: Women can get free checkups, and you can't get charged more just for being a woman.
Young people can stay on a parent's plan until they turn 26.
SS: I think these results seem very realistic and intriguing, but at the same time frightening, even to me.
Our goal was to build an accurate model of a person, not to misrepresent them.
But one thing that concerns me is its potential for misuse.
People have been thinking about this problem for a long time, since the days when Photoshop first hit the market.
As a researcher, I'm also working on countermeasure technology, and I'm part of an ongoing effort at AI Foundation, which uses a combination of machine learning and human moderators to detect fake images and videos, fighting against my own work.
And one of the tools we plan to release is called Reality Defender, which is a web-browser plug-in that can flag potentially fake content automatically, right in the browser.
(Applause) Despite all this, though, fake videos could do a lot of damage, even before anyone has a chance to verify, so it's very important that we make everyone aware of what's currently possible so we can have the right assumption and be critical about what we see.
There's still a long way to go before we can fully model individual people and before we can ensure the safety of this technology.
But I'm excited and hopeful, because if we use it right and carefully, this tool can allow any individual's positive impact on the world to be massively scaled and really help shape our future the way we want it to be.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm really, really, really excited to be here.
I kind of want to tell you a little bit more of the - I don't want to say basics - because we really don't know anything about my syndrome.
I was born with this very rare syndrome, that only two other people in the world including myself, that we know of, have.
Basically what this syndrome causes, is that I cannot gain weight.
Yes, it does sound as good as it is.
(Laughter) I could eat absolutely whatever I want, whenever I want and I won't really gain any weight.
I'm going to be 25 in March, and I've never weighed over about 64 pounds in my entire life.
When I was in college, I hid - well, I didn't 'hide' it, everyone knew it was there - but it was a giant tub of Twinkies, donuts, chips, Skittles, and my roommate would say, "I could hear you at 12:30 am, reaching under your bed to get food."
But I'm like, "You know what? It's alright, I can do these things!"
Because there are benefits to this syndrome.
There are benefits to not being able to gain weight.
There are benefits to being visually impaired.
There are benefits to being kind of really small.
A lot of people think, "Lizzie, how in the world are you saying there are benefits when you can only see out of one eye?"
Well, let me tell you what the benefits are because they are great.
I wear contacts--conTACT. Half-off conTACTS.
(Laughter) When I wear my reading glasses: half-off prescription.
If somebody is annoying me, being rude: Stand on my right side.
(Laughter) It's like you're not even there. I don't even know you're standing there.
Right now, if I stand like this, I have no clue that there's this whole side of the room.
Also, being small, I am very willing to volunteer myself to go to Weight Watchers or to some gym, and say, "Hi, I'm Lizzie. I will be your poster child.
Put my face on whatever you need, and I will say, 'Hi! I used this program. Look how well it worked.'" (Laughter) Even though there are amazing things that have come from this syndrome, there are also things that have been very, very difficult, as you can imagine.
Growing up, I was raised 150% normally.
I was my parents' first child.
And when I was born, the doctors told my mom, "Your daughter has no amniotic fluid around her.
At all."
So when I was born, it was a miracle that I came out screaming.
The doctors told my parents, "We just want to warn you: Expect your daughter to never be able to talk, walk, crawl, think, or do anything by herself."
Now, as first-time parents, you would think that my parents would say, "Oh no. Why? Why are we getting our first child with all these unknown problems?"
But that's not what they did.
The first thing they told the doctor was, "We want to see her, and we are going to take her home and love her, and raise her to the best of our abilities."
And that's what they did.
I credit pretty much everything that I've done in my life to my parents.
My dad is here with me today, and my mom is at home watching.
Hi mom! (Laughter) She's recovering from surgery.
She has been the glue that's held our family together, and she's given me the strength to see that she's going through so much, but she has this fighting spirit that she's instilled in me, so that I have proudly been able to stand in front of people and say, "You know what? I've had a really difficult life.
But that's okay."
That's okay. Things have been scary, things have been tough.
One of the biggest things that I had to deal with growing up was something I'm pretty sure every single one of us in this room has dealt with before.
Can you guess what that is?
It starts with a 'B'. Can you guys guess it?
Audience: Boys! Lizzie: Boys?
(Laughter) Bullying!
(Laughter) I know what you all are thinking.
(Laughter) Why can't I sit here with them? (Laughter) I had to deal with bullying a lot, but as I said, I was raised very normally, so when I started kindergarten, I had absolutely no idea that I looked different.
No clue.
I couldn't see that I looked different from other kids.
I think of it as a big slap of reality for a five year-old, because I went in to school the first day, decked-out in Pocahontas gear.
I was ready!
(Laughter) I went in with my backpack that looked like a turtle shell because it was bigger than me, and I walked up to a little girl and smiled at her, and she looked up at me like I was a monster, like I was the scariest thing she had ever seen in her life.
My first reaction was, "She is really rude.
(Laughter) I am a fun kid, and she's the one missing out.
So I'll just go over here and play with blocks. Or boys."
(Laughter) (Lizzie laughs) I thought the day would get better, and unfortunately, it didn't.
The day got worse and worse. A lot of people just wanted to have absolutely nothing to do with me, and I couldn't understand why.
Why? What did I do? I didn't do anything to them!
In my mind I was still a really cool kid.
I had to go home and ask my parents, "What's wrong with me?
What did I do? Why don't they like me?"
They sat me down and said, "Lizzie, the only thing different about you is that you're smaller than the other kids.
You have this syndrome, but it's not going to define who you are."
They said, "Go to school, pick your head up, smile, continue to be yourself, and people will see that you're just like them."
And so that's what I did.
I want you to think, and ask yourself this in your head, right now: What defines you?
Who are you?
Is it where you come from? Is it your background? Is it your friends?
What is it?
What defines who you are as a person?
It's taken me a very long time to figure out what defines me.
For so long I thought what defined me was my outer appearance. I thought that my little tiny legs, and my little arms, and my little face were ugly.
I thought I was disgusting.
I hated when I'd wake up in the morning when I was going to middle school, and would be looking in the mirror getting ready, and thinking, "Can I just scrub this syndrome off?
It would make my life so much easier if I could just scrub it off.
I could look like other kids; I wouldn't have to buy clothes that had Dora the Explorer on them. I wouldn't have to buy stuff that was 'Bedazzled', when I was trying to be like the cool kids."
I would wish, and pray, and hope, and do whatever I could so I would wake up in the morning and be different, and I wouldn't have to deal with these struggles.
It's what I wanted every single day, and every single day I was disappointed.
I have an amazing support system around me, who never pity me, who are there to pick me up if I'm sad, who are there to laugh with me during the good times, and they taught me that, even though I have this syndrome, even though things are hard, I can't let that define me.
My life was put into my hands, just like your lives are put into yours.
You are the person in the front seat of your car.
You are the one who decides whether your car goes down a bad path, or a good path.
You are the one who decides what defines you.
Now let me tell you: it could be really hard to figure out what defines you, because there were times when I'd get so annoyed and frustrated, and say: "I don't care what defines me!"
When I was in high school I found a video, unfortunately, that somebody posted of me, labeling me the world's ugliest woman.
There were over four million views to this video; eight seconds long, no sound, thousands of comments; people saying, "Lizzie, please - please - just do the world a favor, put a gun to your head, and kill yourself."
Think about that, if people told you that, if strangers told you this.
I cried my eyes out of course, and I was ready to fight back and something kind of clicked in my head, and I thought, "I'm just going to leave it alone."
I started realizing that my life is in my hands.
I could either choose to make this really good, or I could choose to make this really bad.
I could be grateful, and open my eyes and realize the things that I do have, and make those the things that define me.
I can't see out of one eye, but I can see out of the other.
I might get sick a lot, but I have really nice hair.
(Laughter) (Audience) You do, you do!
Thanks.
You guys are like the best little section right here.
(Laughter) (Lizzie laughs) You made me lose my train of thought!
(Laughter) Okay... where was I?
Audience: Your hair!
Hair! Hair. Ok, ok, thank you. Thank you, thank you, thank you.
So I could either choose to be happy or I could choose to be upset with what I have and still kind of complain about it, but then I started realizing: Am I going to let the people who called me a monster define me?
Am I going to let the people who said, "Kill it with fire!" define me?
No; I'm going to let my goals, and my success, and my accomplishments be the things that define me - Not my outer appearance, not the fact that I'm visually impaired, not the fact that I have this syndrome that nobody knows what it is.
So I told myself I'm going to work my butt off and do whatever I could to make myself better, because in my mind, the best way that I could get back at all those people who made fun of me, who teased me, who called me ugly, who called me a monster was to make myself better, and to show them: You know what?
Tell me those negative things, I'm going to turn them around, and I'm going to use them as a ladder to climb up to my goals.
That's what I did.
I told myself that I wanted to be a motivational speaker, I wanted to write a book, graduate college, have my own family, and have my own career.
Eight years later, I’m standing in front of you, still doing motivational speaking.
First thing, I accomplished it.
I wanted to write a book; in a couple of weeks I will be submitting the manuscript for my third book.
(Applause) I wanted to graduate college, and I just finished college.
(Cheers and applause) I'm getting a degree in Communication Studies from Texas State University in San Marcos, and I have a minor in English.
I really, really tried to use real-life experience while I was getting my degree, and my professors were not having it.
I wanted to have, lastly, my own family and my own career.
The family part is kind of down the line, and my career part, I feel like I'm really doing well with it, considering the fact that when I decided I wanted to be a motivational speaker, I went home, I sat in front of my laptop, went to Google, and typed in: "How to be a motivational speaker."
(Laughter) I'm not even joking.
I worked my butt off. I used the people who were telling me that I couldn't do this to motivate me.
I used their negativity to light my fire to keep going.
Use that. Use that. Use that negativity that you have in your life to make yourself better, because I guarantee you - guarantee you - You will win.
Now I want to end, with asking you again.
I want you to leave here, and ask yourself what defines you.
But remember: Brave starts here.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As I have been recently hearing about disturbing sad news, I often think about the idea of loving yourself.
We have been taught to love other people as an important value, but I think loving our own selves hasn't been considered to be an issue worth talking about.
Why?
It may be because it's too obvious, that we love ourselves, to take up the issue and stress the importance.
All of us can't avoid being egoistic, sometimes.
We want to have things our own way.
If everything in our life is going well, can we love ourselves?
Not necessarily so.
The reason why it's hard to discuss "self-love" may be that it has a kind of a narcissistic whiff and sounds a little icky to people.
If we saw somebody looking in the mirror, saying, "How I love myself! Don't bother me!"...
I am not talking about myself!
We would want to say, "Suit yourself! Keep looking in the mirror."
I want to say it doesn't have to be like that, to love ourselves.
Life isn't always easy.
It would be, of course, nice if we were happy all our life.
But in our life, many people might say, "I hate you," or "I wish you would disappear from this world."
Going through the agony, we ultimately reach the realization that we have to love ourselves in the sense of taking responsibility for ourselves and looking after ourselves.
If, when people tell us, "I hate you," we respond to it by saying, "Yes, I hate myself, too," the moment we said so, I'm sure we would lose our desire to go on living.
I've felt the need for that kind of attitude more than once myself.
Since we don't know what will happen in the future, the kind of situation in which we have to love ourselves might arise again, in the sense of needing to take care of ourselves.
It would be wonderful if you could live a trouble-free life.
For a quite long time, I couldn't figure out what kind of person I was.
When I did something good for others, people showed appreciation to me, and then I thought I was basically a pretty good person.
Like that, I had occasions that made me feel relieved.
On the other hand, when I would really hurt someone, I was very disappointed in myself, feeling like I was fundamentally a cruel person.
To love ourselves actually may be harder than to love any other person, because we know ourselves thoroughly, through and through.
Looking back at all we have done in the past, and remembering: "Boy, I did such things as this and that..."
And not only the good things we've done, but unpleasant things we've done also come back at us.
Can we love ourselves with knowing all those sides of us?
At this point, I thought, in our thought process, there must be something fundamentally wrong.
Then, I started by doing this to change it: First, I honestly looked back at myself, seeing a pretty good person, or one not so good.
And for the time being, I accepted all my "selves," good or bad.
Instead of being judgmental about myself, thinking "I may be a nice guy at heart," or "I may be basically a cruel person," "Which one is really me?"
I decided to accept all my "selves" as parts of myself, and thought about why I had so many varied "selves" in this one person.
To sum it up, it's in response to different people and different situations.
When I talk to my grandmother, I am very relaxed.
When I talk to people at work, I may sound serious, putting on a serious look, talking about difficult things.
When I talk to somebody who rubs me the wrong way, you can bet the tone of my voice can't be this calm.
I try not to come into contact with such a person in the first place.
In any case, each "self" of mine has its own uniqueness.
To love each "self" of mine equally in order to love myself may be very difficult, but I can say, "I love my 'self' when I am with this person.
I become somebody whom I even abhor when I am with that person.
But I like my 'self' pretty well when I am with this particular person. I am not too bad."
In fact, to love ourselves may not be that hard after all.
Take romance.
Suppose there are two girls, and I have feelings toward both of them.
One day I have a date with one of them, and have dinner with her.
I enjoy being with her, talking a lot, frequently interjecting jokes, smiling at each other, and we interact with each other very well.
I rush to the train station to catch the last one.
As for the other girl, I also like her, but during our date, I can't talk or joke that much...
And we often get awkward silences.
I feel like a miserable loser.
I don't feel like going on with her, so after having dinner, we say goodbye to each other.
After the two dates, if I were asked which one I would rather see again, I would choose the first one without hesitation.
There's no doubt I like her, but rather because I like my "self" when I am with her.
I enjoy my "self" when I am with her, and find life worth living in the life of that "self" of mine.
The definition of "love" may be to love somebody else, this surely is not wrong, but what I would like to add to it is: Rather, to love means, with the help of the person we love, for us to be able to love ourselves.
That's what I'd like to think.
"I can reveal my inner self as I wish without any difficulties, being true to myself, when I am with that person, and it will never happen with anybody else."
Unfortunately, some of our relationships come to end.
Some end out of disputes.
Others end due to death.
When we grieve over losing our loved ones, we miss the voice and hug of the person, and many other things, but I wonder if we may rather be grieving over losing the life of our "self" who lived with that person, thinking: "Only with them could I talk freely like that.
Only with them could I be honest with myself.
Only with them could I be silly like that.
But that person is gone now, and I can't live the life of that 'self' of mine I love any longer."
I wonder if that is what we really grieve over.
And, of course, vice versa.
If somebody says to me, "I love you," I will be euphoric, yelling, "Yes!"
But if I were told, "Thanks to you, I come to love myself," or "I love myself when I'm with you more than when I am with anybody else," that would be something which strikes my heart more.
That my existence validates one person's existence that way moves me with a deep joy, something poignant.
Each time when we find one "self" we love, we may be finding our foothold we need to go on living.
In our life, we feel like we need to be loved by many people, a certain percentage of people in our groups, in our class, our workplace.
But not that many of those "selves" we love may be necessary.
If we find two or three of our "selves" we love in ourselves, we can go on with those as our foothold.
Five or six may be more than enough.
You may think you only have 3 friends in your class at school or you may think three that many friends who help you like yourself.
All depends on how you take it.
To love ourselves doesn't mean saying: "I am crazy about myself," looking into a mirror, but, instead, it means, with the help of or via somebody else, for us to come to love ourselves.
It's probably where we start really loving ourselves.
And that is why, as we feel the need, we love others as indispensable individuals.
That's all I want to say. Thank you.
I'm an artist.
Being an artist is the greatest job there is.
And I really pity each and every one of you who has to spend your days discovering new galaxies or saving humanity from global warming.
(Laughter) But being an artist is also a daunting job.
I spend every day, from nine to six, doing this.
(Laughter) I even started a side career that consists entirely of complaining about the difficulty of the creative process.
(Laughter) But today, I don't want to talk about what makes my life difficult.
I want to talk about what makes it easy.
And that is you -- and the fact that you are fluent in a language that you're probably not even aware of.
You're fluent in the language of reading images.
Deciphering an image like that takes quite a bit of an intellectual effort.
But nobody ever taught you how this works, you just know it.
College, shopping, music.
What makes a language powerful is that you can take a very complex idea and communicate it in a very simple, efficient form.
These images represent exactly the same ideas.
But when you look, for example, at the college hat, you know that this doesn't represent the accessory you wear on your head when you're being handed your diploma, but rather the whole idea of college.
Now, what drawings can do is they cannot only communicate images, they can even evoke emotions.
Let's say you get to an unfamiliar place and you see this.
You feel happiness and relief.
(Laughter) Or a slight sense of unease or maybe downright panic.
(Laughter) Or blissful peace and quiet.
(Laughter) But visuals, they're of course more than just graphic icons.
You know, if I want to tell the story of modern-day struggle, I would start with the armrest between two airplane seats and two sets of elbows fighting.
What I love there is this universal law that, you know, you have 30 seconds to fight it out and once it's yours, you get to keep it for the rest of the flight.
(Laughter) Now, commercial flight is full of these images.
If I want to illustrate the idea of discomfort, nothing better than these neck pillows.
They're designed to make you more comfortable -- (Laughter) except they don't.
(Laughter) So I never sleep on airplanes.
What I do occasionally is I fall into a sort of painful coma.
And when I wake up from that, I have the most terrible taste in my mouth.
It's a taste that's so bad, it cannot be described with words, but it can be drawn.
(Laughter) The thing is, you know, I love sleeping.
And when I sleep, I really prefer to do it while spooning.
I've been spooning on almost a pro level for close to 20 years, but in all this time, I've never figured out what to do with that bottom arm.
(Laughter) (Applause) And the only thing -- the only thing that makes sleeping even more complicated than trying to do it on an airplane is when you have small children.
They show up at your bed at around 4am with some bogus excuse of, "I had a bad dream."
(Laughter) And then, of course you feel sorry for them, they're your kids, so you let them into your bed.
And I have to admit, at the beginning, they're really cute and warm and snugly.
The minute you fall back asleep, they inexplicably -- (Laughter) start rotating.
(Laughter) We like to call this the helicopter mode.
(Laughter) Now, the deeper something is etched into your consciousness, the fewer details we need to have an emotional reaction.
(Laughter) So why does an image like this work?
It works, because we as readers are incredibly good at filling in the blanks.
Now, when you draw, there's this concept of negative space.
And the idea is, that instead of drawing the actual object, you draw the space around it.
So the bowls in this drawing are empty.
But the black ink prompts your brain to project food into a void.
What we see here is not a owl flying.
What we actually see is a pair of AA batteries standing on a nonsensical drawing, and I animate the scene by moving my desk lamp up and down.
(Laughter) The image really only exists in your mind.
So, how much information do we need to trigger such an image?
My goal as an artist is to use the smallest amount possible.
I try to achieve a level of simplicity where, if you were to take away one more element, the whole concept would just collapse.
And that's why my personal favorite tool as an artist is abstraction.
I've come up with this system which I call the abstract-o-meter, and this is how it works.
So you take a symbol, any symbol, for example the heart and the arrow, which most of us would read as the symbol for love, and I'm an artist, so I can draw this in any given degree of realism or abstraction.
Now, if I go too realistic on it, it just grosses everybody out.
(Laughter) If I go too far on the other side and do very abstract, nobody has any idea what they're looking at.
So I have to find the perfect place on that scale, in this case it's somewhere in the middle.
Now, once we have reduced an image to a more simple form, all sorts of new connections become possible.
And that allows for totally new angles in storytelling.
(Laughter) And so, what I like to do is, I like to take images from really remote cultural areas and bring them together.
Now, with more daring references -- (Laughter) I can have more fun.
But of course, I know that eventually things become so obscure that I start losing some of you.
So as a designer, it's absolutely key to have a good understanding of the visual and cultural vocabulary of your audience.
With this image here, a comment on the Olympics in Athens, I assumed that the reader of the "New Yorker" would have some rudimentary idea of Greek art.
If you don't, the image doesn't work.
But if you do, you might even appreciate the small detail, like the beer-can pattern here on the bottom of the vase.
(Laughter) A recurring discussion I have with magazine editors, who are usually word people, is that their audience, you, are much better at making radical leaps with images than they're being given credit for.
And the only thing I find frustrating is that they often seem to push me towards a small set of really tired visual clichés that are considered safe.
You know, it's the businessman climbing up a ladder, and then the ladder moves, morphs into a stock market graph, and anything with dollar signs; that's always good.
(Laughter) If there are editorial decision makers here in the audience, I want to give you a piece of advice.
Every time a drawing like this is published, a baby panda will die.
(Laughter) Literally.
(Laughter) (Applause) When is a visual cliché good or bad?
It's a fine line.
And it really depends on the story.
In 2011, during the earthquake and the tsunami in Japan, I was thinking of a cover.
And I went through the classic symbols: the Japanese flag, "The Great Wave" by Hokusai, one of the greatest drawings ever.
And then the story changed when the situation at the power plant in Fukushima got out of hand.
And I remember these TV images of the workers in hazmat suits, just walking through the site, and what struck me was how quiet and serene it was.
And so I wanted to create an image of a silent catastrophe.
And that's the image I came up with.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) What I want to do is create an aha moment, for you, for the reader.
And unfortunately, that does not mean that I have an aha moment when I create these images.
I never sit at my desk with the proverbial light bulb going off in my head.
What it takes is actually a very slow, unsexy process of minimal design decisions that then, when I'm lucky, lead to a good idea.
So one day, I'm on a train, and I'm trying to decode the graphic rules for drops on a window.
And eventually I realize, "Oh, it's the background blurry upside-down, contained in a sharp image."
And I thought, wow, that's really cool, and I have absolutely no idea what to do with that.
A while later, I'm back in New York, and I draw this image of being stuck on the Brooklyn bridge in a traffic jam.
It's really annoying, but also kind of poetic.
And only later I realized, I can take both of these ideas and put them together in this idea.
And what I want to do is not show a realistic scene.
But, maybe like poetry, make you aware that you already had this image with you, but only now I've unearthed it and made you realize that you were carrying it with you all along.
But like poetry, this is a very delicate process that is neither efficient nor scalable, I think.
And maybe the most important skill for an artist is really empathy.
You need craft and you need -- (Laughter) you need creativity -- (Laughter) thank you -- to come up with an image like that.
But then you need to step back and look at what you've done from the perspective of the reader.
I've tried to become a better artist by becoming a better observer of images.
And for that, I started an exercise for myself which I call Sunday sketching, which meant, on a Sunday, I would take a random object I found around the house and try to see if that object could trigger an idea that had nothing to do with the original purpose of that item.
And it usually just means I'm blank for a long while.
And the only trick that eventually works is if I open my mind and run through every image I have stored up there, and see if something clicks.
And if it does, just add a few lines of ink to connect -- to preserve this very short moment of inspiration.
And the great lesson there was that the real magic doesn't happen on paper.
It happens in the mind of the viewer.
When your expectations and your knowledge clash with my artistic intentions.
Your interaction with an image, your ability to read, question, be bothered or bored or inspired by an image is as important as my artistic contribution.
Because that's what turns an artistic statement really, into a creative dialogue.
And so, your skill at reading images is not only amazing, it is what makes my art possible.
And for that, I thank you very much.
(Applause) (Cheers) Thank you.
(Applause)
As a little girl, I always imagined I would one day run away.
From the age of six on, I kept a packed bag with some clothes and cans of food tucked away in the back of a closet.
There was a deep restlessness in me, a primal fear that I would fall prey to a life of routine and boredom.
And so, many of my early memories involved intricate daydreams where I would walk across borders, forage for berries, and meet all kinds of strange people living unconventional lives on the road.
Years have passed, but many of the adventures I fantasized about as a child -- traveling and weaving my way between worlds other than my own — have become realities through my work as a documentary photographer.
But no other experience has felt as true to my childhood dreams as living amongst and documenting the lives of fellow wanderers across the United States.
This is the nomadic dream, a different kind of American dream lived by young hobos, travelers, hitchhikers, vagrants and tramps.
In most of our minds, the vagabond is a creature from the past.
The word "hobo" conjures up an old black and white image of a weathered old man covered in coal, legs dangling out of a boxcar, but these photographs are in color, and they portray a community swirling across the country, fiercely alive and creatively free, seeing sides of America that no one else gets to see.
Like their predecessors, today's nomads travel the steel and asphalt arteries of the United States.
By day, they hop freight trains, stick out their thumbs, and ride the highways with anyone from truckers to soccer moms.
By night, they sleep beneath the stars, huddled together with their packs of dogs, cats and pet rats between their bodies.
Some travelers take to the road by choice, renouncing materialism, traditional jobs and university degrees in exchange for a glimmer of adventure.
Others come from the underbelly of society, never given a chance to mobilize upwards: foster care dropouts, teenage runaways escaping abuse and unforgiving homes.
Where others see stories of privation and economic failure, travelers view their own existence through the prism of liberation and freedom.
They'd rather live off of the excess of what they view as a wasteful consumer society than slave away at an unrealistic chance at the traditional American dream.
They take advantage of the fact that in the United States, up to 40 percent of all food ends up in the garbage by scavenging for perfectly good produce in dumpsters and trash cans.
They sacrifice material comforts in exchange for the space and the time to explore a creative interior, to dream, to read, to work on music, art and writing.
But there are many aspects to this life that are far from idyllic.
No one loses their inner demons by taking to the road.
Addiction is real, the elements are real, freight trains maim and kill, and anyone who has lived on the streets can attest to the exhaustive list of laws that criminalize homeless existence.
Who here knows that in many cities across the United States it is now illegal to sit on the sidewalk, to wrap oneself in a blanket, to sleep in your own car, to offer food to a stranger?
I know about these laws because I've watched as friends and other travelers were hauled off to jail or received citations for committing these so-called crimes.
Many of you might be wondering why anyone would choose a life like this, under the thumb of discriminatory laws, eating out of trash cans, sleeping under bridges, picking up seasonal jobs here and there.
The answer to such a question is as varied as the people that take to the road, but travelers often respond with a single word: freedom.
Until we live in a society where every human is assured dignity in their labor so that they can work to live well, not only work to survive, there will always be an element of those who seek the open road as a means of escape, of liberation and, of course, of rebellion.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I thought, "I will talk about death."
Seemed to be the passion today.
Actually, it's not about death.
It's inevitable, terrible, but really what I want to talk about is, I'm just fascinated by the legacy people leave when they die.
That's what I want to talk about.
So Art Buchwald left his legacy of humor with a video that appeared soon after he died, saying, "Hi! I'm Art Buchwald, and I just died."
And Mike, who I met at Galapagos, a trip which I won at TED, is leaving notes on cyberspace where he is chronicling his journey through cancer.
And my father left me a legacy of his handwriting through letters and a notebook.
In the last two years of his life, when he was sick, he filled a notebook with his thoughts about me.
He wrote about my strengths, weaknesses, and gentle suggestions for improvement, quoting specific incidents, and held a mirror to my life.
After he died, I realized that no one writes to me anymore.
Handwriting is a disappearing art.
I'm all for email and thinking while typing, but why give up old habits for new?
Why can't we have letter writing and email exchange in our lives?
There are times when I want to trade all those years that I was too busy to sit with my dad and chat with him, and trade all those years for one hug.
But too late.
But that's when I take out his letters and I read them, and the paper that touched his hand is in mine, and I feel connected to him.
So maybe we all need to leave our children with a value legacy, and not a financial one.
A value for things with a personal touch -- an autographed book, a soul-searching letter.
If a fraction of this powerful TED audience could be inspired to buy a beautiful paper -- John, it'll be a recycled one -- and write a beautiful letter to someone they love, we actually may start a revolution where our children may go to penmanship classes.
So what do I plan to leave for my son?
I collect autographed books, and those of you authors in the audience know I hound you for them -- and CDs too, Tracy.
I plan to publish my own notebook.
As I witnessed my father's body being swallowed by fire, I sat by his funeral pyre and wrote.
I have no idea how I'm going to do it, but I am committed to compiling his thoughts and mine into a book, and leave that published book for my son.
I'd like to end with a few verses of what I wrote at my father's cremation.
And those linguists, please pardon the grammar, because I've not looked at it in the last 10 years.
I took it out for the first time to come here.
"Picture in a frame, ashes in a bottle, boundless energy confined in the bottle, forcing me to deal with reality, forcing me to deal with being grown up.
I hear you and I know that you would want me to be strong, but right now, I am being sucked down, surrounded and suffocated by these raging emotional waters, craving to cleanse my soul, trying to emerge on a firm footing one more time, to keep on fighting and flourishing just as you taught me.
Your encouraging whispers in my whirlpool of despair, holding me and heaving me to shores of sanity, to live again and to love again."
Thank you.
(Music) ♪ It's all there in gospels ♪ ♪A Magdalene girl comes to pay her respects ♪ ♪ But her mind is awhirl ♪ ♪ When she finds the tomb empty ♪ ♪ Straw had been rolled ♪ ♪ Not a sign of a corpse ♪ ♪ In the dark and the cold ♪ ♪ When she reaches the door ♪ ♪ Sees an unholy sight ♪ ♪ There's a solitary figure and a halo of light ♪ ♪ He just carries on floating past Calvary Hill ♪ ♪ In an Almighty hurry ♪ ♪ Aye, but she might catch him still ♪ ♪ Tell me where are you gone, Lord ♪ ♪ And why in such haste? ♪ ♪ Oh don't hinder me, woman ♪ ♪ I've no time to waste ♪ ♪ For they're launching a boat on the morrow at noon ♪ ♪ And I have to be there before daybreak ♪ ♪ Oh I cannot be missing ♪ ♪ The lads'll expect me ♪ ♪ Why else would the Good Lord Himself resurrect me? ♪ ♪ For nothing'll stop me. I have to prevail ♪ ♪ Through the teeth of this tempest ♪ ♪ In the mouth of a gale ♪ ♪ May the angels protect me ♪ ♪ If all else should fail ♪ ♪ And the last ship sails ♪ ♪ Oh the roar of the chains ♪ ♪ And the cracking of timbers ♪ ♪ The noise at the end of the world in your ears ♪ ♪ As a mountain of steel makes its way to the sea ♪ ♪ And the last ship sails ♪ So I was born and raised in the shadow of a shipyard in a little town on the northeast coast of England.
Some of my earliest memories are of giant ships blocking the end of my street, as well as the sun, for a lot of the year.
Every morning as a child, I'd watch thousands of men walk down that hill to work in the shipyard.
I'd watch those same men walking back home every night.
It has to be said, the shipyard was not the most pleasant place to live next door to, or indeed work in.
The shipyard was noisy, dangerous, highly toxic, with an appalling health and safety record.
Despite that, the men and women who worked on those ships were extraordinarily proud of the work they did, and justifiably so.
Some of the largest vessels ever constructed on planet Earth were built right at the end of my street.
My grandfather had been a shipwright, and as a child, as there were few other jobs in the town, I would wonder with some anxiety whether that would be my destiny too.
I was fairly determined that it wouldn't be.
I had other dreams, not necessarily practical ones, but at the age of eight, I was bequeathed a guitar.
It was a battered old thing with five rusty strings, and was out of tune, but quickly I learned to play it and realized that I'd found a friend for life, an accomplice, a co-conspirator in my plan to escape from this surreal industrial landscape.
Well, they say if you dream something hard enough, it will come to pass.
Either that, or I was extremely lucky, but this was my dream.
I dreamt I would leave this town, and just like those ships, once they were launched, I'd never come back.
I dreamt I'd become a writer of songs, that I would sing those songs to vast numbers of people all over the world, that I would be paid extravagant amounts of money, that I'd become famous, that I'd marry a beautiful woman, have children, raise a family, buy a big house in the country, keep dogs, grow wine, have rooms full of Grammy Awards, platinum discs, and what have you.
So far, so good, right? (Laughter) And then one day, the songs stopped coming, and while you've suffered from periods of writer's block before, albeit briefly, this is something chronic.
Day after day, you face a blank page, and nothing's coming.
And those days turned to weeks, and weeks to months, and pretty soon those months have turned into years with very little to show for your efforts. No songs.
So you start asking yourself questions.
What have I done to offend the gods that they would abandon me so?
Is the gift of songwriting taken away as easily as it seems to have been bestowed?
Or perhaps there's a more -- a deeper psychological reason.
It was always a Faustian pact anyway.
You're rewarded for revealing your innermost thoughts, your private emotions on the page for the entertainment of others, for the analysis, the scrutiny of others, and perhaps you've given enough of your privacy away.
And yet, if you look at your work, could it be argued that your best work wasn't about you at all, it was about somebody else?
Did your best work occur when you sidestepped your own ego and you stopped telling your story, but told someone else's story, someone perhaps without a voice, where empathetically, you stood in his shoes for a while or saw the world through his eyes?
Well they say, write what you know.
If you can't write about yourself anymore, then who do you write about?
So it's ironic that the landscape I'd worked so hard to escape from, and the community that I'd more or less abandoned and exiled myself from should be the very landscape, the very community I would have to return to to find my missing muse.
And as soon as I did that, as soon as I decided to honor the community I came from and tell their story, that the songs started to come thick and fast.
I've described it as a kind of projectile vomiting, a torrent of ideas, of characters, of voices, of verses, couplets, entire songs almost formed whole, materialized in front of me as if they'd been bottled up inside me for many, many years.
One of the first things I wrote was just a list of names of people I'd known, and they become characters in a kind of three-dimensional drama, where they explain who they are, what they do, their hopes and their fears for the future.
This is Jackie White.
He's the foreman of the shipyard.
My name is Jackie White, and I'm foreman of the yard, and you don't mess with Jackie on this quayside.
I'm as hard as iron plate, woe betide you if you're late when we have to push a boat out on the spring tide.
Now you can die and hope for heaven, but you need to work your shift, and I'd expect you all to back us to the hilt, for if St. Peter at his gate were to ask you why you're late, why, you tell him that you had to get a ship built.
We build battleships and cruisers for Her Majesty the Queen, supertankers for Onassis, and all the classes in between, We built the greatest ship in tonnage what the world has ever seen ♪ And the only life worth knowing is in the shipyard ♪ ♪ Steel in the stockyard, iron in the soul ♪ ♪ Would conjure up a ship ♪ ♪ Where there used to be a hull ♪ ♪ And we don't know what we'll do ♪ ♪ If this yard gets sold ♪ ♪ For the only life worth knowing is in the shipyard ♪ (Applause) So having decided to write about other people instead of myself, a further irony is that sometimes you reveal more about yourself than you'd ever intended.
This song is called "Dead Man's Boots," which is an expression which describes how difficult it is to get a job; in other words, you'd only get a job in the shipyard if somebody else died.
Or perhaps your father could finagle you an apprenticeship at the age of 15.
But sometimes a father's love can be misconstrued as controlling, and conversely, the scope of his son's ambition can seem like some pie-in-the-sky fantasy.
(Music) ♪ You see these work boots in my hands ♪ ♪ They'll probably fit you now, my son ♪ ♪ Take them, they're a gift from me ♪ ♪ Why don't you try them on? ♪ ♪ It would do your old man good to see ♪ ♪ You walking in these boots one day ♪ ♪ And take your place among the men ♪ ♪ Who work upon the slipway ♪ ♪ These dead man's boots, though they're old and curled ♪ ♪ When a fellow needs a job and a place in the world ♪ ♪ And it's time for a man to put down roots ♪ ♪ And walk to the river in his old man's boots ♪ ♪ He said, "I'm dying, son, and asking ♪ ♪ That you do one final thing for me ♪ ♪ You're barely but a sapling, and you think that you're a tree ♪ ♪ If you need a seed to prosper ♪ ♪ You must first put down some roots ♪ ♪ Just one foot then the other in ♪ ♪ These dead man's boots" ♪ ♪ These dead man's boots, though they're old and curled ♪ ♪ When a fellow needs a job and a place in the world ♪ ♪ And it's time for a man to put down roots ♪ ♪ And walk to the river in his old man's boots ♪ ♪ I said, "Why in the hell would I do that? ♪ ♪ Why would I agree?" ♪ ♪ When his hand was all that I'd received ♪ ♪ As far as I remember ♪ ♪ It's not as if he'd spoiled me with his kindness ♪ ♪ Up to then, you see ♪ ♪ I'd a plan of my own and I'd quit this place ♪ ♪ When I came of age September ♪ ♪ These dead man's boots know their way down the hill ♪ ♪ They could walk there themselves, and they probably will ♪ ♪ I've plenty of choices, I've plenty other routes ♪ ♪ And you'll never see me walking in these dead man's boots ♪ ♪ What was it made him think ♪ ♪ I'd be happy ending up like him ♪ ♪ When he'd hardly got two halfpennies left ♪ ♪ Or a broken pot to piss in? ♪ ♪ He wanted this same thing for me ♪ ♪ Was that his final wish? ♪ ♪ He said, "What the hell are you gonna do?" ♪ ♪ I said, "Anything but this!" ♪ ♪ These dead man's boots know their way down the hill ♪ ♪ They can walk there themselves and they probably will ♪ ♪ But they won't walk with me ‘cause I'm off the other way ♪ ♪ I've had it up to here, I'm gonna have my say ♪ ♪ When all you've got left is that cross on the wall ♪ ♪ I want nothing from you, I want nothing at all ♪ ♪ Not a pension, nor a pittance, when your whole life is through ♪ ♪ Get this through your head, I'm nothing like you ♪ ♪ I'm done with all the arguments, there'll be no more disputes ♪ ♪ And you'll die before you see me in your dead man's boots ♪ (Applause) Thank you.
So whenever they'd launch a big ship, they would invite some dignitary up from London on the train to make a speech, break a bottle of champagne over the bows, launch it down the slipway into the river and out to sea.
Occasionally on a really important ship, they'd get a member of the royal family to come, Duke of Edinburgh, Princess Anne or somebody.
And you have to remember, it wasn't that long ago that the royal family in England were considered to have magical healing powers.
Sick children were held up in crowds to try and touch the cloak of the king or the queen to cure them of some terrible disease.
It wasn't like that in my day, but we still got very excited.
So it's a launch day, it's a Saturday, and my mother has dressed me up in my Sunday best.
I'm not very happy with her.
All the kids are out in the street, and we have little Union Jacks to wave, and at the top of the hill, there's a motorcycle cortege appears.
In the middle of the motorcycles, there's a big, black Rolls-Royce.
Inside the Rolls-Royce is the Queen Mother.
This is a big deal.
So the procession is moving at a stately pace down my street, and as it approaches my house, I start to wave my flag vigorously, and there is the Queen Mother.
I see her, and she seems to see me.
She acknowledges me. She waves, and she smiles.
And I wave my flag even more vigorously.
We're having a moment, me and the Queen Mother.
She's acknowledged me.
And then she's gone.
Well, I wasn't cured of anything.
It was the opposite, actually.
I was infected.
I was infected with an idea.
I don't belong in this street.
I don't want to live in that house.
I don't want to end up in that shipyard.
I want to be in that car. (Laughter) I want a bigger life.
I want a life beyond this town.
I want a life that's out of the ordinary.
It's my right.
It's my right as much as hers.
And so here I am at TED, I suppose to tell that story, and I think it's appropriate to say the obvious that there's a symbiotic and intrinsic link between storytelling and community, between community and art, between community and science and technology, between community and economics.
It's my belief that abstract economic theory that denies the needs of community or denies the contribution that community makes to economy is shortsighted, cruel and untenable.
(Applause) The fact is, whether you're a rock star or whether you're a welder in a shipyard, or a tribesman in the upper Amazon, or the queen of England, at the end of the day, we're all in the same boat.
♪ Aye, the footmen are frantic in their indignation ♪ ♪ You see the queen's took a taxi herself to the station ♪ ♪ Where the porters, surprised by her lack of royal baggage ♪ ♪ Bustle her and three corgis to the rear of the carriage ♪ ♪ For the train it is crammed with all Europe's nobility ♪ ♪ And there's none of them famous for their compatibility ♪ ♪ There's a fight over seats ♪ ♪ "I beg pardon, Your Grace ♪ ♪ But you'll find that one's mine, so get back in your place!" ♪ ♪ "Aye, but where are they going?" ♪ ♪ All the porters debate ♪ ♪ "Why they're going to Newcastle and they daren't be late ♪ ♪ For they're launching a boat on the Tyne at high tide ♪ ♪ And they've come from all over, from far and from wide" ♪ ♪ There's the old Dalai Lama ♪ ♪ And the pontiff of Rome ♪ ♪ Every palace in Europe, and there's nay bugger home ♪ ♪ There's the Duchess of Cornwall and the loyal Prince of Wales ♪ ♪ Looking crushed and uncomfortable in his top hat and tails ♪ ♪ Well, they haven't got tickets ♪ ♪ Come now, it's just a detail ♪ ♪ There was no time to purchase and one simply has to prevail ♪ ♪ For we'll get to the shipyards or we'll end up in jail! ♪ ♪ When the last ship sails ♪ ♪ Oh the roar of the chains ♪ ♪ And the cracking of timbers ♪ ♪ The noise at the end of the world in your ears ♪ ♪ As a mountain of steel makes its way to the sea ♪ ♪ And the last ship sails ♪ ♪ And whatever you'd promised ♪ ♪ Whatever you've done ♪ ♪ And whatever the station in life you've become ♪ ♪ In the name of the Father, in the name of the Son ♪ ♪ And no matter the weave of this life that you've spun ♪ ♪ On the Earth or in Heaven or under the Sun ♪ ♪ When the last ship sails ♪ ♪ Oh the roar of the chains ♪ ♪ And the cracking of timbers ♪ ♪ The noise at the end of the world in your ears ♪ ♪ As a mountain of steel makes its way to the sea ♪ ♪ And the last ship sails ♪ Thanks very much for listening to my song.
Thank you. (Applause) Thank you.
Okay, you have to join in if you know it.
(Music) (Applause) ♪ Just a castaway ♪ ♪ An island lost at sea, oh ♪ ♪ Another lonely day ♪ ♪ With no one here but me, oh ♪ ♪ More loneliness than any man could bear ♪ ♪ Rescue me before I fall into despair ♪ ♪ I'll send an S.O.S. to the world ♪ ♪ I'll send an S.O.S. to the world ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ A year has passed since I wrote my note ♪ ♪ I should have known this right from the start ♪ ♪ Only hope can keep me together ♪ ♪ Love can mend your life ♪ ♪ but love can break your heart ♪ ♪ I'll send an S.O.S. to the world ♪ ♪ I'll send an S.O.S. to the world ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Walked out this morning ♪ ♪ I don't believe what I saw ♪ ♪ A hundred billion bottles ♪ ♪ Washed up on the shore ♪ ♪ Seems I'm not alone in being alone ♪ ♪ A hundred billion castaways ♪ ♪ Looking for a home ♪ ♪ I'll send an S.O.S. to the world ♪ ♪ I'll send an S.O.S. to the world ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ I hope that someone gets my ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ ♪ Message in a bottle ♪ So I'm going to ask you to sing after me, okay, the next part.
It's very easy. Sing in unison.
Here we go.
♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Come on now.
Audience: ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Sting: ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Audience: ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Sting: ♪ I'm sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Audience: ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Sting: ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Audience: ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ Sting: ♪ Sending out ♪ ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ ♪ Sending out an S.O.S. ♪ ♪ Yoooooooo ♪ Thank you, TED. Goodnight.
(Applause)
I saw a UFO once.
I was eight or nine, playing in the street with a friend who was a couple of years older, and we saw a featureless silver disc hovering over the houses.
We watched it for a few seconds, and then it shot away incredibly quickly.
Even as a kid, I got angry it was ignoring the laws of physics.
We ran inside to tell the grown-ups, and they were skeptical -- you'd be skeptical too, right?
I got my own back a few years later: one of those grown-ups told me, "Last night I saw a flying saucer.
I was coming out of the pub after a few drinks."
I stopped him there. I said, "I can explain that sighting."
(Laughter) Psychologists have shown we can't trust our brains to tell the truth.
It's easy to fool ourselves.
I saw something, but what's more likely -- that I saw an alien spacecraft, or that my brain misinterpreted the data my eyes were giving it?
Ever since though I've wondered: Why don't we see flying saucers flitting around?
At the very least, why don't we see life out there in the cosmos?
It's a puzzle, and I've discussed it with dozens of experts from different disciplines over the past three decades.
And there's no consensus.
Frank Drake began searching for alien signals back in 1960 -- so far, nothing.
And with each passing year, this nonobservation, this lack of evidence for any alien activity gets more puzzling because we should see them, shouldn't we?
The universe is 13.8 billion years old, give or take.
If we represent the age of the universe by one year, then our species came into being about 12 minutes before midnight, 31st December.
Western civilization has existed for a few seconds.
Extraterrestrial civilizations could have started in the summer months.
Imagine a summer civilization developing a level of technology more advanced than ours, but tech based on accepted physics though, I'm not talking wormholes or warp drives -- whatever -- just an extrapolation of the sort of tech that TED celebrates.
That civilization could program self-replicating probes to visit every planetary system in the galaxy.
If they launched the first probes just after midnight one August day, then before breakfast same day, they could have colonized the galaxy.
Intergalactic colonization isn't much more difficult, it just takes longer.
A civilization from any one of millions of galaxies could have colonized our galaxy.
Seems far-fetched?
Maybe it is, but wouldn't aliens engage in some recognizable activity -- put worldlets around a star to capture free sunlight, collaborate on a Wikipedia Galactica, or just shout out to the universe, "We're here"?
So where is everybody?
It's a puzzle because we do expect these civilizations to exist, don't we?
After all, there could be a trillion planets in the galaxy -- maybe more.
You don't need any special knowledge to consider this question, and I've explored it with lots of people over the years.
And I've found they often frame their thinking in terms of the barriers that would need to be cleared if a planet is to host a communicative civilization.
And they usually identify four key barriers.
Habitability -- that's the first barrier.
We need a terrestrial planet in that just right "Goldilocks zone," where water flows as a liquid.
They're out there.
In 2016, astronomers confirmed there's a planet in the habitable zone of the closest star, Proxima Centauri -- so close that Breakthrough Starshot project plans to send probes there.
We'd become a starfaring species.
But not all worlds are habitable.
Some will be too close to a star and they'll fry, some will be too far away and they'll freeze.
Abiogenesis -- the creation of life from nonlife -- that's the second barrier.
The basic building blocks of life aren't unique to Earth: amino acids have been found in comets, complex organic molecules in interstellar dust clouds, water in exoplanetary systems.
The ingredients are there, we just don't know how they combine to create life, and presumably there will be worlds on which life doesn't start.
The development of technological civilization is a third barrier.
Some say we already share our planet with alien intelligences.
A 2011 study showed that elephants can cooperate to solve problems.
A 2010 study showed that an octopus in captivity can recognize different humans.
2017 studies show that ravens can plan for future events -- wonderful, clever creatures -- but they can't contemplate the Breakthrough Starshot project, and if we vanished today, they wouldn't go on to implement Breakthrough Starshot -- why should they?
Evolution doesn't have space travel as an end goal.
There will be worlds where life doesn't give rise to advanced technology.
Communication across space -- that's a fourth barrier.
Maybe advanced civilizations choose to explore inner space rather than outer space, or engineer at small distances rather than large.
Or maybe they just don't want to risk an encounter with a potentially more advanced and hostile neighbor.
There'll be worlds where, for whatever reason, civilizations either stay silent or don't spend long trying to communicate.
As for the height of the barriers, your guess is as good as anyone's.
In my experience, when people sit down and do the math, they typically conclude there are thousands of civilizations in the galaxy.
But then we're back to the puzzle: Where is everybody?
By definition, UFOs -- including the one I saw -- are unidentified.
We can't simply infer they're spacecraft.
You can still have some fun playing with the idea aliens are here.
Some say a summer civilization did colonize the galaxy and seeded Earth with life ...
others, that we're living in a cosmic wilderness preserve -- a zoo.
Yet others -- that we're living in a simulation.
Programmers just haven't revealed the aliens yet.
Most of my colleagues though argue that E.T. is out there, we just need to keep looking, and this makes sense.
Space is vast.
Identifying a signal is hard, and we haven't been looking that long.
Without doubt, we should spend more on the search.
It's about understanding our place in the universe.
It's too important a question to ignore.
But there's an obvious answer: we're alone.
It's just us.
There could be a trillion planets in the galaxy.
Is it plausible we're the only creatures capable of contemplating this question?
Well, yes, because in this context, we don't know whether a trillion is a big number.
In 2000, Peter Ward and Don Brownlee proposed the Rare Earth idea.
Remember those four barriers that people use to estimate the number of civilizations?
Ward and Brownlee said there might be more.
Let's look at one possible barrier.
It's a recent suggestion by David Waltham, a geophysicist.
This is my very simplified version of Dave's much more sophisticated argument.
We are able to be here now because Earth's previous inhabitants enjoyed four billion years of good weather -- ups and downs but more or less clement.
But long-term climate stability is strange, if only because astronomical influences can push a planet towards freezing or frying.
There's a hint our moon has helped, and that's interesting because the prevailing theory is that the moon came into being when Theia, a body the size of Mars, crashed into a newly formed Earth.
The outcome of that crash could have been a quite different Earth-Moon system.
We ended up with a large moon and that permitted Earth to have both a stable axial tilt and a slow rotation rate.
Both factors influence climate and the suggestion is that they've helped moderate climate change.
Great for us, right?
But Waltham showed that if the moon were just a few miles bigger, things would be different.
Earth's spin axis would now wander chaotically.
There'd be episodes of rapid climate change -- not good for complex life.
The moon is just the right size: big but not too big.
A "Goldilocks" moon around a "Goldilocks" planet -- a barrier perhaps.
You can imagine more barriers.
For instance, simple cells came into being billions of years ago ...
but perhaps the development of complex life needed a series of unlikely events.
Once life on Earth had access to multicellularity and sophisticated genetic structures, and sex, new opportunities opened up: animals became possible.
But maybe it's the fate of many planets for life to settle at the level of simple cells.
Purely for the purposes of illustration, let me suggest four more barriers to add to the four that people said blocked the path to communicative civilization.
Again, purely for the purposes of illustration, suppose there's a one-in-a-thousand chance of making it across each of the barriers.
Of course there might be different ways of navigating the barriers, and some chances will be better than one in a thousand.
Equally, there might be more barriers and some chances might be one in a million.
Let's just see what happens in this picture.
If the galaxy contains a trillion planets, how many will host a civilization capable of contemplating like us projects such as Breakthrough Starshot?
Habitability -- right sort of planet around the right sort of star -- the trillion becomes a billion.
Stability -- a climate that stays benign for eons -- the billion becomes a million.
Life must start -- the million becomes a thousand.
Complex life forms must arise -- the thousand becomes one.
Sophisticated tool use must develop -- that's one planet in a thousand galaxies.
To understand the universe, they'll have to develop the techniques of science and mathematics -- that's one planet in a million galaxies.
To reach the stars, they'll have to be social creatures, capable of discussing abstract concepts with each other using complex grammar -- one planet in a billion galaxies.
And they have to avoid disaster -- not just self-inflicted but from the skies, too.
That planet around Proxima Centauri, last year it got blasted by a flare.
One planet in a trillion galaxies, just as in the visible universe.
I think we're alone.
Those colleagues of mine who agree we're alone often see a barrier ahead -- bioterror, global warming, war.
A universe that's silent because technology itself forms the barrier to the development of a truly advanced civilization.
Depressing, right?
I'm arguing the exact opposite.
I grew up watching "Star Trek" and "Forbidden Planet," and I saw a UFO once, so this idea of cosmic loneliness I certainly find slightly wistful.
But for me, the silence of the universe is shouting, "We're the creatures who got lucky."
All barriers are behind us.
We're the only species that's cleared them -- the only species capable of determining its own destiny.
And if we learn to appreciate how special our planet is, how important it is to look after our home and to find others, how incredibly fortunate we all are simply to be aware of the universe, humanity might survive for a while.
And all those amazing things we dreamed aliens might have done in the past, that could be our future.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
People say things about religion all the time.
(Laughter) The late, great Christopher Hitchens wrote a book called "God Is Not Great" whose subtitle was, "Religion Poisons Everything."
(Laughter) But last month, in Time magazine, Rabbi David Wolpe, who I gather is referred to as America's rabbi, said, to balance that against that negative characterization, that no important form of social change can be brought about except through organized religion.
Now, remarks of this sort on the negative and the positive side are very old.
I have one in my pocket here from the first century BCE by Lucretius, the author of "On the Nature of Things," who said, "Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum" -- I should have been able to learn that by heart — which is, that's how much religion is able to persuade people to do evil, and he was talking about the fact of Agamemnon's decision to place his daughter Iphigenia on an altar of sacrifice in order to preserve the prospects of his army.
So there have been these long debates over the centuries, in that case, actually, we can say over the millennia, about religion.
People have talked about it a lot, and they've said good and bad and indifferent things about it.
What I want to persuade you of today is of a very simple claim, which is that these debates are in a certain sense preposterous, because there is no such thing as religion about which to make these claims.
There isn't a thing called religion, and so it can't be good or bad.
It can't even be indifferent.
And if you think about claims about the nonexistence of things, one obvious way to try and establish the nonexistence of a purported thing would be to offer a definition of that thing and then to see whether anything satisfied it.
I'm going to start out on that little route to begin with.
So if you look in the dictionaries and if you think about it, one very natural definition of religion is that it involves belief in gods or in spiritual beings.
As I say, this is in many dictionaries, but you'll also find it actually in the work of Sir Edward Tylor, who was the first professor of anthropology at Oxford, one of the first modern anthropologists.
In his book on primitive culture, he says the heart of religion is what he called animism, that is, the belief in spiritual agency, belief in spirits.
The first problem for that definition is from a recent novel by Paul Beatty called "Tuff."
There's a guy talking to a rabbi.
The rabbi says he doesn't believe in God.
The guy says, "You're a rabbi, how can you not believe in God?"
And the reply is, "It's what's so great about being Jewish.
You don't have to believe in a God per se, just in being Jewish." (Laughter) So if this guy is a rabbi, and a Jewish rabbi, and if you have to believe in God in order to be religious, then we have the rather counterintuitive conclusion that since it's possible to be a Jewish rabbi without believing in God, Judaism isn't a religion.
That seems like a pretty counterintuitive thought.
Here's another argument against this view.
A friend of mine, an Indian friend of mine, went to his grandfather when he was very young, a child, and said to him, "I want to talk to you about religion," and his grandfather said, "You're too young.
Come back when you're a teenager."
So he came back when he was a teenager, and he said to his grandfather, "It may be a bit late now because I've discovered that I don't believe in the gods."
And his grandfather, who was a wise man, said, "Oh, so you belong to the atheist branch of the Hindu tradition." (Laughter) And finally, there's this guy, who famously doesn't believe in God.
His name is the Dalai Lama.
He often jokes that he's one of the world's leading atheists.
But it's true, because the Dalai Lama's religion does not involve belief in God.
Now you might think this just shows that I've given you the wrong definition and that I should come up with some other definition and test it against these cases and try and find something that captures atheistic Judaism, atheistic Hinduism, and atheistic Buddhism as forms of religiosity, but I actually think that that's a bad idea, and the reason I think it's a bad idea is that I don't think that's how our concept of religion works.
I think the way our concept of religion works is that we actually have, we have a list of paradigm religions and their sub-parts, right, and if something new comes along that purports to be a religion, what we ask is, "Well, is it like one of these?"
Right?
And I think that's not only how we think about religion, and that's, as it were, so from our point of view, anything on that list had better be a religion, which is why I don't think an account of religion that excludes Buddhism and Judaism has a chance of being a good starter, because they're on our list.
But why do we have such a list?
What's going on? How did it come about that we have this list?
I think the answer is a pretty simple one and therefore crude and contentious.
I'm sure a lot of people will disagree with it, but here's my story, and true or not, it's a story that I think gives you a good sense of how the list might have come about, and therefore helps you to think about what use the list might be.
I think the answer is, European travelers, starting roughly about the time of Columbus, started going around the world.
They came from a Christian culture, and when they arrived in a new place, they noticed that some people didn't have Christianity, and so they asked themselves the following question: what have they got instead of Christianity?
And that list was essentially constructed.
It consists of the things that other people had instead of Christianity.
Now there's a difficulty with proceeding in that way, which is that Christianity is extremely, even on that list, it's an extremely specific tradition.
It has all kinds of things in it that are very, very particular that are the results of the specifics of Christian history, and one thing that's at the heart of it, one thing that's at the heart of most understandings of Christianity, which is the result of the specific history of Christianity, is that it's an extremely creedal religion.
It's a religion in which people are really concerned about whether you believe the right things.
The history of Christianity, the internal history of Christianity, is largely the history of people killing each other because they believed the wrong thing, and it's also involved in struggles with other religions, obviously starting in the Middle Ages, a struggle with Islam, in which, again, it was the infidelity, the fact that they didn't believe the right things, that seemed so offensive to the Christian world.
Now that's a very specific and particular history that Christianity has, and not everywhere is everything that has ever been put on this sort of list like it.
Here's another problem, I think.
A very specific thing happened.
It was actually adverted to earlier, but a very specific thing happened in the history of the kind of Christianity that we see around us mostly in the United States today, and it happened in the late 19th century, and that specific thing that happened in the late 19th century was a kind of deal that was cut between science, this new way of organizing intellectual authority, and religion.
If you think about the 18th century, say, if you think about intellectual life before the late 19th century, anything you did, anything you thought about, whether it was the physical world, the human world, the natural world apart from the human world, or morality, anything you did would have been framed against the background of a set of assumptions that were religious, Christian assumptions.
You couldn't give an account of the natural world that didn't say something about its relationship, for example, to the creation story in the Abrahamic tradition, the creation story in the first book of the Torah.
So everything was framed in that way.
But this changes in the late 19th century, and for the first time, it's possible for people to develop serious intellectual careers as natural historians like Darwin.
Darwin worried about the relationship between what he said and the truths of religion, but he could proceed, he could write books about his subject without having to say what the relationship was to the religious claims, and similarly, geologists increasingly could talk about it.
In the early 19th century, if you were a geologist and made a claim about the age of the Earth, you had to explain whether that was consistent or how it was or wasn't consistent with the age of the Earth implied by the account in Genesis.
By the end of the 19th century, you can just write a geology textbook in which you make arguments about how old the Earth is.
So there's a big change, and that division, that intellectual division of labor occurs as I say, I think, and it sort of solidifies so that by the end of the 19th century in Europe, there's a real intellectual division of labor, and you can do all sorts of serious things, including, increasingly, even philosophy, without being constrained by the thought, "Well, what I have to say has to be consistent with the deep truths that are given to me by our religious tradition."
So imagine someone who's coming out of that world, that late-19th-century world, coming into the country that I grew up in, Ghana, the society that I grew up in, Asante, coming into that world at the turn of the 20th century with this question that made the list: what have they got instead of Christianity?
Well, here's one thing he would have noticed, and by the way, there was a person who actually did this.
His name was Captain Rattray, he was sent as the British government anthropologist, and he wrote a book about Asante religion.
This is a soul disc.
There are many of them in the British Museum.
I could give you an interesting, different history of how it comes about that many of the things from my society ended up in the British Museum, but we don't have time for that.
So this object is a soul disc.
What is a soul disc?
It was worn around the necks of the soul-washers of the Asante king.
What was their job? To wash the king's soul.
It would take a long while to explain how a soul could be the kind of thing that could be washed, but Rattray knew that this was religion because souls were in play.
And similarly, there were many other things, many other practices.
For example, every time anybody had a drink, more or less, they poured a little bit on the ground in what's called the libation, and they gave some to the ancestors.
My father did this. Every time he opened a bottle of whiskey, which I'm glad to say was very often, he would take the top off and pour off just a little on the ground, and he would talk to, he would say to Akroma-Ampim, the founder of our line, or Yao Antony, my great uncle, he would talk to them, offer them a little bit of this.
And finally, there were these huge public ceremonials.
This is an early-19th-century drawing by another British military officer of such a ceremonial, where the king was involved, and the king's job, one of the large parts of his job, apart from organizing warfare and things like that, was to look after the tombs of his ancestors, and when a king died, the stool that he sat on was blackened and put in the royal ancestral temple, and every 40 days, the King of Asante has to go and do cult for his ancestors.
That's a large part of his job, and people think that if he doesn't do it, things will fall apart.
So he's a religious figure, as Rattray would have said, as well as a political figure.
So all this would count as religion for Rattray, but my point is that when you look into the lives of those people, you also find that every time they do anything, they're conscious of the ancestors.
Every morning at breakfast, you can go outside the front of the house and make an offering to the god tree, the nyame dua outside your house, and again, you'll talk to the gods and the high gods and the low gods and the ancestors and so on.
This is not a world in which the separation between religion and science has occurred.
Religion has not being separated from any other areas of life, and in particular, what's crucial to understand about this world is that it's a world in which the job that science does for us is done by what Rattray is going to call religion, because if they want an explanation of something, if they want to know why the crop just failed, if they want to know why it's raining or not raining, if they need rain, if they want to know why their grandfather has died, they are going to appeal to the very same entities, the very same language, talk to the very same gods about that.
This great separation, in other words, between religion and science hasn't happened.
Now, this would be a mere historical curiosity, except that in large parts of the world, this is still the truth.
I had the privilege of going to a wedding the other day in northern Namibia, 20 miles or so south of the Angolan border in a village of 200 people.
These were modern people.
We had with us Oona Chaplin, who some of you may have heard of, and one of the people from this village came up to her, and said, "I've seen you in 'Game of Thrones.'" So these were not people who were isolated from our world, but nevertheless, for them, the gods and the spirits are still very much there, and when we were on the bus going back and forth to the various parts of the [ceremony], they prayed not just in a generic way but for the safety of the journey, and they meant it, and when they said to me that my mother, the bridegroom's [grandmother], was with us, they didn't mean it figuratively.
They meant, even though she was a dead person, they meant that she was still around.
So in large parts of the world today, that separation between science and religion hasn't occurred in large parts of the world today, and as I say, these are not -- This guy used to work for Chase and at the World Bank.
These are fellow citizens of the world with you, but they come from a place in which religion is occupying a very different role.
So what I want you to think about next time somebody wants to make some vast generalization about religion is that maybe there isn't such a thing as a religion, such a thing as religion, and that therefore what they say cannot possibly be true.
(Applause)
At every stage of our lives we make decisions that will profoundly influence the lives of the people we're going to become, and then when we become those people, we're not always thrilled with the decisions we made.
So young people pay good money to get tattoos removed that teenagers paid good money to get.
Middle-aged people rushed to divorce people who young adults rushed to marry.
Older adults work hard to lose what middle-aged adults worked hard to gain.
On and on and on.
The question is, as a psychologist, that fascinates me is, why do we make decisions that our future selves so often regret?
Now, I think one of the reasons -- I'll try to convince you today — is that we have a fundamental misconception about the power of time.
Every one of you knows that the rate of change slows over the human lifespan, that your children seem to change by the minute but your parents seem to change by the year.
But what is the name of this magical point in life where change suddenly goes from a gallop to a crawl?
Is it teenage years? Is it middle age?
Is it old age? The answer, it turns out, for most people, is now, wherever now happens to be.
What I want to convince you today is that all of us are walking around with an illusion, an illusion that history, our personal history, has just come to an end, that we have just recently become the people that we were always meant to be and will be for the rest of our lives.
Let me give you some data to back up that claim.
So here's a study of change in people's personal values over time.
Here's three values.
Everybody here holds all of them, but you probably know that as you grow, as you age, the balance of these values shifts.
So how does it do so?
Well, we asked thousands of people.
We asked half of them to predict for us how much their values would change in the next 10 years, and the others to tell us how much their values had changed in the last 10 years.
And this enabled us to do a really interesting kind of analysis, because it allowed us to compare the predictions of people, say, 18 years old, to the reports of people who were 28, and to do that kind of analysis throughout the lifespan.
Here's what we found.
First of all, you are right, change does slow down as we age, but second, you're wrong, because it doesn't slow nearly as much as we think.
At every age, from 18 to 68 in our data set, people vastly underestimated how much change they would experience over the next 10 years.
We call this the "end of history" illusion.
To give you an idea of the magnitude of this effect, you can connect these two lines, and what you see here is that 18-year-olds anticipate changing only as much as 50-year-olds actually do.
Now it's not just values. It's all sorts of other things.
For example, personality.
Many of you know that psychologists now claim that there are five fundamental dimensions of personality: neuroticism, openness to experience, agreeableness, extraversion, and conscientiousness.
Again, we asked people how much they expected to change over the next 10 years, and also how much they had changed over the last 10 years, and what we found, well, you're going to get used to seeing this diagram over and over, because once again the rate of change does slow as we age, but at every age, people underestimate how much their personalities will change in the next decade.
And it isn't just ephemeral things like values and personality.
You can ask people about their likes and dislikes, their basic preferences.
For example, name your best friend, your favorite kind of vacation, what's your favorite hobby, what's your favorite kind of music.
People can name these things.
We ask half of them to tell us, "Do you think that that will change over the next 10 years?"
and half of them to tell us, "Did that change over the last 10 years?"
And what we find, well, you've seen it twice now, and here it is again: people predict that the friend they have now is the friend they'll have in 10 years, the vacation they most enjoy now is the one they'll enjoy in 10 years, and yet, people who are 10 years older all say, "Eh, you know, that's really changed."
Does any of this matter?
Is this just a form of mis-prediction that doesn't have consequences?
No, it matters quite a bit, and I'll give you an example of why.
It bedevils our decision-making in important ways.
Bring to mind right now for yourself your favorite musician today and your favorite musician 10 years ago.
I put mine up on the screen to help you along.
Now we asked people to predict for us, to tell us how much money they would pay right now to see their current favorite musician perform in concert 10 years from now, and on average, people said they would pay 129 dollars for that ticket.
And yet, when we asked them how much they would pay to see the person who was their favorite 10 years ago perform today, they say only 80 dollars.
Now, in a perfectly rational world, these should be the same number, but we overpay for the opportunity to indulge our current preferences because we overestimate their stability.
Why does this happen? We're not entirely sure, but it probably has to do with the ease of remembering versus the difficulty of imagining.
Most of us can remember who we were 10 years ago, but we find it hard to imagine who we're going to be, and then we mistakenly think that because it's hard to imagine, it's not likely to happen.
Sorry, when people say "I can't imagine that," they're usually talking about their own lack of imagination, and not about the unlikelihood of the event that they're describing.
The bottom line is, time is a powerful force.
It transforms our preferences.
It reshapes our values.
It alters our personalities.
We seem to appreciate this fact, but only in retrospect.
Only when we look backwards do we realize how much change happens in a decade.
It's as if, for most of us, the present is a magic time.
It's a watershed on the timeline.
It's the moment at which we finally become ourselves.
Human beings are works in progress that mistakenly think they're finished.
The person you are right now is as transient, as fleeting and as temporary as all the people you've ever been.
The one constant in our life is change.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I read poetry all the time and write about it frequently and take poems apart to see how they work because I'm a word person.
I understand the world best, most fully, in words rather than, say, pictures or numbers, and when I have a new experience or a new feeling, I'm a little frustrated until I can try to put it into words.
I think I've always been that way.
I devoured science fiction as a child. I still do.
And I found poems by Andrew Marvell and Matthew Arnold and Emily Dickinson and William Butler Yeats because they were quoted in science fiction, and I loved their sounds and I went on to read about ottava rima and medial caesuras and enjambment and all that other technical stuff that you care about if you already care about poems, because poems already made me happier and sadder and more alive.
And I became a poetry critic because I wanted to know how and why.
Now, poetry isn't one thing that serves one purpose any more than music or computer programming serve one purpose.
The greek word poem, it just means "a made thing," and poetry is a set of techniques, ways of making patterns that put emotions into words.
The more techniques you know, the more things you can make, and the more patterns you can recognize in things you might already like or love.
That said, poetry does seem to be especially good at certain things.
For example, we are all going to die.
Poetry can help us live with that.
Poems are made of words, nothing but words.
The particulars in poems are like the particularities, the personalities, that distinguish people from one another.
Poems are easy to share, easy to pass on, and when you read a poem, you can imagine someone's speaking to you or for you, maybe even someone far away or someone made up or someone deceased.
That's why we can go to poems when we want to remember something or someone, to celebrate or to look beyond death or to say goodbye, and that's one reason poems can seem important, even to people who aren't me, who don't so much live in a world of words.
The poet Frank O'Hara said, "If you don't need poetry, bully for you," but he also said when he didn't want to be alive anymore, the thought that he wouldn't write any more poems had stopped him.
Poetry helps me want to be alive, and I want to show you why by showing you how, how a couple of poems react to the fact that we're alive in one place at one time in one culture, and in another we won't be alive at all.
So here's one of the first poems I memorized.
It could address a child or an adult.
"From far, from eve and morning From yon twelve-winded sky, The stuff of life to knit me Blew hither; here am I.
Now — for a breath I tarry Nor yet disperse apart — Take my hand quick and tell me, What have you in your heart.
Speak now, and I will answer; How shall I help you, say; Ere to the wind's twelve quarters I take my endless way."
[A. E. Housman] Now, this poem has appealed to science fiction writers.
It's furnished at least three science fiction titles, I think because it says poems can brings us news from the future or the past or across the world, because their patterns can seem to tell you what's in somebody's heart.
It says poems can bring people together temporarily, which I think is true, and it sticks in my head not just because it rhymes but for how it rhymes, cleanly and simply on the two and four, "say" and "way," with anticipatory hints on the one and three, "answer" and "quarters," as if the poem itself were coming together.
It plays up the fact that we die by exaggerating the speed of our lives.
A few years on Earth become one speech, one breath.
It's a poem about loneliness -- the "I" in the poem feels no connection will last — and it might look like a plea for help 'til you get to the word "help," where this "I" facing you, taking your hand, is more like a teacher or a genie, or at least that's what he wants to believe.
It would not be the first time a poet had written the poem that he wanted to hear.
Now, this next poem really changed what I liked and what I read and what I felt I could read as an adult.
It might not make any sense to you if you haven't seen it before.
"The Garden" "Oleander: coral from lipstick ads in the 50's.
Fruit of the tree of such knowledge To smack (thin air) meaning kiss or hit.
It appears in the guise of outworn usages because we are bad?
Big masculine threat, insinuating and slangy."
[Rae Armantrout] Now, I found this poem in an anthology of almost equally confusing poems in 1989.
I just heard that there were these scandalous writers called Language poets who didn't make any sense, and I wanted to go and see for myself what they were like, and some of them didn't do much for me, but this writer, Rae Armantrout, did an awful lot, and I kept reading her until I felt I knew what was going on, as I do with this poem.
It's about the Garden of Eden and the Fall and the Biblical story of the Fall, in which sex as we know it and death and guilt come into the world at the same time.
It's also about how appearances deceive, how our culture can sweep us along into doing and saying things we didn't intend or don't like, and Armantrout's style is trying to help us stop or slow down.
"Smack" can mean "kiss" as in air kisses, as in lip-smacking, but that can lead to "smack" as in "hit" as in domestic abuse, because sexual attraction can seem threatening.
The red that means fertility can also mean poison.
Oleander is poisonous.
And outworn usages like "smack" for "kiss" or "hit" can help us see how our unacknowledged assumptions can make us believe we are bad, either because sex is sinful or because we tolerate so much sexism.
We let guys tell women what to do.
The poem reacts to old lipstick ads, and its edginess about statement, its reversals and halts, have everything to do with resisting the language of ads that want to tell us so easily what to want, what to do, what to think.
That resistance is a lot of the point of the poem, which shows me, Armantrout shows me what it's like to hear grave threats and mortal dishonesty in the language of everyday life, and once she's done that, I think she can show other people, women and men, what it's like to feel that way and say to other people, women and men who feel so alienated or so threatened that they're not alone.
Now, how do I know that I'm right about this somewhat confusing poem?
Well in this case, I emailed the poet a draft of my talk and she said, "Yeah, yeah, that's about it."
Yeah. (Laughter) (Applause) But usually, you can't know. You never know.
You can't be sure, and that's okay.
All we can do we is listen to poems and look at poems and guess and see if they can bring us what we need, and if you're wrong about some part of a poem, nothing bad will happen.
Now, this next poem is older than Armantrout's, but a little younger than A. E. Housman's.
"The Brave Man" "The sun, that brave man, Comes through boughs that lie in wait, That brave man.
Green and gloomy eyes In dark forms of the grass Run away.
The good stars, Pale helms and spiky spurs, Run away.
Fears of my bed, Fears of life and fears of death, Run away.
That brave man comes up From below and walks without meditation, That brave man."
[Wallace Stevens] Now, the sun in this poem, in Wallace Stevens' poem, seems so grave because the person in the poem is so afraid.
The sun comes up in the morning through branches, dispels the dew, the eyes, on the grass, and defeats stars envisioned as armies.
"Brave" has its old sense of showy as well as its modern sense, courage.
This sun is not afraid to show his face.
But the person in the poem is afraid.
He might have been up all night.
That is the reveal Stevens saves for that fourth stanza, where run away has become a refrain.
This person might want to run away too, but fortified by the sun's example, he might just rise.
Stevens saves that sonically odd word "meditation" for the end.
Unlike the sun, human beings think.
We meditate on past and future, life and death, above and below.
And it can make us afraid.
Poems, the patterns in poems, show us not just what somebody thought or what someone did or what happened but what it was like to be a person like that, to be so anxious, so lonely, so inquisitive, so goofy, so preposterous, so brave.
That's why poems can seem at once so durable, so personal, and so ephemeral, like something inside and outside you at once.
The Scottish poet Denise Riley compares poetry to a needle, a sliver of outside I cradle inside, and the American poet Terrance Hayes wrote six poems called "Wind in a Box."
One of them asks, "Tell me, what am I going to do when I'm dead?"
And the answer is that he'll stay with us or won't stay with us inside us as wind, as air, as words.
It is easier than ever to find poems that might stay inside you, that might stay with you, from long, long ago, or from right this minute, from far away or from right close to where you live, almost no matter where you live.
Poems can help you say, help you show how you're feeling, but they can also introduce you to feelings, ways of being in the world, people, very much unlike you, maybe even people from long, long ago.
Some poems even tell you that that is what they can do.
That's what John Keats is doing in his most mysterious, perhaps, poem.
It's mysterious because it's probably unfinished, he probably left it unfinished, and because it might be meant for a character in a play, but it might just be Keats' thinking about what his own writing, his handwriting, could do, and in it I hear, at least I hear, mortality, and I hear the power of older poetic techniques, and I have the feeling, you might have the feeling, of meeting even for an instant, almost becoming, someone else from long ago, someone quite memorable.
"This living hand, now warm and capable Of earnest grasping, would, if it were cold And in the icy silence of the tomb, So haunt thy days and chill thy dreaming nights That thou would wish thine own heart dry of blood So in my veins red life might stream again, And thou be conscience-calm’d -- see here it is -- I hold it towards you."
Thanks.
(Applause)
Even nature's most disgusting creatures have important secrets, but who would want a swarm of cockroaches coming towards them?
Yet one of the greatest differences between natural and human technologies relates to robustness.
Robust systems are stable in complex and new environments.
Remarkably, cockroaches can self-stabilize running over rough terrain.
When we put a jet pack on them, or give them a perturbation like an earthquake, we discovered that their wonderfully tuned legs allow them to self-stabilize without using any of their brainpower.
They can go over complex terrain like grass, no problem, and not get destabilized.
We discovered a new behavior where, because of their shape, they actually roll automatically to their side to go through this artificial test bit of grass.
Robust systems can perform multiple tasks with the same structure.
Here's a new behavior we've discovered.
The animals rapidly invert and disappear in less than 150 milliseconds — you never see them — using the same structures that they use to run, their legs.
They can run upside down very rapidly on rods, branches and wires, and if you perturb one of those branches, they can do this.
They can perform gymnastic maneuvers like no robot we have yet.
And they have nearly unlimited maneuverability with that same structure and unprecedented access to a variety of different areas.
They have wings for flying when they get warm, but they use those same wings to flip over if they get destabilized.
Very effective.
Robust systems are also fault tolerant and fail-safe.
This is the foot of a cockroach.
It has spines, gluey pads and claws, but if you take off those feet, they can still go over rough terrain, like the bottom video that you see, without hardly slowing down. Extraordinary.
They can run up mesh without their feet.
Here's an animal using a normal, alternating tripod: three legs, three legs, three legs, but in nature, the insects often have lost their legs.
Here's one moving with two middle legs gone.
It can even lose three legs, in a tripod, and adopt a new gait, a hopping gait.
And I point out that all of these videos are slowed down 20 times, so they're actually really fast, when you see this.
Robust systems are also damage resistant.
Here's an animal climbing up a wall.
It looks like a rapid, smooth, vertical climb, but when you slow it down, you see something very different.
Here's what they do.
They intentionally have a head-on collision with the wall so they don't slow down and can transition up it in 75 milliseconds.
And they can do this in part because they have extraordinary exoskeletons.
And they're really just made up of compliant joints that are tubes and plates connected to one another.
Here's a dissection of an abdomen of a cockroach.
You see these plates, and you see the compliant membrane.
My engineering colleague at Berkeley designed with his students a novel manufacturing technique where you essentially origami the exoskeleton, you laser cut it, laminate it, and you fold it up into a robot.
And you can do that now in less than 15 minutes.
These robots, called DASH, for Dynamic Autonomous Sprawled Hexapod, are highly compliant robots, and they're remarkably robust as a result of these features.
They're certainly incredibly damage resistant.
(Laughter) They even have some of the behaviors of the cockroaches.
So they can use their smart, compliant body to transition up a wall in a very simple way.
They even have some of the beginnings of the rapid inversion behavior where they disappear.
Now we want to know why they can go anywhere.
We discovered that they can go through three-millimeter gaps, the height of two pennies, two stacked pennies, and when they do this, they can actually run through those confined spaces at high speeds, although you never see it.
To understand it better, we did a CT scan of the exoskeleton and showed that they can compress their body by over 40 percent.
We put them in a materials testing machine to look at the stress strain analysis and showed that they can withstand forces 800 times their body weight, and after this they can fly and run absolutely normally.
So you never know where curiosity-based research will lead, and someday you may want a swarm of cockroach-inspired robots to come at you.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
Let me tell you a story.
It goes back 200 million years.
It's a story of the neocortex, which means "new rind."
So in these early mammals, because only mammals have a neocortex, rodent-like creatures.
It was the size of a postage stamp and just as thin, and was a thin covering around their walnut-sized brain, but it was capable of a new type of thinking.
Rather than the fixed behaviors that non-mammalian animals have, it could invent new behaviors.
So a mouse is escaping a predator, its path is blocked, it'll try to invent a new solution.
That may work, it may not, but if it does, it will remember that and have a new behavior, and that can actually spread virally through the rest of the community.
Another mouse watching this could say, "Hey, that was pretty clever, going around that rock," and it could adopt a new behavior as well.
Non-mammalian animals couldn't do any of those things.
They had fixed behaviors.
Now they could learn a new behavior but not in the course of one lifetime.
In the course of maybe a thousand lifetimes, it could evolve a new fixed behavior.
That was perfectly okay 200 million years ago.
The environment changed very slowly.
It could take 10,000 years for there to be a significant environmental change, and during that period of time it would evolve a new behavior.
Now that went along fine, but then something happened.
Sixty-five million years ago, there was a sudden, violent change to the environment.
We call it the Cretaceous extinction event.
That's when the dinosaurs went extinct, that's when 75 percent of the animal and plant species went extinct, and that's when mammals overtook their ecological niche, and to anthropomorphize, biological evolution said, "Hmm, this neocortex is pretty good stuff," and it began to grow it.
And mammals got bigger, their brains got bigger at an even faster pace, and the neocortex got bigger even faster than that and developed these distinctive ridges and folds basically to increase its surface area.
If you took the human neocortex and stretched it out, it's about the size of a table napkin, and it's still a thin structure.
It's about the thickness of a table napkin.
But it has so many convolutions and ridges it's now 80 percent of our brain, and that's where we do our thinking, and it's the great sublimator.
We still have that old brain that provides our basic drives and motivations, but I may have a drive for conquest, and that'll be sublimated by the neocortex into writing a poem or inventing an app or giving a TED Talk, and it's really the neocortex that's where the action is.
Fifty years ago, I wrote a paper describing how I thought the brain worked, and I described it as a series of modules.
Each module could do things with a pattern.
It could learn a pattern. It could remember a pattern.
It could implement a pattern.
And these modules were organized in hierarchies, and we created that hierarchy with our own thinking.
And there was actually very little to go on 50 years ago.
It led me to meet President Johnson.
I've been thinking about this for 50 years, and a year and a half ago I came out with the book "How To Create A Mind," which has the same thesis, but now there's a plethora of evidence.
The amount of data we're getting about the brain from neuroscience is doubling every year.
Spatial resolution of brainscanning of all types is doubling every year.
We can now see inside a living brain and see individual interneural connections connecting in real time, firing in real time.
We can see your brain create your thoughts.
We can see your thoughts create your brain, which is really key to how it works.
So let me describe briefly how it works.
I've actually counted these modules.
We have about 300 million of them, and we create them in these hierarchies.
I'll give you a simple example.
I've got a bunch of modules that can recognize the crossbar to a capital A, and that's all they care about.
A beautiful song can play, a pretty girl could walk by, they don't care, but they see a crossbar to a capital A, they get very excited and they say "crossbar," and they put out a high probability on their output axon.
That goes to the next level, and these layers are organized in conceptual levels.
Each is more abstract than the next one, so the next one might say "capital A."
That goes up to a higher level that might say "Apple."
Information flows down also.
If the apple recognizer has seen A-P-P-L, it'll think to itself, "Hmm, I think an E is probably likely," and it'll send a signal down to all the E recognizers saying, "Be on the lookout for an E, I think one might be coming."
The E recognizers will lower their threshold and they see some sloppy thing, could be an E.
Ordinarily you wouldn't think so, but we're expecting an E, it's good enough, and yeah, I've seen an E, and then apple says, "Yeah, I've seen an Apple."
Go up another five levels, and you're now at a pretty high level of this hierarchy, and stretch down into the different senses, and you may have a module that sees a certain fabric, hears a certain voice quality, smells a certain perfume, and will say, "My wife has entered the room."
Go up another 10 levels, and now you're at a very high level.
You're probably in the frontal cortex, and you'll have modules that say, "That was ironic.
That's funny. She's pretty."
You might think that those are more sophisticated, but actually what's more complicated is the hierarchy beneath them.
There was a 16-year-old girl, she had brain surgery, and she was conscious because the surgeons wanted to talk to her.
You can do that because there's no pain receptors in the brain.
And whenever they stimulated particular, very small points on her neocortex, shown here in red, she would laugh.
So at first they thought they were triggering some kind of laugh reflex, but no, they quickly realized they had found the points in her neocortex that detect humor, and she just found everything hilarious whenever they stimulated these points.
"You guys are so funny just standing around," was the typical comment, and they weren't funny, not while doing surgery.
So how are we doing today?
Well, computers are actually beginning to master human language with techniques that are similar to the neocortex.
I actually described the algorithm, which is similar to something called a hierarchical hidden Markov model, something I've worked on since the '90s.
"Jeopardy" is a very broad natural language game, and Watson got a higher score than the best two players combined.
It got this query correct: "A long, tiresome speech delivered by a frothy pie topping," and it quickly responded, "What is a meringue harangue?"
And Jennings and the other guy didn't get that.
It's a pretty sophisticated example of computers actually understanding human language, and it actually got its knowledge by reading Wikipedia and several other encyclopedias.
Five to 10 years from now, search engines will actually be based on not just looking for combinations of words and links but actually understanding, reading for understanding the billions of pages on the web and in books.
So you'll be walking along, and Google will pop up and say, "You know, Mary, you expressed concern to me a month ago that your glutathione supplement wasn't getting past the blood-brain barrier.
Well, new research just came out 13 seconds ago that shows a whole new approach to that and a new way to take glutathione.
Let me summarize it for you."
Twenty years from now, we'll have nanobots, because another exponential trend is the shrinking of technology.
They'll go into our brain through the capillaries and basically connect our neocortex to a synthetic neocortex in the cloud providing an extension of our neocortex.
Now today, I mean, you have a computer in your phone, but if you need 10,000 computers for a few seconds to do a complex search, you can access that for a second or two in the cloud.
In the 2030s, if you need some extra neocortex, you'll be able to connect to that in the cloud directly from your brain.
So I'm walking along and I say, "Oh, there's Chris Anderson.
He's coming my way.
I'd better think of something clever to say.
I've got three seconds.
My 300 million modules in my neocortex isn't going to cut it.
I need a billion more."
I'll be able to access that in the cloud.
And our thinking, then, will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking, but the non-biological portion is subject to my law of accelerating returns.
It will grow exponentially.
And remember what happens the last time we expanded our neocortex?
That was two million years ago when we became humanoids and developed these large foreheads.
Other primates have a slanted brow.
They don't have the frontal cortex.
But the frontal cortex is not really qualitatively different.
It's a quantitative expansion of neocortex, but that additional quantity of thinking was the enabling factor for us to take a qualitative leap and invent language and art and science and technology and TED conferences.
No other species has done that.
And so, over the next few decades, we're going to do it again.
We're going to again expand our neocortex, only this time we won't be limited by a fixed architecture of enclosure.
It'll be expanded without limit.
That additional quantity will again be the enabling factor for another qualitative leap in culture and technology.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Election night 2008 was a night that tore me in half.
It was the night that Barack Obama was elected.
[One hundred and forty-three] years after the end of slavery, and [43] years after the passage of the Voting Rights Act, an African-American was elected president.
Many of us never thought that this was possible until the moment that it happened.
And in many ways, it was the climax of the black civil rights movement in the United States.
I was in California that night, which was ground zero at the time for another movement: the marriage equality movement.
Gay marriage was on the ballot in the form of Proposition 8, and as the election returns started to come in, it became clear that the right for same sex couples to marry, which had recently been granted by the California courts, was going to be taken away.
So on the same night that Barack Obama won his historic presidency, the lesbian and gay community suffered one of our most painful defeats.
And then it got even worse.
Pretty much immediately, African-Americans started to be blamed for the passage of Proposition 8.
This was largely due to an incorrect poll that said that blacks had voted for the measure by something like 70 percent.
This turned out not to be true, but this idea of pervasive black homophobia set in, and was grabbed on by the media.
I couldn't tear myself away from the coverage.
I listened to some gay commentator say that the African-American community was notoriously homophobic, and now that civil rights had been achieved for us, we wanted to take away other people's rights.
There were even reports of racist epithets being thrown at some of the participants of the gay rights rallies that took place after the election.
And on the other side, some African-Americans dismissed or ignored homophobia that was indeed real in our community.
And others resented this comparison between gay rights and civil rights, and once again, the sinking feeling that two minority groups of which I'm both a part of were competing with each other instead of supporting each other overwhelmed and, frankly, pissed me off.
Now, I'm a documentary filmmaker, so after going through my pissed off stage and yelling at the television and radio, my next instinct was to make a movie.
And what guided me in making this film was, how was this happening?
How was it that the gay rights movement was being pitted against the civil rights movement?
And this wasn't just an abstract question.
I'm a beneficiary of both movements, so this was actually personal.
But then something else happened after that election in 2008.
The march towards gay equality accelerated at a pace that surprised and shocked everyone, and is still reshaping our laws and our policies, our institutions and our entire country.
And so it started to become increasingly clear to me that this pitting of the two movements against each other actually didn't make sense, and that they were in fact much, much more interconnected, and that, in fact, some of the way that the gay rights movement has been able to make such incredible gains so quickly is that it's used some of the same tactics and strategies that were first laid down by the civil rights movement.
Let's just look at a few of these strategies.
First off, it's really interesting to see, to actually visually see, how quick the gay rights movement has made its gains, if you look at a few of the major events on a timeline of both freedom movements.
Now, there are tons of milestones in the civil rights movement, but the first one we're going to start with is the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott.
This was a protest campaign against Montgomery, Alabama's segregation on their public transit system, and it began when a woman named Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat to a white person.
The campaign lasted a year, and it galvanized the civil rights movement like nothing had before it.
And I call this strategy the "I'm tired of your foot on my neck" strategy.
So gays and lesbians have been in society since societies began, but up until the mid-20th century, homosexual acts were still illegal in most states.
So just 14 years after the Montgomery bus boycott, a group of LGBT folks took that same strategy.
It's known as Stonewall, in 1969, and it's where a group of LGBT patrons fought back against police beatings at a Greenwich Village bar that sparked three days of rioting.
Incidentally, black and latino LGBT folks were at the forefront of this rebellion, and it's a really interesting example of the intersection of our struggles against racism, homophobia, gender identity and police brutality.
After Stonewall happened, gay liberation groups sprang up all over the country, and the modern gay rights movement as we know it took off.
So the next moment to look at on the timeline is the 1963 March on Washington.
This was a seminal event in the civil rights movement and it's where African-Americans called for both civil and economic justice.
And it's of course where Martin Luther King delivered his famous "I have a dream" speech, but what's actually less known is that this march was organized by a man named Bayard Rustin.
Bayard was an out gay man, and he's considered one of the most brilliant strategists of the civil rights movement.
He later in his life became a fierce advocate of LGBT rights as well, and his life is testament to the intersection of the struggles.
The March on Washington is one of the high points of the movement, and it's where there was a fervent belief that African-Americans too could be a part of American democracy.
I call this strategy the "We are visible and many in numbers" strategy.
Some early gay activists were actually directly inspired by the march, and some had taken part.
Gay pioneer Jack Nichols said, "We marched with Martin Luther King, seven of us from the Mattachine Society" -- which was an early gay rights organization — "and from that moment on, we had our own dream about a gay rights march of similar proportions."
Several years later, a series of marches took place, each one gaining the momentum of the gay freedom struggle.
The first one was in 1979, and the second one took place in 1987.
The third one was held in 1993.
Almost a million people showed up, and people were so energized and excited by what had taken place, they went back to their own communities and started their own political and social organizations, further increasing the visibility of the movement.
The day of that march, October 11, was then declared National Coming Out Day, and is still celebrated all over the world.
These marches set the groundwork for the historic changes that we see happening today in the United States.
And lastly, the "Loving" strategy.
The name speaks for itself.
In 1967, the Supreme Court ruled in Loving v. Virginia, and invalidated all laws that prohibited interracial marriage.
This is considered one of the Supreme Court's landmark civil rights cases.
In 1996, President Clinton signed the Defense of Marriage Act, known as DOMA, and that made the federal government only have to recognize marriages between a man and a woman.
In United States v. Windsor, a 79-year-old lesbian named Edith Windsor sued the federal government when she was forced to pay estate taxes on her deceased wife's property, something that heterosexual couples don't have to do.
And as the case wound its way through the lower courts, the Loving case was repeatedly cited as precedent.
When it got to the Supreme Court in 2013, the Supreme Court agreed, and DOMA was thrown out.
It was incredible.
But the gay marriage movement has been making gains for years now.
To date, 17 states have passed laws allowing marriage equality.
It's become the de facto battle for gay equality, and it seems like daily, laws prohibiting it are being challenged in the courts, even in places like Texas and Utah, which no one saw coming.
So a lot has changed since that night in 2008 when I felt torn in half.
I did go on to make that film.
It's a documentary film, and it's called "The New Black," and it looks at how the African-American community is grappling with the gay rights issue in light of the gay marriage movement and this fight over the meaning of civil rights.
And I wanted to capture some of this incredible change that was happening, and as luck or politics would have it, another marriage battle started gearing up, this time in Maryland, where African-Americans make up 30 percent of the electorate.
So this tension between gay rights and civil rights started to bubble up once again, and I was lucky enough to capture how some people were making the connection between the movements this time.
This is a clip of Karess Taylor-Hughes and Samantha Masters, two characters in the film, as they hit the streets of Baltimore and try to convince potential voters.
(Video) Samantha Masters: That's what's up, man, this is a righteous man over here.
Okay, are you registered to vote?
Man: No. Karess Taylor-Hughes: Okay. How old are you?
Man: 21. KTH: 21? You gotta get registered to vote.
We got to get you registered to vote.
Man: I ain't voting on no gay shit.
SM: Okay, why? What's up? Man: I ain't with that.
SM: That's not cool.
Man: What made you be gay? SM: So what made you be straight?
So what made you be straight?
Man 2: You can't answer that question. (Laughter) KSM: I used to not have the same rights as you, but I know that because a black man like yourself stood up for a woman like me, I know that I've got the same opportunities.
So you, as a black man, have the opportunity to stand up for somebody else.
Whether you're gay or not, these are your brothers and sisters out here, and they need you to represent.
Man 2: Who is you to tell somebody who they can't have sex with, who they can't be with?
They ain't got that power.
Nobody has that power to say, you can't marry that young lady.
Who has that power? Nobody.
SM: But you know what?
Our state has put the power in your hands, and so what we need you to do is vote for, you gonna vote for 6.
Man 2: I got you.
SM: Vote for 6, okay? Man 2: I got you.
KSM: All right, do y'all need community service hours?
You do? All right, you can always volunteer with us to get community service hours.
Y'all want to do that?
We feed you. We bring you pizza.
(Laughter) (Applause) Yoruba Richen: Thank you.
What's amazing to me about that clip that we just captured as we were filming is, it really shows how Karess understands the history of the civil rights movement, but she's not restricted by it.
She doesn't just limit it to black people.
She sees it as a blueprint for expanding rights to gays and lesbians.
Maybe because she's younger, she's like 25, she's able to do this a little bit more easily, but the fact is that Maryland voters did pass that marriage equality amendment, and in fact it was the first time that marriage equality was directly voted on and passed by the voters.
African-Americans supported it at a higher level than had ever been recorded.
It was a complete turnaround from that night in 2008 when Proposition 8 was passed.
It was, and feels, monumental.
We in the LGBT community have gone from being a pathologized and reviled and criminalized group to being seen as part of the great human quest for dignity and equality.
We've gone from having to hide our sexuality in order to maintain our jobs and our families to literally getting a place at the table with the president and a shout out at his second inauguration.
I just want to read what he said at that inauguration: "We the people declare today that the most evident of truths, that all of us are created equal.
It is the star that guides us still, just as it guided our forebears through Seneca Falls and Selma and Stonewall."
Now we know that everything is not perfect, especially when you look at what's happening with the LGBT rights issue internationally, but it says something about how far we've come when our president puts the gay freedom struggle in the context of the other great freedom struggles of our time: the women's rights movement and the civil rights movement.
His statement demonstrates not only the interconnectedness of those movements, but how each one borrowed and was inspired by the other.
So just as Martin Luther King learned from and borrowed from Gandhi's tactics of civil disobedience and nonviolence, which became a bedrock of the civil rights movement, the gay rights movement saw what worked in the civil rights movement, and they used some of those same strategies and tactics to make gains at an even quicker pace.
Maybe one more other reason for the relative quick progress of the gay rights movement.
Whereas a lot of us continue to still live in racially segregated spaces, LGBT folks, we are everywhere.
We are in urban communities and rural communities, communities of color, immigrant communities, churches and mosques and synagogues.
We are your mothers and brothers and sisters and sons.
And when someone that you love or a family member comes out, it may be easier to support their quest for equality.
And in fact, the gay rights movement asks us to support justice and equality from a space of love.
That may be the biggest, greatest gift that the movement has given us.
It calls on us to access that which is most universal and most intimate: a love of our brother and our sister and our neighbor.
I just want to end with a quote by one of our greatest freedom fighters who's no longer with us, Nelson Mandela of South Africa.
Nelson Mandela led South Africa after the dark and brutal days of Apartheid, and out of the ashes of that legalized racial discrimination, he led South Africa to become the first country in the world to ban discrimination based on sexual orientation within its constitution.
Mandela said, "For to be free is not merely to cast off one's chains, but to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others."
So as these movements continue on, and as freedom struggles around the world continue on, let's remember that not only are they interconnected, but they must support and enhance each other for us to be truly victorious.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I grew up in a very small country town in Victoria.
I had a very normal, low-key kind of upbringing.
I went to school, I hung out with my friends, I fought with my younger sisters.
It was all very normal.
And when I was 15, a member of my local community approached my parents and wanted to nominate me for a community achievement award.
And my parents said, "Hm, that's really nice, but there's kind of one glaring problem with that.
She hasn't actually achieved anything." (Laughter) And they were right, you know.
I went to school, I got good marks, I had a very low-key after school job in my mum's hairdressing salon, and I spent a lot of time watching "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and "Dawson's Creek."
Yeah, I know. What a contradiction.
But they were right, you know.
I wasn't doing anything that was out of the ordinary at all.
I wasn't doing anything that could be considered an achievement if you took disability out of the equation.
Years later, I was on my second teaching round in a Melbourne high school, and I was about 20 minutes into a year 11 legal studies class when this boy put up his hand and said, "Hey miss, when are you going to start doing your speech?"
And I said, "What speech?"
You know, I'd been talking them about defamation law for a good 20 minutes.
And he said, "You know, like, your motivational speaking.
You know, when people in wheelchairs come to school, they usually say, like, inspirational stuff?"
(Laughter) "It's usually in the big hall."
And that's when it dawned on me: This kid had only ever experienced disabled people as objects of inspiration.
We are not, to this kid -- and it's not his fault, I mean, that's true for many of us.
For lots of us, disabled people are not our teachers or our doctors or our manicurists.
We're not real people. We are there to inspire.
And in fact, I am sitting on this stage looking like I do in this wheelchair, and you are probably kind of expecting me to inspire you. Right? (Laughter) Yeah.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, I'm afraid I'm going to disappoint you dramatically.
I am not here to inspire you.
I am here to tell you that we have been lied to about disability.
Yeah, we've been sold the lie that disability is a Bad Thing, capital B, capital T.
It's a bad thing, and to live with a disability makes you exceptional.
It's not a bad thing, and it doesn't make you exceptional.
And in the past few years, we've been able to propagate this lie even further via social media.
You may have seen images like this one: "The only disability in life is a bad attitude."
Or this one: "Your excuse is invalid." Indeed.
Or this one: "Before you quit, try!"
These are just a couple of examples, but there are a lot of these images out there.
You know, you might have seen the one, the little girl with no hands drawing a picture with a pencil held in her mouth.
You might have seen a child running on carbon fiber prosthetic legs.
And these images, there are lots of them out there, they are what we call inspiration porn.
(Laughter) And I use the term porn deliberately, because they objectify one group of people for the benefit of another group of people.
So in this case, we're objectifying disabled people for the benefit of nondisabled people.
The purpose of these images is to inspire you, to motivate you, so that we can look at them and think, "Well, however bad my life is, it could be worse.
I could be that person."
But what if you are that person?
I've lost count of the number of times that I've been approached by strangers wanting to tell me that they think I'm brave or inspirational, and this was long before my work had any kind of public profile.
They were just kind of congratulating me for managing to get up in the morning and remember my own name. (Laughter) And it is objectifying.
These images, those images objectify disabled people for the benefit of nondisabled people.
They are there so that you can look at them and think that things aren't so bad for you, to put your worries into perspective.
And life as a disabled person is actually somewhat difficult.
We do overcome some things.
But the things that we're overcoming are not the things that you think they are.
They are not things to do with our bodies.
I use the term "disabled people" quite deliberately, because I subscribe to what's called the social model of disability, which tells us that we are more disabled by the society that we live in than by our bodies and our diagnoses.
So I have lived in this body a long time.
I'm quite fond of it.
It does the things that I need it to do, and I've learned to use it to the best of its capacity just as you have, and that's the thing about those kids in those pictures as well.
They're not doing anything out of the ordinary.
They are just using their bodies to the best of their capacity.
So is it really fair to objectify them in the way that we do, to share those images?
People, when they say, "You're an inspiration," they mean it as a compliment.
And I know why it happens.
It's because of the lie, it's because we've been sold this lie that disability makes you exceptional.
And it honestly doesn't.
And I know what you're thinking.
You know, I'm up here bagging out inspiration, and you're thinking, "Jeez, Stella, aren't you inspired sometimes by some things?"
And the thing is, I am.
I learn from other disabled people all the time.
I'm learning not that I am luckier than them, though.
I am learning that it's a genius idea to use a pair of barbecue tongs to pick up things that you dropped. (Laughter) I'm learning that nifty trick where you can charge your mobile phone battery from your chair battery.
Genius.
We are learning from each others' strength and endurance, not against our bodies and our diagnoses, but against a world that exceptionalizes and objectifies us.
I really think that this lie that we've been sold about disability is the greatest injustice.
It makes life hard for us.
And that quote, "The only disability in life is a bad attitude," the reason that that's bullshit is because it's just not true, because of the social model of disability.
No amount of smiling at a flight of stairs has ever made it turn into a ramp.
Never. (Laughter) (Applause) Smiling at a television screen isn't going to make closed captions appear for people who are deaf.
No amount of standing in the middle of a bookshop and radiating a positive attitude is going to turn all those books into braille.
It's just not going to happen.
I really want to live in a world where disability is not the exception, but the norm.
I want to live in a world where a 15-year-old girl sitting in her bedroom watching "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" isn't referred to as achieving anything because she's doing it sitting down.
I want to live in a world where we don't have such low expectations of disabled people that we are congratulated for getting out of bed and remembering our own names in the morning.
I want to live in a world where we value genuine achievement for disabled people, and I want to live in a world where a kid in year 11 in a Melbourne high school is not one bit surprised that his new teacher is a wheelchair user.
Disability doesn't make you exceptional, but questioning what you think you know about it does.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It was less than a year after September 11, and I was at the Chicago Tribune writing about shootings and murders, and it was leaving me feeling pretty dark and depressed.
I had done some activism in college, so I decided to help a local group hang door knockers against animal testing.
I thought it would be a safe way to do something positive, but of course I have the absolute worst luck ever, and we were all arrested.
Police took this blurry photo of me holding leaflets as evidence.
My charges were dismissed, but a few weeks later, two FBI agents knocked on my door, and they told me that unless I helped them by spying on protest groups, they would put me on a domestic terrorist list.
I'd love to tell you that I didn't flinch, but I was terrified, and when my fear subsided, I became obsessed with finding out how this happened, how animal rights and environmental activists who have never injured anyone could become the FBI's number one domestic terrorism threat.
A few years later, I was invited to testify before Congress about my reporting, and I told lawmakers that, while everybody is talking about going green, some people are risking their lives to defend forests and to stop oil pipelines.
They're physically putting their bodies on the line between the whalers' harpoons and the whales.
These are everyday people, like these protesters in Italy who spontaneously climbed over barbed wire fences to rescue beagles from animal testing.
And these movements have been incredibly effective and popular, so in 1985, their opponents made up a new word, eco-terrorist, to shift how we view them.
They just made it up.
Now these companies have backed new laws like the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, which turns activism into terrorism if it causes a loss of profits.
Now most people never even heard about this law, including members of Congress.
Less than one percent were in the room when it passed the House.
The rest were outside at a new memorial.
They were praising Dr. King as his style of activism was branded as terrorism if done in the name of animals or the environment.
Supporters say laws like this are needed for the extremists: the vandals, the arsonists, the radicals.
But right now, companies like TransCanada are briefing police in presentations like this one about how to prosecute nonviolent protesters as terrorists.
The FBI's training documents on eco-terrorism are not about violence, they're about public relations.
Today, in multiple countries, corporations are pushing new laws that make it illegal to photograph animal cruelty on their farms.
The latest was in Idaho just two weeks ago, and today we released a lawsuit challenging it as unconstitutional as a threat to journalism.
The first of these ag-gag prosecutions, as they're called, was a young woman named Amy Meyer, and Amy saw a sick cow being moved by a bulldozer outside of a slaughterhouse as she was on the public street.
And Amy did what any of us would: She filmed it.
When I found out about her story, I wrote about it, and within 24 hours, it created such an uproar that the prosecutors just dropped all the charges.
But apparently, even exposing stuff like that is a threat.
Through the Freedom of Information Act, I learned that the counter-terrorism unit has been monitoring my articles and speeches like this one.
They even included this nice little write-up of my book.
They described it as "compelling and well-written."
(Applause) Blurb on the next book, right?
The point of all of this is to make us afraid, but as a journalist, I have an unwavering faith in the power of education.
Our best weapon is sunlight.
Dostoevsky wrote that the whole work of man is to prove he's a man and not a piano key.
Over and over throughout history, people in power have used fear to silence the truth and to silence dissent.
It's time we strike a new note.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Four years ago, a security researcher, or, as most people would call it, a hacker, found a way to literally make ATMs throw money at him.
His name was Barnaby Jack, and this technique was later called "jackpotting" in his honor.
I'm here today because I think we actually need hackers.
Barnaby Jack could have easily turned into a career criminal or James Bond villain with his knowledge, but he chose to show the world his research instead.
He believed that sometimes you have to demo a threat to spark a solution.
And I feel the same way.
That's why I'm here today.
We are often terrified and fascinated by the power hackers now have.
They scare us.
But the choices they make have dramatic outcomes that influence us all.
So I am here today because I think we need hackers, and in fact, they just might be the immune system for the information age.
Sometimes they make us sick, but they also find those hidden threats in our world, and they make us fix it.
I knew that I might get hacked for giving this talk, so let me save you the effort.
In true TED fashion, here is my most embarrassing picture.
But it would be difficult for you to find me in it, because I'm the one who looks like a boy standing to the side.
I was such a nerd back then that even the boys on the Dungeons and Dragons team wouldn't let me join.
This is who I was, but this is who I wanted to be: Angelina Jolie.
She portrayed Acid Burn in the '95 film "Hackers."
She was pretty and she could rollerblade, but being a hacker, that made her powerful.
And I wanted to be just like her, so I started spending a lot of time on hacker chat rooms and online forums.
I remember one late night I found a bit of PHP code.
I didn't really know what it did, but I copy-pasted it and used it anyway to get into a password-protected site like that.
Open Sesame.
It was a simple trick, and I was just a script kiddie back then, but to me, that trick, it felt like this, like I had discovered limitless potential at my fingertips.
This is the rush of power that hackers feel.
It's geeks just like me discovering they have access to superpower, one that requires the skill and tenacity of their intellect, but thankfully no radioactive spiders.
But with great power comes great responsibility, and you all like to think that if we had such powers, we would only use them for good.
But what if you could read your ex's emails, or add a couple zeros to your bank account.
What would you do then?
Indeed, many hackers do not resist those temptations, and so they are responsible in one way or another to billions of dollars lost each year to fraud, malware or plain old identity theft, which is a serious issue.
But there are other hackers, hackers who just like to break things, and it is precisely those hackers that can find the weaker elements in our world and make us fix it.
This is what happened last year when another security researcher called Kyle Lovett discovered a gaping hole in the design of certain wireless routers like you might have in your home or office.
He learned that anyone could remotely connect to these devices over the Internet and download documents from hard drives attached to those routers, no password needed.
He reported it to the company, of course, but they ignored his report.
Perhaps they thought universal access was a feature, not a bug, until two months ago when a group of hackers used it to get into people's files.
But they didn't steal anything.
They left a note: Your router and your documents can be accessed by anyone in the world.
Here's what you should do to fix it.
We hope we helped.
By getting into people's files like that, yeah, they broke the law, but they also forced that company to fix their product.
Making vulnerabilities known to the public is a practice called full disclosure in the hacker community, and it is controversial, but it does make me think of how hackers have an evolving effect on technologies we use every day.
This is what Khalil did.
Khalil is a Palestinian hacker from the West Bank, and he found a serious privacy flaw on Facebook which he attempted to report through the company's bug bounty program.
These are usually great arrangements for companies to reward hackers disclosing vulnerabilities they find in their code.
Unfortunately, due to some miscommunications, his report was not acknowledged.
Frustrated with the exchange, he took to use his own discovery to post on Mark Zuckerberg's wall.
This got their attention, all right, and they fixed the bug, but because he hadn't reported it properly, he was denied the bounty usually paid out for such discoveries.
Thankfully for Khalil, a group of hackers were watching out for him.
In fact, they raised more than 13,000 dollars to reward him for this discovery, raising a vital discussion in the technology industry about how we come up with incentives for hackers to do the right thing.
But I think there's a greater story here still.
Even companies founded by hackers, like Facebook was, still have a complicated relationship when it comes to hackers.
And so for more conservative organizations, it is going to take time and adapting in order to embrace hacker culture and the creative chaos that it brings with it.
But I think it's worth the effort, because the alternative, to blindly fight all hackers, is to go against the power you cannot control at the cost of stifling innovation and regulating knowledge.
These are things that will come back and bite you.
It is even more true if we go after hackers that are willing to risk their own freedom for ideals like the freedom of the web, especially in times like this, like today even, as governments and corporates fight to control the Internet.
I find it astounding that someone from the shadowy corners of cyberspace can become its voice of opposition, its last line of defense even, perhaps someone like Anonymous, the leading brand of global hacktivism.
This universal hacker movement needs no introduction today, but six years ago they were not much more than an Internet subculture dedicated to sharing silly pictures of funny cats and Internet trolling campaigns.
Their moment of transformation was in early 2008 when the Church of Scientology attempted to remove certain leaked videos from appearing on certain websites.
This is when Anonymous was forged out of the seemingly random collection of Internet dwellers.
It turns out, the Internet doesn't like it when you try to remove things from it, and it will react with cyberattacks and elaborate pranks and with a series of organized protests all around the world, from my hometown of Tel Aviv to Adelaide, Australia.
This proved that Anonymous and this idea can rally the masses from the keyboards to the streets, and it laid the foundations for dozens of future operations against perceived injustices to their online and offline world.
Since then, they've gone after many targets.
They've uncovered corruption, abuse.
They've hacked popes and politicians, and I think their effect is larger than simple denial of service attacks that take down websites or even leak sensitive documents.
I think that, like Robin Hood, they are in the business of redistribution, but what they are after isn't your money.
It's not your documents. It's your attention.
They grab the spotlight for causes they support, forcing us to take note, acting as a global magnifying glass for issues that we are not as aware of but perhaps we should be.
They have been called many names from criminals to terrorists, and I cannot justify their illegal means, but the ideas they fight for are ones that matter to us all.
The reality is, hackers can do a lot more than break things.
They can bring people together.
And if the Internet doesn't like it when you try to remove things from it, just watch what happens when you try to shut the Internet down.
This took place in Egypt in January 2011, and as President Hosni Mubarak attempted a desperate move to quash the rising revolution on the streets of Cairo, he sent his personal troops down to Egypt's Internet service providers and had them physically kill the switch on the country's connection to the world overnight.
For a government to do a thing like that was unprecedented, and for hackers, it made it personal.
Hackers like the Telecomix group were already active on the ground, helping Egyptians bypass censorship using clever workarounds like Morse code and ham radio.
It was high season for low tech, which the government couldn't block, but when the Net went completely down, Telecomix brought in the big guns.
They found European service providers that still had 20-year-old analog dial-up access infrastructure.
They opened up 300 of those lines for Egyptians to use, serving slow but sweet Internet connection for Egyptians.
This worked.
It worked so well, in fact, one guy even used it to download an episode of "How I Met Your Mother."
But while Egypt's future is still uncertain, when the same thing happened in Syria just one year later, Telecomix were prepared with those Internet lines, and Anonymous, they were perhaps the first international group to officially denounce the actions of the Syrian military by defacing their website.
But with this sort of power, it really depends on where you stand, because one man's hero can be another's villain, and so the Syrian Electronic Army is a pro-Assad group of hackers who support his contentious regime.
They've taken down multiple high-profile targets in the past few years, including the Associated Press's Twitter account, in which they posted a message about an attack on the White House injuring President Obama.
This tweet was fake, of course, but the resulting drop in the Dow Jones index that day was most certainly not, and a lot of people lost a lot of money.
This sort of thing is happening all over the world right now.
In conflicts from the Crimean Peninsula to Latin America, from Europe to the United States, hackers are a force for social, political and military influence.
As individuals or in groups, volunteers or military conflicts, there are hackers everywhere.
They come from all walks of life, ethnicities, ideologies and genders, I might add.
They are now shaping the world's stage.
Hackers represent an exceptional force for change in the 21st century.
This is because access to information is a critical currency of power, one which governments would like to control, a thing they attempt to do by setting up all-you-can-eat surveillance programs, a thing they need hackers for, by the way.
And so the establishment has long had a love-hate relationship when it comes to hackers, because the same people who demonize hacking also utilize it at large.
Two years ago, I saw General Keith Alexander.
He's the NSA director and U.S. cyber commander, but instead of his four star general uniform, he was wearing jeans and a t-shirt.
This was at DEF CON, the world's largest hacker conference.
Perhaps like me, General Alexander didn't see 12,000 criminals that day in Vegas.
I think he saw untapped potential.
In fact, he was there to give a hiring pitch.
"In this room right here," he said, "is the talent our nation needs."
Well, hackers in the back row replied, "Then stop arresting us."
(Applause) Indeed, for years, hackers have been on the wrong side of the fence, but in light of what we know now, who is more watchful of our online world?
The rules of the game are not that clear anymore, but hackers are perhaps the only ones still capable of challenging overreaching governments and data-hoarding corporates on their own playing field.
To me, that represents hope.
For the past three decades, hackers have done a lot of things, but they have also impacted civil liberties, innovation and Internet freedom, so I think it's time we take a good look at how we choose to portray them, because if we keep expecting them to be the bad guys, how can they be the heroes too?
My years in the hacker world have made me realize both the problem and the beauty about hackers: They just can't see something broken in the world and leave it be.
They are compelled to either exploit it or try and change it, and so they find the vulnerable aspects in our rapidly changing world.
They make us, they force us to fix things or demand something better, and I think we need them to do just that, because after all, it is not information that wants to be free, it's us.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. (Applause) Hack the planet!
Welcome to "Five Dangerous Things You Should Let Your Children Do."
I don't have children.
I borrow my friends' children, so -- (Laughter) take all this advice with a grain of salt.
I'm Gever Tulley.
I'm a contract computer scientist by trade, but I'm the founder of something called the Tinkering School.
It's a summer program which aims to help kids learn how to build the things that they think of.
So we build a lot of things, and I do put power tools into the hands of second-graders.
So if you're thinking about sending your kid to Tinkering School, they do come back bruised, scraped and bloody.
(Laughter) You know, we live in a world that's subjected to ever more stringent child safety regulations.
There doesn't seem to be any limit on how crazy child safety regulations can get.
We put suffocation warnings on every piece of plastic film manufactured in the United States, or for sale with an item in the United States.
We put warnings on coffee cups to tell us that the contents may be hot.
And we seem to think that any item sharper than a golf ball is too sharp for children under the age of 10.
So where does this trend stop?
When we round every corner and eliminate every sharp object, every pokey bit in the world, then the first time that kids come in contact with anything sharp, or not made out of round plastic, they'll hurt themselves with it.
So, as the boundaries of what we determine as the safety zone grow ever smaller, we cut off our children from valuable opportunities to learn how to interact with the world around them.
And despite all of our best efforts and intentions, kids are always going to figure out how to do the most dangerous thing they can, in whatever environment they can.
(Laughter) So despite the provocative title, this presentation is really about safety, and about some simple things that we can do to raise our kids to be creative, confident and in control of the environment around them.
And what I now present to you is an excerpt from a book in progress.
The book is called "50 Dangerous Things."
This is "Five Dangerous Things."
Thing number one: Play with fire.
Learning to control one of the most elemental forces in nature is a pivotal moment in any child's personal history.
Whether we remember it or not, it's the first time we really get control of one of these mysterious things.
These mysteries are only revealed to those who get the opportunity to play with it.
So, playing with fire.
This is like one of the great things we ever discovered, fire.
From playing with it, they learn some basic principles about fire, about intake, combustion, exhaust.
These are the three working elements of fire that you have to have for a good, controlled fire.
And you can think of the open-pit fire as a laboratory.
You don't know what they're going to learn from playing with it.
Let them fool around with it on their own terms and trust me, they're going to learn things that you can't get out of playing with Dora the Explorer toys.
(Laughter) Number two: Own a pocketknife.
Pocketknives are kind of drifting out of our cultural consciousness, which I think is a terrible thing.
(Laughter) Your first pocketknife is like the first universal tool that you're given.
You know, it's a spatula, it's a pry bar, it's a screwdriver and it's a blade, yeah.
And it's a powerful and empowering tool.
And in a lot of cultures they give knives -- like, as soon as they're toddlers, they have knives.
These are Inuit children cutting whale blubber.
I first saw this in a Canadian Film Board film when I was 10, and it left a lasting impression, to see babies playing with knives.
And it shows that kids can develop an extended sense of self through a tool at a very young age.
You lay down a couple of very simple rules -- always cut away from your body, keep the blade sharp, never force it -- and these are things kids can understand and practice with.
And yeah, they're going to cut themselves.
I have some terrible scars on my legs from where I stabbed myself.
But you know, they're young. They heal fast.
(Laughter) Number three: Throw a spear.
It turns out that our brains are actually wired for throwing things, and like muscles, if you don't use parts of your brain, they tend to atrophy over time.
But when you exercise them, any given muscle adds strength to the whole system, and that applies to your brain, too.
So practicing throwing things has been shown to stimulate the frontal and parietal lobes, which have to do with visual acuity, 3D understanding, and structural problem solving, so it helps develop their visualization skills and their predictive ability.
And throwing is a combination of analytical and physical skill, so it's very good for that kind of whole-body training.
These kinds of target-based practices also help kids develop attention and concentration skills, so those are great.
Number [four]: Deconstruct appliances.
There is a world of interesting things inside your dishwasher.
Next time you're about to throw out an appliance, don't throw it out.
Take it apart with your kid, or send him to my school, and we'll take it apart with them.
Even if you don't know what the parts are, puzzling out what they might be for is a really good practice for the kids to get sort of the sense that they can take things apart, and no matter how complex they are, they can understand parts of them.
It's a sense of knowability, that something is knowable.
So these black boxes that we live with and take for granted are actually complex things made by other people, and you can understand them.
Number five: Two-parter.
Break the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.
(Laughter) There are laws beyond safety regulations that attempt to limit how we can interact with the things that we own -- in this case, digital media.
It's a very simple exercise: Buy a song on iTunes, write it to a CD, then rip the CD to an MP3, and play it on your very same computer.
You've just broken a law.
Technically, the RIAA could come and prosecute you.
It's an important lesson for kids to understand, that some of these laws get broken by accident, and that laws have to be interpreted.
That's something we often talk about with the kids when we're fooling around with things and breaking them open, and taking them apart and using them for other things.
And also when we go out and drive a car.
Driving a car is a really empowering act for a young child, so this is the alternate -- (Laughter) For those of you who aren't comfortable actually breaking the law, you can drive a car with your child.
This is a great stage for a kid.
This happens about the same time that they get latched onto things like dinosaurs, these big things in the outside world, that they're trying to get a grip on.
A car is a similar object, and they can get in a car and drive it.
And that really gives them a handle on a world in a way that they don't often have access to.
And it's perfectly legal.
Find a big empty lot, make sure there's nothing in it, and that it's on private property, and let them drive your car.
It's very safe actually.
And it's fun for the whole family.
(Laughter) Let's see, I think that's it. That's number five and a half. OK.
In the middle of my Ph.D., I was hopelessly stuck.
Every research direction that I tried led to a dead end.
It seemed like my basic assumptions just stopped working.
I felt like a pilot flying through the mist, and I lost all sense of direction.
I stopped shaving.
I couldn't get out of bed in the morning.
I felt unworthy of stepping across the gates of the university, because I wasn't like Einstein or Newton or any other scientist whose results I had learned about, because in science, we just learn about the results, not the process.
And so obviously, I couldn't be a scientist.
But I had enough support and I made it through and discovered something new about nature.
This is an amazing feeling of calmness, being the only person in the world who knows a new law of nature.
And I started the second project in my Ph.D, and it happened again.
I got stuck and I made it through.
And I started thinking, maybe there's a pattern here.
I asked the other graduate students, and they said, "Yeah, that's exactly what happened to us, except nobody told us about it."
We'd all studied science as if it's a series of logical steps between question and answer, but doing research is nothing like that.
At the same time, I was also studying to be an improvisation theater actor.
So physics by day, and by night, laughing, jumping, singing, playing my guitar.
Improvisation theater, just like science, goes into the unknown, because you have to make a scene onstage without a director, without a script, without having any idea what you'll portray or what the other characters will do.
But unlike science, in improvisation theater, they tell you from day one what's going to happen to you when you get onstage.
You're going to fail miserably.
You're going to get stuck.
And we would practice staying creative inside that stuck place.
For example, we had an exercise where we all stood in a circle, and each person had to do the world's worst tap dance, and everybody else applauded and cheered you on, supporting you onstage.
When I became a professor and had to guide my own students through their research projects, I realized again, I don't know what to do.
I'd studied thousands of hours of physics, biology, chemistry, but not one hour, not one concept on how to mentor, how to guide someone to go together into the unknown, about motivation.
So I turned to improvisation theater, and I told my students from day one what's going to happen when you start research, and this has to do with our mental schema of what research will be like.
Because you see, whenever people do anything, for example if I want to touch this blackboard, my brain first builds up a schema, a prediction of exactly what my muscles will do before I even start moving my hand, and if I get blocked, if my schema doesn't match reality, that causes extra stress called cognitive dissonance.
That's why your schemas had better match reality.
But if you believe the way science is taught, and if you believe textbooks, you're liable to have the following schema of research.
If A is the question, and B is the answer, then research is a direct path.
The problem is that if an experiment doesn't work, or a student gets depressed, it's perceived as something utterly wrong and causes tremendous stress.
And that's why I teach my students a more realistic schema.
Here's an example where things don't match your schema.
(Laughter) (Applause) So I teach my students a different schema.
If A is the question, B is the answer, stay creative in the cloud, and you start going, and experiments don't work, experiments don't work, experiments don't work, experiments don't work, until you reach a place linked with negative emotions where it seems like your basic assumptions have stopped making sense, like somebody yanked the carpet beneath your feet.
And I call this place the cloud.
Now you can be lost in the cloud for a day, a week, a month, a year, a whole career, but sometimes, if you're lucky enough and you have enough support, you can see in the materials at hand, or perhaps meditating on the shape of the cloud, a new answer, C, and you decide to go for it.
And experiments don't work, experiments don't work, but you get there, and then you tell everyone about it by publishing a paper that reads A arrow C, which is a great way to communicate, but as long as you don't forget the path that brought you there.
Now this cloud is an inherent part of research, an inherent part of our craft, because the cloud stands guard at the boundary.
It stands guard at the boundary between the known and the unknown, because in order to discover something truly new, at least one of your basic assumptions has to change, and that means that in science, we do something quite heroic.
Every day, we try to bring ourselves to the boundary between the known and the unknown and face the cloud.
Now notice that I put B in the land of the known, because we knew about it in the beginning, but C is always more interesting and more important than B.
So B is essential in order to get going, but C is much more profound, and that's the amazing thing about resesarch.
Now just knowing that word, the cloud, has been transformational in my research group, because students come to me and say, "Uri, I'm in the cloud," and I say, "Great, you must be feeling miserable."
(Laughter) But I'm kind of happy, because we might be close to the boundary between the known and the unknown, and we stand a chance of discovering something truly new, since the way our mind works, it's just knowing that the cloud is normal, it's essential, and in fact beautiful, we can join the Cloud Appreciation Society, and it detoxifies the feeling that something is deeply wrong with me.
And as a mentor, I know what to do, which is to step up my support for the student, because research in psychology shows that if you're feeling fear and despair, your mind narrows down to very safe and conservative ways of thinking.
If you'd like to explore the risky paths needed to get out of the cloud, you need other emotions -- solidarity, support, hope — that come with your connection from somebody else, so like in improvisation theater, in science, it's best to walk into the unknown together.
So knowing about the cloud, you also learn from improvisation theater a very effective way to have conversations inside the cloud.
It's based on the central principle of improvisation theater, so here improvisation theater came to my help again.
It's called saying "Yes, and" to the offers made by other actors.
That means accepting the offers and building on them, saying, "Yes, and."
For example, if one actor says, "Here is a pool of water," and the other actor says, "No, that's just a stage," the improvisation is over.
It's dead, and everybody feels frustrated.
That's called blocking.
If you're not mindful of communications, scientific conversations can have a lot of blocking.
Saying "Yes, and" sounds like this.
"Here is a pool of water." "Yeah, let's jump in."
"Look, there's a whale! Let's grab it by its tail.
It's pulling us to the moon!"
So saying "Yes, and" bypasses our inner critic.
We all have an inner critic that kind of guards what we say, so people don't think that we're obscene or crazy or unoriginal, and science is full of the fear of appearing unoriginal.
Saying "Yes, and" bypasses the critic and unlocks hidden voices of creativity you didn't even know that you had, and they often carry the answer about the cloud.
So you see, knowing about the cloud and about saying "Yes, and" made my lab very creative.
Students started playing off of each others' ideas, and we made surprising discoveries in the interface between physics and biology.
For example, we were stuck for a year trying to understand the intricate biochemical networks inside our cells, and we said, "We are deeply in the cloud," and we had a playful conversation where my student Shai Shen Orr said, "Let's just draw this on a piece of paper, this network," and instead of saying, "But we've done that so many times and it doesn't work," I said, "Yes, and let's use a very big piece of paper," and then Ron Milo said, "Let's use a gigantic architect's blueprint kind of paper, and I know where to print it," and we printed out the network and looked at it, and that's where we made our most important discovery, that this complicated network is just made of a handful of simple, repeating interaction patterns like motifs in a stained glass window.
We call them network motifs, and they're the elementary circuits that help us understand the logic of the way cells make decisions in all organisms, including our body.
Soon enough, after this, I started being invited to give talks to thousands of scientists across the world, but the knowledge about the cloud and saying "Yes, and" just stayed within my own lab, because you see, in science, we don't talk about the process, anything subjective or emotional.
We talk about the results.
So there was no way to talk about it in conferences.
That was unthinkable.
And I saw scientists in other groups get stuck without even having a word to describe what they're seeing, and their ways of thinking narrowed down to very safe paths, their science didn't reach its full potential, and they were miserable.
I thought, that's the way it is.
I'll try to make my lab as creative as possible, and if everybody else does the same, science will eventually become more and more better and better.
That way of thinking got turned on its head when by chance I went to hear Evelyn Fox Keller give a talk about her experiences as a woman in science.
And she asked, "Why is it that we don't talk about the subjective and emotional aspects of doing science?
It's not by chance. It's a matter of values."
You see, science seeks knowledge that's objective and rational.
That's the beautiful thing about science.
But we also have a cultural myth that the doing of science, what we do every day to get that knowledge, is also only objective and rational, like Mr. Spock.
And when you label something as objective and rational, automatically, the other side, the subjective and emotional, become labeled as non-science or anti-science or threatening to science, and we just don't talk about it.
And when I heard that, that science has a culture, everything clicked into place for me, because if science has a culture, culture can be changed, and I can be a change agent working to change the culture of science wherever I could.
And so the very next lecture I gave in a conference, I talked about my science, and then I talked about the importance of the subjective and emotional aspects of doing science and how we should talk about them, and I looked at the audience, and they were cold.
They couldn't hear what I was saying in the context of a 10 back-to-back PowerPoint presentation conference.
And I tried again and again, conference after conference, but I wasn't getting through.
I was in the cloud.
And eventually I managed to get out the cloud using improvisation and music.
Since then, every conference I go to, I give a science talk and a second, special talk called "Love and fear in the lab," and I start it off by doing a song about scientists' greatest fear, which is that we work hard, we discover something new, and somebody else publishes it before we do.
We call it being scooped, and being scooped feels horrible.
It makes us afraid to talk to each other, which is no fun, because we came to science to share our ideas and to learn from each other, and so I do a blues song, which — (Applause) — called "Scooped Again," and I ask the audience to be my backup singers, and I tell them, "Your text is 'Scoop, Scoop.'" It sounds like this: "Scoop, scoop!"
Sounds like this.
♪ I've been scooped again ♪ ♪ Scoop! Scoop! ♪ And then we go for it.
♪ I've been scooped again ♪ ♪ Scoop! Scoop! ♪ ♪ I've been scooped again ♪ ♪ Scoop! Scoop! ♪ ♪ I've been scooped again ♪ ♪ Scoop! Scoop! ♪ ♪ I've been scooped again ♪ ♪ Scoop! Scoop! ♪ ♪ Oh mama, can't you feel my pain ♪ ♪ Heavens help me, I've been scooped again ♪ (Applause) Thank you.
Thank you for your backup singing.
So everybody starts laughing, starts breathing, notices that there's other scientists around them with shared issues, and we start talking about the emotional and subjective things that go on in research.
It feels like a huge taboo has been lifted.
Finally, we can talk about this in a scientific conference.
And scientists have gone on to form peer groups where they meet regularly and create a space to talk about the emotional and subjective things that happen as they're mentoring, as they're going into the unknown, and even started courses about the process of doing science, about going into the unknown together, and many other things.
So my vision is that, just like every scientist knows the word "atom," that matter is made out of atoms, every scientist would know the words like "the cloud," saying "Yes, and," and science will become much more creative, make many, many more unexpected discoveries for the benefit of us all, and would also be much more playful.
And what I might ask you to remember from this talk is that next time you face a problem you can't solve in work or in life, there's a word for what you're going to see: the cloud.
And you can go through the cloud not alone but together with someone who is your source of support to say "Yes, and" to your ideas, to help you say "Yes, and" to your own ideas, to increase the chance that, through the wisps of the cloud, you'll find that moment of calmness where you get your first glimpse of your unexpected discovery, your C.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Six months ago, I got an email from a man in Israel who had read one of my books, and the email said, "You don't know me, but I'm your 12th cousin."
And it said, "I have a family tree with 80,000 people on it, including you, Karl Marx, and several European aristocrats."
Now I did not know what to make of this.
Part of me was like, okay, when's he going to ask me to wire 10,000 dollars to his Nigerian bank, right?
I also thought, 80,000 relatives, do I want that?
I have enough trouble with some of the ones I have already.
And I won't name names, but you know who you are.
But another part of me said, this is remarkable.
Here I am alone in my office, but I'm not alone at all.
I'm connected to 80,000 people around the world, and that's four Madison Square Gardens full of cousins.
And some of them are going to be great, and some of them are going to be irritating, but they're all related to me.
So this email inspired me to dive into genealogy, which I always thought was a very staid and proper field, but it turns out it's going through a fascinating revolution, and a controversial one.
Partly, this is because of DNA and genetic testing, but partly, it's because of the Internet.
There are sites that now take the Wikipedia approach to family trees, collaboration and crowdsourcing, and what you do is, you load your family tree on, and then these sites search to see if the A.J. Jacobs in your tree is the same as the A.J. Jacobs in another tree, and if it is, then you can combine, and then you combine and combine and combine until you get these massive, mega-family trees with thousands of people on them, or even millions.
I'm on something on Geni called the world family tree, which has no less than a jaw-dropping 75 million people.
So that's 75 million people connected by blood or marriage, sometimes both.
(Laughter) It's in all seven continents, including Antarctica.
I'm on it. Many of you are on it, whether you know it or not, and you can see the links.
Here's my cousin Gwyneth Paltrow.
She has no idea I exist, but we are officially cousins.
We have just 17 links between us.
And there's my cousin Barack Obama.
(Laughter) And he is my aunt's fifth great-aunt's husband's father's wife's seventh great-nephew, so practically my old brother.
And my cousin, of course, the actor Kevin Bacon -- (Laughter) — who is my first cousin's twice removed's wife's niece's husband's first cousin once removed's niece's husband.
So six degrees of Kevin Bacon, plus or minus several degrees.
Now, I'm not boasting, because all of you have famous people and historical figures in your tree, because we are all connected, and 75 million may seem like a lot, but in a few years, it's quite likely we will have a family tree with all, almost all, seven billion people on Earth.
But does it really matter?
What's the importance?
And I do think it is important, and I'll give you five reasons why, really quickly.
First, it's got scientific value.
This is an unprecedented history of the human race, and it's giving us valuable data about how diseases are inherited, how people migrate, and there's a team of scientists at MIT right now studying the world family tree.
Number two, it brings history alive.
I found out I'm connected to Albert Einstein, so I told my seven-year-old son that, and he was totally engaged.
Now Albert Einstein is not some dead white guy with weird hair.
He's Uncle Albert. (Laughter) And my son wanted to know, "What did he say? What is E = MC squared?"
Also, it's not all good news.
I found a link to Jeffrey Dahmer, the serial killer, but I will say that's on my wife's side.
(Laughter) (Applause) So I want to make that clear. Sorry, honey.
Number three, interconnectedness.
We all come from the same ancestor, and you don't have to believe the literal Bible version, but scientists talk about Y chromosomal Adam and mitochondrial Eve, and these were about 100,000 to 300,000 years ago.
We all have a bit of their DNA in us.
They are our great-great-great-great-great-great -- continue that for about 7,000 times -- grandparents, and so that means we literally all are biological cousins as well, and estimates vary, but probably the farthest cousin you have on Earth is about a 50th cousin.
Now, it's not just ancestors we share, descendants.
If you have kids, and they have kids, look how quickly the descendants accumulate.
So in 10, 12 generations, you're going to have thousands of offspring, and millions of offspring.
Number four, a kinder world.
Now, I know that there are family feuds.
I have three sons, so I see how they fight.
But I think that there's also a human bias to treat your family a little better than strangers.
I think this tree is going to be bad news for bigots, because they're going to have to realize that they are cousins with thousands of people in whatever ethnic group they happen to have issues with, and I think you look back at history, and a lot of the terrible things we've done to each other is because one group thinks another group is sub-human, and you can't do that anymore.
We're not just part of the same species.
We're part of the same family.
We share 99.9 percent of our DNA.
Now the final one is number five, a democratizing effect.
Some genealogy has an elitist strain, like people say, "Oh, I'm descended from Mary Queen of Scots and you're not, so you cannot join my country club."
But that's really going to be hard to do now, because everyone is related.
I'm descended from Mary Queen of Scots -- by marriage, but still.
So it's really a fascinating time in the history of family, because it's changing so fast.
There is gay marriage and sperm donors and there's intermarriage on an unprecedented scale, and this makes some of my more conservative cousins a little nervous, but I actually think it's a good thing.
I think the more inclusive the idea of family is, the better, because then you have more potential caretakers, and as my aunt's eighth cousin twice removed Hillary Clinton says -- (Laughter) — it takes a village.
So I have all these hundreds and thousands, millions of new cousins.
I thought, what can I do with this information?
And that's when I decided, why not throw a party?
So that's what I'm doing.
And you're all invited.
Next year, next summer, I will be hosting what I hope is the biggest and best family reunion in history.
(Applause) Thank you. I want you there.
I want you there.
It's going to be at the New York Hall of Science, which is a great venue, but it's also on the site of the former World's Fair, which is, I think, very appropriate, because I see this as a family reunion meets a world's fair.
There's going to be exhibits and food, music.
Paul McCartney is 11 steps away, so I'm hoping he brings his guitar.
He hasn't RSVP'd yet, but fingers crossed.
And there is going to be a day of speakers, of fascinating cousins.
It's early, but I've already, I've got some lined up.
Cass Sunstein, my cousin who is perhaps the most brilliant legal scholar, will be talking.
He was a former member of the Obama administration.
And on the other side of the political spectrum, George H.W. Bush, number 41, the father, he has agreed to participate, and Nick Kroll, the comedian, and Dr. Oz, and many more to come.
And, of course, the most important is that you, I want you guys there, and I invite you to go to GlobalFamilyReunion.org and figure out how you're on the family tree, because these are big issues, family and tribe, and I don't know all the answers, but I have a lot of smart relatives, including you guys, so together, I think we can figure it out.
Only together can we solve these big problems.
So from cousin to cousin, I thank you. I can't wait to see you.
Goodbye.
(Applause)
I need to start by telling you a little bit about my social life, which I know may not seem relevant, but it is.
When people meet me at parties and they find out that I'm an English professor who specializes in language, they generally have one of two reactions.
One set of people look frightened. (Laughter) They often say something like, "Oh, I'd better be careful what I say.
I'm sure you'll hear every mistake I make."
And then they stop talking. (Laughter) And they wait for me to go away and talk to someone else.
The other set of people, their eyes light up, and they say, "You are just the person I want to talk to."
And then they tell me about whatever it is they think is going wrong with the English language.
(Laughter) A couple of weeks ago, I was at a dinner party and the man to my right started telling me about all the ways that the Internet is degrading the English language.
He brought up Facebook, and he said, "To defriend? I mean, is that even a real word?"
I want to pause on that question: What makes a word real?
My dinner companion and I both know what the verb "defriend" means, so when does a new word like "defriend" become real?
Who has the authority to make those kinds of official decisions about words, anyway?
Those are the questions I want to talk about today.
I think most people, when they say a word isn't real, what they mean is, it doesn't appear in a standard dictionary.
That, of course, raises a host of other questions, including, who writes dictionaries?
Before I go any further, let me clarify my role in all of this.
I do not write dictionaries.
I do, however, collect new words much the way dictionary editors do, and the great thing about being a historian of the English language is that I get to call this "research."
When I teach the history of the English language, I require that students teach me two new slang words before I will begin class.
Over the years, I have learned some great new slang this way, including "hangry," which -- (Applause) — which is when you are cranky or angry because you are hungry, and "adorkable," which is when you are adorable in kind of a dorky way, clearly, terrific words that fill important gaps in the English language.
(Laughter) But how real are they if we use them primarily as slang and they don't yet appear in a dictionary?
With that, let's turn to dictionaries.
I'm going to do this as a show of hands: How many of you still regularly refer to a dictionary, either print or online?
Okay, so that looks like most of you.
Now, a second question. Again, a show of hands: How many of you have ever looked to see who edited the dictionary you are using?
Okay, many fewer.
At some level, we know that there are human hands behind dictionaries, but we're really not sure who those hands belong to.
I'm actually fascinated by this.
Even the most critical people out there tend not to be very critical about dictionaries, not distinguishing among them and not asking a whole lot of questions about who edited them.
Just think about the phrase "Look it up in the dictionary," which suggests that all dictionaries are exactly the same.
Consider the library here on campus, where you go into the reading room, and there is a large, unabridged dictionary up on a pedestal in this place of honor and respect lying open so we can go stand before it to get answers.
Now, don't get me wrong, dictionaries are fantastic resources, but they are human and they are not timeless.
I'm struck as a teacher that we tell students to critically question every text they read, every website they visit, except dictionaries, which we tend to treat as un-authored, as if they came from nowhere to give us answers about what words really mean.
Here's the thing: If you ask dictionary editors, what they'll tell you is they're just trying to keep up with us as we change the language.
They're watching what we say and what we write and trying to figure out what's going to stick and what's not going to stick.
They have to gamble, because they want to appear cutting edge and catch the words that are going to make it, such as LOL, but they don't want to appear faddish and include the words that aren't going to make it, and I think a word that they're watching right now is YOLO, you only live once.
Now I get to hang out with dictionary editors, and you might be surprised by one of the places where we hang out.
Every January, we go to the American Dialect Society annual meeting, where among other things, we vote on the word of the year.
There are about 200 or 300 people who come, some of the best known linguists in the United States.
To give you a sense of the flavor of the meeting, it occurs right before happy hour.
Anyone who comes can vote.
The most important rule is that you can vote with only one hand.
In the past, some of the winners have been "tweet" in 2009 and "hashtag" in 2012.
"Chad" was the word of the year in the year 2000, because who knew what a chad was before 2000, and "WMD" in 2002.
Now, we have other categories in which we vote too, and my favorite category is most creative word of the year.
Past winners in this category have included "recombobulation area," which is at the Milwaukee Airport after security, where you can recombobulate.
(Laughter) You can put your belt back on, put your computer back in your bag.
And then my all-time favorite word at this vote, which is "multi-slacking."
(Laughter) And multi-slacking is the act of having multiple windows up on your screen so it looks like you're working when you're actually goofing around on the web.
(Laughter) (Applause) Will all of these words stick? Absolutely not.
And we have made some questionable choices, for example in 2006 when the word of the year was "Plutoed," to mean demoted.
(Laughter) But some of the past winners now seem completely unremarkable, such as "app" and "e" as a prefix, and "google" as a verb.
Now, a few weeks before our vote, Lake Superior State University issues its list of banished words for the year.
What is striking about this is that there's actually often quite a lot of overlap between their list and the list that we are considering for words of the year, and this is because we're noticing the same thing.
We're noticing words that are coming into prominence.
It's really a question of attitude.
Are you bothered by language fads and language change, or do you find it fun, interesting, something worthy of study as part of a living language?
The list by Lake Superior State University continues a fairly long tradition in English of complaints about new words.
So here is Dean Henry Alford in 1875, who was very concerned that "desirability" is really a terrible word.
In 1760, Benjamin Franklin wrote a letter to David Hume giving up the word "colonize" as bad.
Over the years, we've also seen worries about new pronunciations.
Here is Samuel Rogers in 1855 who is concerned about some fashionable pronunciations that he finds offensive, and he says "as if contemplate were not bad enough, balcony makes me sick."
(Laughter) The word is borrowed in from Italian and it was pronounced bal-COE-nee.
These complaints now strike us as quaint, if not downright adorkable -- (Laughter) -- but here's the thing: we still get quite worked up about language change.
I have an entire file in my office of newspaper articles which express concern about illegitimate words that should not have been included in the dictionary, including "LOL" when it got into the Oxford English Dictionary and "defriend" when it got into the Oxford American Dictionary.
I also have articles expressing concern about "invite" as a noun, "impact" as a verb, because only teeth can be impacted, and "incentivize" is described as "boorish, bureaucratic misspeak."
Now, it's not that dictionary editors ignore these kinds of attitudes about language.
They try to provide us some guidance about words that are considered slang or informal or offensive, often through usage labels, but they're in something of a bind, because they're trying to describe what we do, and they know that we often go to dictionaries to get information about how we should use a word well or appropriately.
In response, the American Heritage Dictionaries include usage notes.
Usage notes tend to occur with words that are troublesome in one way, and one of the ways that they can be troublesome is that they're changing meaning.
Now usage notes involve very human decisions, and I think, as dictionary users, we're often not as aware of those human decisions as we should be.
To show you what I mean, we'll look at an example, but before we do, I want to explain what the dictionary editors are trying to deal with in this usage note.
Think about the word "peruse" and how you use that word.
I would guess many of you are thinking of skim, scan, reading quickly.
Some of you may even have some walking involved, because you're perusing grocery store shelves, or something like that.
You might be surprised to learn that if you look in most standard dictionaries, the first definition will be to read carefully, or pore over.
American Heritage has that as the first definition.
They then have, as the second definition, skim, and next to that, they say "usage problem."
(Laughter) And then they include a usage note, which is worth looking at.
So here's the usage note: "Peruse has long meant 'to read thoroughly'...
But the word is often used more loosely, to mean simply 'to read.'...
Further extension of the word to mean 'to glance over, skim,' has traditionally been considered an error, but our ballot results suggest that it is becoming somewhat more acceptable.
When asked about the sentence, 'I only had a moment to peruse the manual quickly,' 66 percent of the [Usage] Panel found it unacceptable in 1988, 58 percent in 1999, and 48 percent in 2011."
Ah, the Usage Panel, that trusted body of language authorities who is getting more lenient about this.
Now, what I hope you're thinking right now is, "Wait, who's on the Usage Panel?
And what should I do with their pronouncements?"
If you look in the front matter of American Heritage Dictionaries, you can actually find the names of the people on the Usage Panel.
But who looks at the front matter of dictionaries?
There are about 200 people on the Usage Panel.
They include academicians, journalists, creative writers.
There's a Supreme Court justice on it and a few linguists.
As of 2005, the list includes me.
(Applause) Here's what we can do for you.
We can give you a sense of the range of opinions about contested usage.
That is and should be the extent of our authority.
We are not a language academy.
About once a year, I get a ballot that asks me about whether new uses, new pronunciations, new meanings, are acceptable.
Now here's what I do to fill out the ballot.
I listen to what other people are saying and writing.
I do not listen to my own likes and dislikes about the English language.
I will be honest with you: I do not like the word "impactful," but that is neither here nor there in terms of whether "impactful" is becoming common usage and becoming more acceptable in written prose.
So to be responsible, what I do is go look at usage, which often involves going to look at online databases such as Google Books.
Well, if you look for "impactful" in Google Books, here is what you find.
Well, it sure looks like "impactful" is proving useful for a certain number of writers, and has become more and more useful over the last 20 years.
Now, there are going to be changes that all of us don't like in the language.
There are going to be changes where you think, "Really?
Does the language have to change that way?"
What I'm saying is, we should be less quick to decide that that change is terrible, we should be less quick to impose our likes and dislikes about words on other people, and we should be entirely reluctant to think that the English language is in trouble.
It's not. It is rich and vibrant and filled with the creativity of the speakers who speak it.
In retrospect, we think it's fascinating that the word "nice" used to mean silly, and that the word "decimate" used to mean to kill one in every 10.
(Laughter) We think that Ben Franklin was being silly to worry about "notice" as a verb.
Well, you know what?
We're going to look pretty silly in a hundred years for worrying about "impact" as a verb and "invite" as a noun.
The language is not going to change so fast that we can't keep up.
Language just doesn't work that way.
I hope that what you can do is find language change not worrisome but fun and fascinating, just the way dictionary editors do.
I hope you can enjoy being part of the creativity that is continually remaking our language and keeping it robust.
So how does a word get into a dictionary?
It gets in because we use it and we keep using it, and dictionary editors are paying attention to us.
If you're thinking, "But that lets all of us decide what words mean," I would say, "Yes it does, and it always has."
Dictionaries are a wonderful guide and resource, but there is no objective dictionary authority out there that is the final arbiter about what words mean.
If a community of speakers is using a word and knows what it means, it's real.
That word might be slangy, that word might be informal, that word might be a word that you think is illogical or unnecessary, but that word that we're using, that word is real.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Think of a hard choice you'll face in the near future.
It might be between two careers -- artist and accountant -- or places to live -- the city or the country -- or even between two people to marry -- you could marry Betty or you could marry Lolita.
Or it might be a choice about whether to have children, to have an ailing parent move in with you, to raise your child in a religion that your partner lives by but leaves you cold.
Or whether to donate your life savings to charity.
Chances are, the hard choice you thought of was something big, something momentous, something that matters to you.
Hard choices seem to be occasions for agonizing, hand-wringing, the gnashing of teeth.
But I think we've misunderstood hard choices and the role they play in our lives.
Understanding hard choices uncovers a hidden power each of us possesses.
What makes a choice hard is the way the alternatives relate.
In any easy choice, one alternative is better than the other.
In a hard choice, one alternative is better in some ways, the other alternative is better in other ways, and neither is better than the other overall.
You agonize over whether to stay in your current job in the city or uproot your life for more challenging work in the country, because staying is better in some ways, moving is better in others, and neither is better than the other overall.
We shouldn't think that all hard choices are big.
Let's say you're deciding what to have for breakfast.
You could have high fiber bran cereal or a chocolate donut.
Suppose what matters in the choice is tastiness and healthfulness.
The cereal is better for you, the donut tastes way better, but neither is better than the other overall, a hard choice.
Realizing that small choices can also be hard, may make big hard choices seem less intractable.
After all, we manage to figure out what to have for breakfast, so maybe we can figure out whether to stay in the city or uproot for the new job in the country.
We also shouldn't think that hard choices are hard because we are stupid.
When I graduated from college, I couldn't decide between two careers, philosophy and law.
I really loved philosophy.
There are amazing things you can learn as a philosopher, and all from the comfort of an armchair.
But I came from a modest immigrant family where my idea of luxury was having a pork tongue and jelly sandwich in my school lunchbox, so the thought of spending my whole life sitting around in armchairs just thinking ...
Well, that struck me as the height of extravagance and frivolity.
So I got out my yellow pad, I drew a line down the middle, and I tried my best to think of the reasons for and against each alternative.
I remember thinking to myself, if only I knew what my life in each career would be like.
If only God or Netflix would send me a DVD of my two possible future careers, I'd be set.
I'd compare them side by side, I'd see that one was better, and the choice would be easy.
But I got no DVD, and because I couldn't figure out which was better, I did what many of us do in hard choices: I took the safest option.
Fear of being an unemployed philosopher led me to become a lawyer, and as I discovered, lawyering didn't quite fit.
It wasn't who I was.
So now I'm a philosopher, and I study hard choices, and I can tell you, that fear of the unknown, while a common motivational default in dealing with hard choices, rests on a misconception of them.
It's a mistake to think that in hard choices, one alternative really is better than the other, but we're too stupid to know which, and since we don't know which, we might as well take the least risky option.
Even taking two alternatives side by side with full information, a choice can still be hard.
Hard choices are hard not because of us or our ignorance; they're hard because there is no best option.
Now, if there's no best option, if the scales don't tip in favor of one alternative over another, then surely the alternatives must be equally good.
So maybe the right thing to say in hard choices is that they're between equally good options.
But that can't be right.
If alternatives are equally good, you should just flip a coin between them, and it seems a mistake to think, here's how you should decide between careers, places to live, people to marry: Flip a coin.
There's another reason for thinking that hard choices aren't choices between equally good options.
Suppose you have a choice between two jobs: you could be an investment banker or a graphic artist.
There are a variety of things that matter in such a choice, like the excitement of the work, achieving financial security, having time to raise a family, and so on.
Maybe the artist's career puts you on the cutting edge of new forms of pictorial expression.
Maybe the banking career puts you on the cutting edge of new forms of financial manipulation.
(Laughter) Imagine the two jobs however you like, so that neither is better than the other.
Now suppose we improve one of them, a bit.
Suppose the bank, wooing you, adds 500 dollars a month to your salary.
Does the extra money now make the banking job better than the artist one?
Not necessarily.
A higher salary makes the banking job better than it was before, but it might not be enough to make being a banker better than being an artist.
But if an improvement in one of the jobs doesn't make it better than the other, then the two original jobs could not have been equally good.
If you start with two things that are equally good, and you improve one of them, it now must be better than the other.
That's not the case with options in hard choices.
So now we've got a puzzle.
We've got two jobs.
Neither is better than the other, nor are they equally good.
So how are we supposed to choose?
Something seems to have gone wrong here.
Maybe the choice itself is problematic, and comparison is impossible.
But that can't be right.
It's not like we're trying to choose between two things that can't be compared.
We're weighing the merits of two jobs, after all, not the merits of the number nine and a plate of fried eggs.
A comparison of the overall merits of two jobs is something we can make, and one we often do make.
I think the puzzle arises because of an unreflective assumption we make about value.
We unwittingly assume that values like justice, beauty, kindness, are akin to scientific quantities, like length, mass and weight.
Take any comparative question not involving value, such as which of two suitcases is heavier.
There are only three possibilities.
The weight of one is greater, lesser or equal to the weight of the other.
Properties like weight can be represented by real numbers -- one, two, three and so on -- and there are only three possible comparisons between any two real numbers.
One number is greater, lesser, or equal to the other.
Not so with values.
As post-Enlightenment creatures, we tend to assume that scientific thinking holds the key to everything of importance in our world, but the world of value is different from the world of science.
The stuff of the one world can be quantified by real numbers.
The stuff of the other world can't.
We shouldn't assume that the world of is, of lengths and weights, has the same structure as the world of ought, of what we should do.
So if what matters to us -- a child's delight, the love you have for your partner — can't be represented by real numbers, then there's no reason to believe that in choice, there are only three possibilities -- that one alternative is better, worse or equal to the other.
We need to introduce a new, fourth relation beyond being better, worse or equal, that describes what's going on in hard choices.
I like to say that the alternatives are "on a par."
When alternatives are on a par, it may matter very much which you choose, but one alternative isn't better than the other.
Rather, the alternatives are in the same neighborhood of value, in the same league of value, while at the same time being very different in kind of value.
That's why the choice is hard.
Understanding hard choices in this way uncovers something about ourselves we didn't know.
Each of us has the power to create reasons.
Imagine a world in which every choice you face is an easy choice, that is, there's always a best alternative.
If there's a best alternative, then that's the one you should choose, because part of being rational is doing the better thing rather than the worse thing, choosing what you have most reason to choose.
In such a world, we'd have most reason to wear black socks instead of pink socks, to eat cereal instead of donuts, to live in the city rather than the country, to marry Betty instead of Lolita.
A world full of only easy choices would enslave us to reasons.
When you think about it, (Laughter) it's nuts to believe that the reasons given to you dictated that you had most reason to pursue the exact hobbies you do, to live in the exact house you do, to work at the exact job you do.
Instead, you faced alternatives that were on a par -- hard choices -- and you made reasons for yourself to choose that hobby, that house and that job.
When alternatives are on a par, the reasons given to us, the ones that determine whether we're making a mistake, are silent as to what to do.
It's here, in the space of hard choices, that we get to exercise our normative power -- the power to create reasons for yourself, to make yourself into the kind of person for whom country living is preferable to the urban life.
When we choose between options that are on a par, we can do something really rather remarkable.
We can put our very selves behind an option.
Here's where I stand.
Here's who I am, I am for banking.
I am for chocolate donuts.
(Laughter) This response in hard choices is a rational response, but it's not dictated by reasons given to us.
Rather, it's supported by reasons created by us.
When we create reasons for ourselves to become this kind of person rather than that, we wholeheartedly become the people that we are.
You might say that we become the authors of our own lives.
So when we face hard choices, we shouldn't beat our head against a wall trying to figure out which alternative is better.
There is no best alternative.
Instead of looking for reasons out there, we should be looking for reasons in here: Who am I to be?
You might decide to be a pink sock-wearing, cereal-loving, country-living banker, and I might decide to be a black sock-wearing, urban, donut-loving artist.
What we do in hard choices is very much up to each of us.
Now, people who don't exercise their normative powers in hard choices are drifters.
We all know people like that.
I drifted into being a lawyer.
I didn't put my agency behind lawyering.
I wasn't for lawyering.
Drifters allow the world to write the story of their lives.
They let mechanisms of reward and punishment -- pats on the head, fear, the easiness of an option -- to determine what they do.
So the lesson of hard choices: reflect on what you can put your agency behind, on what you can be for, and through hard choices, become that person.
Far from being sources of agony and dread, hard choices are precious opportunities for us to celebrate what is special about the human condition, that the reasons that govern our choices as correct or incorrect sometimes run out, and it is here, in the space of hard choices, that we have the power to create reasons for ourselves to become the distinctive people that we are.
And that's why hard choices are not a curse but a godsend.
Thank you.
(Applause)
On November 5th, 1990, a man named El-Sayyid Nosair walked into a hotel in Manhattan and assassinated Rabbi Meir Kahane, the leader of the Jewish Defense League.
Nosair was initially found not guilty of the murder, but while serving time on lesser charges, he and other men began planning attacks on a dozen New York City landmarks, including tunnels, synagogues and the United Nations headquarters.
Thankfully, those plans were foiled by an FBI informant.
Sadly, the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center was not.
Nosair would eventually be convicted for his involvement in the plot.
El-Sayyid Nosair is my father.
I was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 1983 to him, an Egyptian engineer, and a loving American mother and grade school teacher, who together tried their best to create a happy childhood for me.
It wasn't until I was seven years old that our family dynamic started to change.
My father exposed me to a side of Islam that few people, including the majority of Muslims, get to see.
It's been my experience that when people take the time to interact with one another, it doesn't take long to realize that for the most part, we all want the same things out of life.
However, in every religion, in every population, you'll find a small percentage of people who hold so fervently to their beliefs that they feel they must use any means necessary to make others live as they do.
A few months prior to his arrest, he sat me down and explained that for the past few weekends, he and some friends had been going to a shooting range on Long Island for target practice.
He told me I'd be going with him the next morning.
We arrived at Calverton Shooting Range, which unbeknownst to our group was being watched by the FBI.
When it was my turn to shoot, my father helped me hold the rifle to my shoulder and explained how to aim at the target about 30 yards off.
That day, the last bullet I shot hit the small orange light that sat on top of the target and to everyone's surprise, especially mine, the entire target burst into flames.
My uncle turned to the other men, and in Arabic said, "Ibn abuh."
Like father, like son.
They all seemed to get a really big laugh out of that comment, but it wasn't until a few years later that I fully understood what they thought was so funny.
They thought they saw in me the same destruction my father was capable of.
Those men would eventually be convicted of placing a van filled with 1,500 pounds of explosives into the sub-level parking lot of the World Trade Center's North Tower, causing an explosion that killed six people and injured over 1,000 others.
These were the men I looked up to.
These were the men I called ammu, which means uncle.
By the time I turned 19, I had already moved 20 times in my life, and that instability during my childhood didn't really provide an opportunity to make many friends.
Each time I would begin to feel comfortable around someone, it was time to pack up and move to the next town.
Being the perpetual new face in class, I was frequently the target of bullies.
I kept my identity a secret from my classmates to avoid being targeted, but as it turns out, being the quiet, chubby new kid in class was more than enough ammunition.
So for the most part, I spent my time at home reading books and watching TV or playing video games.
For those reasons, my social skills were lacking, to say the least, and growing up in a bigoted household, I wasn't prepared for the real world.
I'd been raised to judge people based on arbitrary measurements, like a person's race or religion.
So what opened my eyes?
One of my first experiences that challenged this way of thinking was during the 2000 presidential elections.
Through a college prep program, I was able to take part in the National Youth Convention in Philadelphia.
My particular group's focus was on youth violence, and having been the victim of bullying for most of my life, this was a subject in which I felt particularly passionate.
The members of our group came from many different walks of life.
One day toward the end of the convention, I found out that one of the kids I had befriended was Jewish.
Now, it had taken several days for this detail to come to light, and I realized that there was no natural animosity between the two of us.
I had never had a Jewish friend before, and frankly I felt a sense of pride in having been able to overcome a barrier that for most of my life I had been led to believe was insurmountable.
Another major turning point came when I found a summer job at Busch Gardens, an amusement park.
There, I was exposed to people from all sorts of faiths and cultures, and that experience proved to be fundamental to the development of my character.
Most of my life, I'd been taught that homosexuality was a sin, and by extension, that all gay people were a negative influence.
As chance would have it, I had the opportunity to work with some of the gay performers at a show there, and soon found that many were the kindest, least judgmental people I had ever met.
Being bullied as a kid created a sense of empathy in me toward the suffering of others, and it comes very unnaturally to me to treat people who are kind in any other way than how I would want to be treated.
Because of that feeling, I was able to contrast the stereotypes I'd been taught as a child with real life experience and interaction.
I don't know what it's like to be gay, but I'm well acquainted with being judged for something that's beyond my control.
Then there was "The Daily Show."
On a nightly basis, Jon Stewart forced me to be intellectually honest with myself about my own bigotry and helped me to realize that a person's race, religion or sexual orientation had nothing to do with the quality of one's character.
He was in many ways a father figure to me when I was in desperate need of one.
Inspiration can often come from an unexpected place, and the fact that a Jewish comedian had done more to positively influence my worldview than my own extremist father is not lost on me.
One day, I had a conversation with my mother about how my worldview was starting to change, and she said something to me that I will hold dear to my heart for as long as I live.
She looked at me with the weary eyes of someone who had experienced enough dogmatism to last a lifetime, and said, "I'm tired of hating people."
In that instant, I realized how much negative energy it takes to hold that hatred inside of you.
Zak Ebrahim is not my real name.
I changed it when my family decided to end our connection with my father and start a new life.
So why would I out myself and potentially put myself in danger?
Well, that's simple.
I do it in the hopes that perhaps someone someday who is compelled to use violence may hear my story and realize that there is a better way, that although I had been subjected to this violent, intolerant ideology, that I did not become fanaticized.
Instead, I choose to use my experience to fight back against terrorism, against the bigotry.
I do it for the victims of terrorism and their loved ones, for the terrible pain and loss that terrorism has forced upon their lives.
For the victims of terrorism, I will speak out against these senseless acts and condemn my father's actions.
And with that simple fact, I stand here as proof that violence isn't inherent in one's religion or race, and the son does not have to follow the ways of his father.
I am not my father.
Thank you. (Applause) Thank you, everybody. (Applause) Thank you all. (Applause) Thanks a lot. (Applause)
I'm a lifelong traveler.
Even as a little kid, I was actually working out that it would be cheaper to go to boarding school in England than just to the best school down the road from my parents' house in California.
So, from the time I was nine years old I was flying alone several times a year over the North Pole, just to go to school.
And of course the more I flew the more I came to love to fly, so the very week after I graduated from high school, I got a job mopping tables so that I could spend every season of my 18th year on a different continent.
And then, almost inevitably, I became a travel writer so my job and my joy could become one.
And I really began to feel that if you were lucky enough to walk around the candlelit temples of Tibet or to wander along the seafronts in Havana with music passing all around you, you could bring those sounds and the high cobalt skies and the flash of the blue ocean back to your friends at home, and really bring some magic and clarity to your own life.
Except, as you all know, one of the first things you learn when you travel is that nowhere is magical unless you can bring the right eyes to it.
You take an angry man to the Himalayas, he just starts complaining about the food.
And I found that the best way that I could develop more attentive and more appreciative eyes was, oddly, by going nowhere, just by sitting still.
And of course sitting still is how many of us get what we most crave and need in our accelerated lives, a break.
But it was also the only way that I could find to sift through the slideshow of my experience and make sense of the future and the past.
And so, to my great surprise, I found that going nowhere was at least as exciting as going to Tibet or to Cuba.
And by going nowhere, I mean nothing more intimidating than taking a few minutes out of every day or a few days out of every season, or even, as some people do, a few years out of a life in order to sit still long enough to find out what moves you most, to recall where your truest happiness lies and to remember that sometimes making a living and making a life point in opposite directions.
And of course, this is what wise beings through the centuries from every tradition have been telling us.
It's an old idea.
More than 2,000 years ago, the Stoics were reminding us it's not our experience that makes our lives, it's what we do with it.
Imagine a hurricane suddenly sweeps through your town and reduces every last thing to rubble.
One man is traumatized for life.
But another, maybe even his brother, almost feels liberated, and decides this is a great chance to start his life anew.
It's exactly the same event, but radically different responses.
There is nothing either good or bad, as Shakespeare told us in "Hamlet," but thinking makes it so.
And this has certainly been my experience as a traveler.
Twenty-four years ago I took the most mind-bending trip across North Korea.
But the trip lasted a few days.
What I've done with it sitting still, going back to it in my head, trying to understand it, finding a place for it in my thinking, that's lasted 24 years already and will probably last a lifetime.
The trip, in other words, gave me some amazing sights, but it's only sitting still that allows me to turn those into lasting insights.
And I sometimes think that so much of our life takes place inside our heads, in memory or imagination or interpretation or speculation, that if I really want to change my life I might best begin by changing my mind.
Again, none of this is new; that's why Shakespeare and the Stoics were telling us this centuries ago, but Shakespeare never had to face 200 emails in a day.
(Laughter) The Stoics, as far as I know, were not on Facebook.
We all know that in our on-demand lives, one of the things that's most on demand is ourselves.
Wherever we are, any time of night or day, our bosses, junk-mailers, our parents can get to us.
Sociologists have actually found that in recent years Americans are working fewer hours than 50 years ago, but we feel as if we're working more.
We have more and more time-saving devices, but sometimes, it seems, less and less time.
We can more and more easily make contact with people on the furthest corners of the planet, but sometimes in that process we lose contact with ourselves.
And one of my biggest surprises as a traveler has been to find that often it's exactly the people who have most enabled us to get anywhere who are intent on going nowhere.
In other words, precisely those beings who have created the technologies that override so many of the limits of old, are the ones wisest about the need for limits, even when it comes to technology.
I once went to the Google headquarters and I saw all the things many of you have heard about; the indoor tree houses, the trampolines, workers at that time enjoying 20 percent of their paid time free so that they could just let their imaginations go wandering.
But what impressed me even more was that as I was waiting for my digital I.D., one Googler was telling me about the program that he was about to start to teach the many, many Googlers who practice yoga to become trainers in it, and the other Googler was telling me about the book that he was about to write on the inner search engine, and the ways in which science has empirically shown that sitting still, or meditation, can lead not just to better health or to clearer thinking, but even to emotional intelligence.
I have another friend in Silicon Valley who is really one of the most eloquent spokesmen for the latest technologies, and in fact was one of the founders of Wired magazine, Kevin Kelly.
And Kevin wrote his last book on fresh technologies without a smartphone or a laptop or a TV in his home.
And like many in Silicon Valley, he tries really hard to observe what they call an Internet sabbath, whereby for 24 or 48 hours every week they go completely offline in order to gather the sense of direction and proportion they'll need when they go online again.
The one thing perhaps that technology hasn't always given us is a sense of how to make the wisest use of technology.
And when you speak of the sabbath, look at the Ten Commandments -- there's only one word there for which the adjective "holy" is used, and that's the Sabbath.
I pick up the Jewish holy book of the Torah -- its longest chapter, it's on the Sabbath.
And we all know that it's really one of our greatest luxuries, the empty space.
In many a piece of music, it's the pause or the rest that gives the piece its beauty and its shape.
And I know I as a writer will often try to include a lot of empty space on the page so that the reader can complete my thoughts and sentences and so that her imagination has room to breathe.
Now, in the physical domain, of course, many people, if they have the resources, will try to get a place in the country, a second home.
I've never begun to have those resources, but I sometimes remember that any time I want, I can get a second home in time, if not in space, just by taking a day off.
And it's never easy because, of course, whenever I do I spend much of it worried about all the extra stuff that's going to crash down on me the following day.
I sometimes think I'd rather give up meat or sex or wine than the chance to check on my emails.
(Laughter) And every season I do try to take three days off on retreat but a part of me still feels guilty to be leaving my poor wife behind and to be ignoring all those seemingly urgent emails from my bosses and maybe to be missing a friend's birthday party.
But as soon as I get to a place of real quiet, I realize that it's only by going there that I'll have anything fresh or creative or joyful to share with my wife or bosses or friends.
Otherwise, really, I'm just foisting on them my exhaustion or my distractedness, which is no blessing at all.
And so when I was 29, I decided to remake my entire life in the light of going nowhere.
One evening I was coming back from the office, it was after midnight, I was in a taxi driving through Times Square, and I suddenly realized that I was racing around so much I could never catch up with my life.
And my life then, as it happened, was pretty much the one I might have dreamed of as a little boy.
I had really interesting friends and colleagues, I had a nice apartment on Park Avenue and 20th Street.
I had, to me, a fascinating job writing about world affairs, but I could never separate myself enough from them to hear myself think -- or really, to understand if I was truly happy.
And so, I abandoned my dream life for a single room on the backstreets of Kyoto, Japan, which was the place that had long exerted a strong, really mysterious gravitational pull on me.
Even as a child I would just look at a painting of Kyoto and feel I recognized it; I knew it before I ever laid eyes on it.
But it's also, as you all know, a beautiful city encircled by hills, filled with more than 2,000 temples and shrines, where people have been sitting still for 800 years or more.
And quite soon after I moved there, I ended up where I still am with my wife, formerly our kids, in a two-room apartment in the middle of nowhere where we have no bicycle, no car, no TV I can understand, and I still have to support my loved ones as a travel writer and a journalist, so clearly this is not ideal for job advancement or for cultural excitement or for social diversion.
But I realized that it gives me what I prize most, which is days and hours.
I have never once had to use a cell phone there.
I almost never have to look at the time, and every morning when I wake up, really the day stretches in front of me like an open meadow.
And when life throws up one of its nasty surprises, as it will, more than once, when a doctor comes into my room wearing a grave expression, or a car suddenly veers in front of mine on the freeway, I know, in my bones, that it's the time I've spent going nowhere that is going to sustain me much more than all the time I've spent racing around to Bhutan or Easter Island.
I'll always be a traveler -- my livelihood depends on it -- but one of the beauties of travel is that it allows you to bring stillness into the motion and the commotion of the world.
I once got on a plane in Frankfurt, Germany, and a young German woman came down and sat next to me and engaged me in a very friendly conversation for about 30 minutes, and then she just turned around and sat still for 12 hours.
She didn't once turn on her video monitor, she never pulled out a book, she didn't even go to sleep, she just sat still, and something of her clarity and calm really imparted itself to me.
I've noticed more and more people taking conscious measures these days to try to open up a space inside their lives.
Some people go to black-hole resorts where they'll spend hundreds of dollars a night in order to hand over their cell phone and their laptop to the front desk on arrival.
Some people I know, just before they go to sleep, instead of scrolling through their messages or checking out YouTube, just turn out the lights and listen to some music, and notice that they sleep much better and wake up much refreshed.
I was once fortunate enough to drive into the high, dark mountains behind Los Angeles, where the great poet and singer and international heartthrob Leonard Cohen was living and working for many years as a full-time monk in the Mount Baldy Zen Center.
And I wasn't entirely surprised when the record that he released at the age of 77, to which he gave the deliberately unsexy title of "Old Ideas," went to number one in the charts in 17 nations in the world, hit the top five in nine others.
Something in us, I think, is crying out for the sense of intimacy and depth that we get from people like that.
who take the time and trouble to sit still.
And I think many of us have the sensation, I certainly do, that we're standing about two inches away from a huge screen, and it's noisy and it's crowded and it's changing with every second, and that screen is our lives.
And it's only by stepping back, and then further back, and holding still, that we can begin to see what the canvas means and to catch the larger picture.
And a few people do that for us by going nowhere.
So, in an age of acceleration, nothing can be more exhilarating than going slow.
And in an age of distraction, nothing is so luxurious as paying attention.
And in an age of constant movement, nothing is so urgent as sitting still.
So you can go on your next vacation to Paris or Hawaii, or New Orleans; I bet you'll have a wonderful time.
But, if you want to come back home alive and full of fresh hope, in love with the world, I think you might want to try considering going nowhere.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Architecture is amazing, for sure.
It's amazing because it's art.
But you know, it's a very funny kind of art.
It's an art at the frontier between art and science.
It's fed by ...
by real life, every day.
It's driven by force of necessity.
Quite amazing, quite amazing.
And the life of the architect is also amazing.
You know, as an architect, at 10 o’clock in the morning, you need to be a poet, for sure.
But at 11, you must become a humanist, otherwise you'd lose your direction.
And at noon, you absolutely need to be a builder.
You need to be able to make a building, because architecture, at the end, is the art of making buildings.
Architecture is the art of making shelter for human beings.
Period.
And this is not easy at all.
It's amazing.
Look at this.
Here we are in London, at the top of the Shard of Glass.
This is a building we completed a few years ago.
Those people are well-trained workers, and they are assembling the top piece of the tower.
Well, they look like rock climbers.
They are.
I mean, they are defying the force of gravity, like building does, by the way.
We got 30 of those people -- actually, on that site, we got more than 1,400 people, coming from 60 different nationalities.
You know, this is a miracle. It's a miracle.
To put together 1,400 people, coming from such different places, is a miracle.
Sites are miracles.
This is another one.
Let's talk about construction.
Adventure, it's adventure in real life, not adventure in spirit.
This guy there is a deepwater diver.
From rock climbers to deepwater divers.
This is in Berlin.
After the fall of the Wall in '89, we built this building, connecting East Berlin to West Berlin, in Potsdamer Platz.
We got on that project almost 5,000 people.
Almost 5,000 people.
And this is another site in Japan, building the Kansai Airport.
Again, all the rock climbers, Japanese ones.
You know, making buildings together is the best way to create a sense of cooperation.
The sense of pride -- pride is essential.
But, you know, construction, of course, is one of the reasons why architecture is amazing.
But there is another one, that is maybe even more amazing.
Because architecture is the art of making shelter for communities, not just for individuals -- communities and society at large.
And society is never the same.
The world keeps changing.
And changes are difficult to swallow by people.
And architecture is a mirror of those changes.
Architecture is the built expression of those changes.
So, this is why it is so difficult, because those changes create adventure.
They create adventure, and architecture is adventure.
This is the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris, a long time ago.
That was back in time, '77.
This was a spaceship landing in the middle of Paris.
Together with my friend in adventure, Richard Rogers, we were, at the time, young bad boys.
Young, bad boys.
(Laughter) It was really only a few years after May '68.
So it was a rebellion, pure rebellion.
The idea was to make the proof that cultural buildings should not be intimidating.
They should create a sense of curiosity.
This is the way to create a cultural place.
Curiosity is the beginning of a cultural attitude.
And there's a piazza there, you can see that piazza.
And a piazza is the beginning of urban life.
A piazza is the place where people meet.
And they mix experience.
And they mix ages.
And, you know, in some way, you create the essence of the city.
And since then, we made, in the office, so many other places for people.
Here, in Rome, is a concert hall.
Another place for people.
This building inside is actually designed by the sound, you can see.
It's flirting with sound.
And this is the Kansai Airport, in Japan.
To make a building, sometimes you need to make an island, and we made the island.
The building is more than one mile long.
It looks like an immense glider, landing on the ground.
And this is in San Francisco.
Another place for people.
This building is the California Academy of Sciences.
And we planted on that roof -- thousands and thousands of plants that use the humidity of the air, instead of pumping water from the water table.
The roof is a living roof, actually.
And this building was made Platinum LEED.
The LEED is the system to measure, of course, the sustainability of a building.
So this was also a place for people that will stay a long time.
And this is actually New York.
This is the new Whitney, in the Meatpacking District in New York.
Well, another flying vessel.
Another place for people.
Here we are in Athens, the Niarchos Foundation.
It's a library, it's an open house, a concert hall and a big park.
This building is also a Platinum LEED building.
This building actually captures the sun's energy with that roof.
But, you know, making a building a place for people is good.
Making libraries, making concert halls, making universities, making museums is good, because you create a place that's open, accessible.
You create a building for a better world, for sure.
But there is something else that makes architecture amazing, even more.
And this is the fact that architecture doesn't just answer to need and necessity, but also to desires -- yes, desires -- dreams, aspirations.
This is what architecture does.
Even the most modest hut on earth is not just a roof.
It's more than a roof.
It's telling a story; it's telling a story about the identity of the people living in that hut.
Individuals.
Architecture is the art of telling stories.
Like this one.
In London: the Shard of Glass.
Well, this building is the tallest building in Western Europe.
It goes up more than 300 meters in the air, to breathe fresh air.
The facets of this building are inclined, and they reflect the sky of London, that is never the same.
After rain, everything becomes bluish.
In the sunny evening, everything is red.
It's something that is difficult to explain.
It's what we call the soul of a building.
On this picture on the left, you have the Menil Collection, used a long time ago.
It's a museum.
On the right is the Harvard Art Museum.
Both those two buildings flirt with light.
Light is probably one of the most essential materials in architecture.
And this is in Amsterdam.
This building is flirting with water.
And this is my office, on the sea.
Well, this is flirting with work.
Actually, we enjoy working there.
And that cable car is the little cable car that goes up to there.
That's "The New York Times" in New York.
Well, this is playing with transparency.
Again, the sense of light, the sense of transparency.
On the left here, you have the Magic Lantern in Japan, in Ginza, in Tokyo.
And in the center is a monastery in the forest.
This monastery is playing with the silence and the forest.
And a museum, a science museum.
This is about levitation.
And this is in the center of Paris, in the belly of the whale.
This is the Pathé Foundation in Paris.
All those buildings have something in common: it's that something is searching for desire, for dreams.
And that's me.
(Laughter) Well, it's me on my sailing boat.
Flirting with breeze.
Well, there's not a very good reason to show you this picture.
(Laughter) I'm trying, I'm trying.
You know, one thing is clear: I love sailing, for sure.
I actually also love designing sailing boats.
But I love sailing, because sailing is associated with slowness.
And ...
and silence.
And the sense of suspension.
And there is another thing that this picture says.
It says that I'm Italian.
(Laughter) Well, there is very little I can do about that.
(Laughter) I'm Italian, and I love beauty.
I love beauty.
Well, let's go sailing, I want to take you sailing here, to this place, in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.
This is the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Center.
It's for the Kanaky ethnic group.
It's in Nouméa, New Caledonia.
This place is for art.
Art and nature.
And those buildings actually flirt with the wind, with the trade winds.
They have a sound, they have a voice, those buildings.
I'm showing this because it's about beauty.
It's about pure beauty.
And let's talk about beauty for a moment.
Beauty is like the bird of paradise: the very moment you try to catch it, it flies away.
Your arm is too short.
But beauty is not a frivolous idea.
